WT03-B33-1IA059-000323-B024-286http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec77.html 205.156.212.5 19970114221836 text/html 39641HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:16:41 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:06 GMTContent-length: 39454Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec77.html Sample Issue Copyright SNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNet January 11, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *LATEST NEWS* APPN COMPLEXITY, TOKEN RING THROUGHPUT LEAVE AS/400 OUT OF NETWORKING GAME (891 words) IBM WILL CHANGE THE 3745, BUT MAYBE NOT UNTIL 1992 (940 words) *OFFICE AUTOMATION* IBM RINGS IN NEW MULTIVENDOR OFFICE CONNECTIONS WITH SOFT SWITCH (724 words) THE IBM COOPERATIVE SOFTWARE PROGRAM (118 words) *FDDI* IBM PUTS WEIGHT BEHIND FDDI PUSH WITH SMT FORUM MEMBERSHIP (598 words) SMT AGREEMENT WOULD MARK MAJOR FDDI MILESTONE (240 words) *VIEWPOINT* 1990: HOTTER THAN USUAL? (819 words) *CONSULTANT NOTEBOOK* MOBILE COMPUTER SYSTEM COMING SOON, GARTNER SAYS (211 words) SNA WILL REMAIN IBM'S BABY DESPITE GROWING OSI INVESTMENT (253 words) *IBM ROUNDUP* KNOWLEDGE-BASED SOFTWARE TOOL UNVEILED (127 words) IBM, OTHERS SUBMIT PROPOSAL TO OSF (83 words) PS/2 GETS X.25 CO-PROCESSOR SUPPORT (83 words) IBM ANNOUNCES NETWORK SERVICES (68 words) *NEWS BRIEFS* KODAK SELECTS IBM TO MANAGE WORLDWIDE SNA NETWORK (74 words) MADGE NETWORKS INTRODUCES SOFTWARE DRIVER FOR SMART AT, MC RINGNODES (105 words) IMS-NV -- NETVIEW SUPPORT AVAILABLE FOR CROSSCOMM'S ILAN LAN-WAN BRIDGES (85 words) SIMWARE INTRODUCES SIMHLLAPI (59 words) CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990APPN COMPLEXITY, TOKEN RING THROUGHPUT LEAVE AS/400 OUT OFNETWORKING GAMEDifficulties in implementing Advanced Peer to Peer Networking(APPN) and slow Token Ring interfaces are causing the AS/400minicomputer to fall short of its communications potential,experts said this week.Despite its advanced functions, IBM's 18-month-old AS/400 has notyet become much more than a file server or terminal controller.Users and analysts say that many of the unit's more advancedcapabilities, such as APPN, are far too complicated for thesmaller companies installing it.  The real test, they say, willcome when the AS/400 enters larger SNA networks.When it introduced the AS/400 in June 1988, IBM made manycommunications promises, including to support multiplearchitectures such as SNA, OSI, and TCP/IP.  IBM said theminicomputer would communicate and operate with both IBM andnon-IBM products.To back up its promises, IBM introduced OS/400, the AS/400operating system.  OS/400 contains built-in support for AdvancedProgram-to-Program Communications (APPC, also known as LU 6.2),APPN, Distributed Data Management (DDM), Token Ring, and a host ofoffice information architectures.According to most observers, the AS/400 can fulfill IBM's promisesunder the current OS/400 release.  But putting these capabilitiesinto practical use is no easy task.COMPLEXITY NOT AVOIDED"The need to support a confusing array of protocols and approachesto data communication had to be satisfied without creating asystem that was difficult to program, operate, or use," stated a1989 report from ADM Inc. (Cheshire, Conn.), an AS/400consultancy.  "The AS/400 must support SNA while avoiding thecomplexity associated with management of an SNA network."However, most AS/400 users do not use its advanced communicationsfeatures.  Observers say that although OS/400 has the potential tosupport distributed communications, APPC and APPN are too complexto be useful to smaller users."APPN requires a major programming effort, and once it's done,it's very specialized -- not for the common user," observed BruceArmstrong of Link Computer Corp. (Altoona, Pa.), an AS/400remarketer.  "There's no question that APPN could solve manyproblems we are seeing, but I don't seeing it solving anythingsoon.  The simplicity just isn't there."Armstrong said his company has yet to install any AS/400s in theAPPN or Token Ring environments.TOKEN RINGS NOT THERE, EITHER"There are a lot of AS/400 systems out there that have beendeveloped without a network design.  They're not set up to[interconnect]," Armstrong said.  "We had a situation recentlywhere a company had 300 terminals and a mixture of PCs, but noToken Ring activity."One reason for the lack of Token Ring implementations may bethroughput problems, noted Armstrong.  "There are problems withAS/400s on a Token Ring -- it has been brought up at Common [IBM'ssmall systems user group] meetings.  IBM still has a ways to go intrying to get PC networks [to link with] AS/400s."Others familiar with the AS/400's networking capabilities agreed."We are just starting to see Token Rings attaching to AS/400s.  Wehave just gotten many clients off of coaxial cable onto twistedpair.  Now it will be easy for them to go to Token Ring," saidGeorge Woodring, director of technical services at ADM.  "TokenRing takes planning and knowledge of what it can do to beeffective.  There's not that much expertise out there in theAS/400 world."ADM recently installed its first APPN network."The customer was afraid once the switch was made to APPN, hewould lose performance.  [The customer wasn't] too familiar withwhat APPN could do," Woodring said.  "We did find that 9600 baudwasn't cutting it with 16 to 18 communication lines, but we uppedit to 19.2 Kbps, and it worked fine."LITTLE CRITICALSOther companies -- such as the Travelers Insurance Companies(Hartford, Conn.) and Mobil Oil (New York, N.Y.) -- have installedAPPN, but they are few and far between, according to analysts.And even large corporations that can afford APPN networks aredoing very little mission-critical work on them.The few AS/400s that handle communications tasks today actas hosts in small environments or replace IBM's aging 43XXmainframe computers.  Even there, the AS/400 serves primarilyas a stand-alone unit."We have 18 remote sites in the U.S. and Canada, basically spreadout in a star formation with links back to Lincoln," explainedJohn Edson, manager of administrative services and informationsystems for Norden Laboratories (Lincoln, Neb.), a distributor ofveterinary health products.Norden's network is based on SNA protocols, Edson said, and theAS/400 has never had a problem communicating in that environment.Woodring said the AS/400s he has installed have worked well in theSNA environment."The biggest problem there has been [is with] customers trying toimplement it without first-hand knowledge of what it can do,"Woodring commented.  "The initial release of OS/400 wasunforgiving if you made a mistake.  Now, it's much easier.  Butnone of it is easy without some experience."Still, within the larger SNA environment, the AS/400 cannot act asa control point, but only as a controller.  In that role, it hasperformed well, according experts.  The AS/400 will eventuallyplay an important role in bringing about the move to APPN,analysts said, but it's not doing it yet.  (Michael Cooney)Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990IBM WILL CHANGE THE 3745, BUT MAYBE NOT UNTIL 1992Some potential customers are re-thinking their decisions topurchase the IBM 3745 Communication Controller because of arumored forklift upgrade.  Observers say the fear of major changesin the front-end processor could be justified, but those changesprobably will not happen in 1990.Although it has been on the market for two years, the 3745 has notmade tremendous inroads in SNA networks, observers say.  Since newtechnology is making product cycles shorter and IBM has no greatstake in maintaining the 3745, some potential customers aregetting skittish."We had a couple of customers who were worried about IBM pullingthe plug on the 3745," commented Thad Kemp at computer lessorStamford Computing Group, (Stamford, Conn.).  "A couple of monthsago, that perception was a real problem, but it doesn't seem to bebothering anyone now.  Word is that the 3745 won't be changed thatradically until 1992."Other observers concurred with that forecast."We see IBM coming out with its follow-onmainframe -- Summit -- in 1992, so we would expect tosee a new communication box sometime after that," statedBill Husband, senior consultant with the Meridian Group(Deerfield, Ill.), also a computer lessor.  "The rule of thumbwe use is that for every MIP added to the machine, customerscan add 10 communications lines.  With the four to eight-foldincrease we foresee in power over the next couple years, we'llhave to see some sort of upgrade."NOT TIME TO DUMP THE FAMILYSince it was enhanced last May, the 3745 family covers mostcustomers' requirements, noted Dave Wolff, executive vicepresident of El Camino Resources (Northridge, Calif.).  For mostusers, however, the Network Control Program (NCP) operating systemstill has a way to go."It is conceivable IBM could change the 3745 again, but not in thenear term," Wolff said.  "The 3745 is selling at a reasonableclip, and the high end isn't losing to the competition like itused to."Indeed, IBM does not lose to too many competitors in the front-endprocessor market.  According to Computer Intelligence (La Jolla,Calif.), IBM has an 88 percent market share.  NCR Comten holds a 6percent share, and Amdahl holds a 2 percent share.Of this 88 percent, the 3725 still makes up the bulk of theinstalled base (40 percent), with the older 3704 and 3705 comingin second (20 percent).  The low-end 3720 comes in third (10percent), and the 3745 thus far has garnered only 6 percent."It's been a slow, steady migration to the new models," observedRalph Busch of Computer Intelligence.  "[But] we haven't seen anyslowdown recently that would indicate a problem."3725 IN VOGUEBusch recommended that customers worried about the 3745 -- orperhaps not ready to spend the money to upgrade -- should look atbuying a used 3725, which his numbers show being worth only about10 percent of its original value."If all a customer needs is a little more channel space, then itshould look that way," Busch said.Kemp pointed out that if customers are worried about floor space,they should move to the 3745.  "The 3725  has a floor spaceproblem -- you'll need 3 or 4 of them to do what one 3745 does.We know some customers who will move to the 3745 for that reasonalone."Wolff said that if IBM changed the architecture, 3745 customerswould likely receive a field upgrade before a forklift upgrade.But he also said the 3725 suffices for many current users."The 3725 is a living boat anchor that will be around for a longtime.  There is nothing that the market is crying for right now.IBM needs to get customers to use the 3745 more for now," Wolffsaid.Some customers are turning away from IBM entirely.  Donovan DataSystems (New York, N.Y.), for example, went to the NCR Comten5565.  This accounting and data processing service company isprimarily a Comten shop, but has looked at the 3745."Basically, [the 3745] couldn't provide the flexibility weneeded," said Ron Block, vice president at Donovan.  "We neededmultiple front ends in our VTAM [Virtual Telecommunications AccessMethod] environment, which IBM couldn't do."Although Comten and Amdahl generally offer better flexibility thanBig Blue, observers said the plug-compatible vendors in the 3745arena are not affecting the big controller much.1990 OR 1992?IBM is battling itself on the 3745 issue, experts say.  Thefront-end device may need some changes, such as higher speeds andwater cooling to help it handle growing SNA traffic.  The unitwill need these features when it becomes an APPN node, expertssaid."With the increased amount of 80386 -- and now 80486 -- computersto attach to it, the 3745 will have to change.  For that and otherreasons, I don't think it will last the year," projected BrianJeffery, managing director of the International Technology Group(Los Altos, Calif.).  "IBM has a lot of communication products inthe pipeline, and the new [processor] hardware coming out willforce IBM to change the 3745 soon."Others have said the 3745 was a short-term machine to begin withand will fade away with the advent of APPN."Customers expect forklift upgrades from time to time, and productcycles have sped up," commented David Passmore, a partner atNetwork Strategies/Ernst and Young (Fairfax, Va.).  "But the timefor a forklift upgrade of the 3745 is at least two years away."(Michael Cooney)Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990IBM RINGS IN NEW MULTIVENDOR OFFICE CONNECTIONS WITH SOFT SWITCHIBM recently rang out the old by dumping its Office InterconnectFacility (OIF) and rang in the new by signing Soft Switch Inc. toprovide multivendor office systems connectivity in IBMenvironments.IBM signed Soft Switch (Wayne, Pa.) under its Cooperative SoftwareProgram (CSP) to provide host-based links between its OfficeVisionsystem and Digital Equipment Corp.'s All-In-One, Wang Office,Hewlett-Packard's Desk Manager, and other office systems.Soft Switch provides these connections through its Soft SwitchCentral MVS or VM software.  Soft Switch describes Central as a"full blown networking product" with "post offices" that interfacewith SNA Distribution Services (SNADS), X.400, Simple MailTransfer Protocol (SMTP), DECnet, and other protocols.STOPGAP STOPS DEADSoft Switch Central replaces OIF, which IBM said was nevershipped.Originally announced in October 1989, OIF was designed to allowusers to exchange electronic mail messages between VM PROFS(Professional Office System), MVS Personal Services/CustomerInformation Control System (PS/CICS), and Distributed OfficeSupport System (DISOSS), DEC, and Wang.At the time, observers labeled OIF a stopgap measure, but it nevereven got that far."The OIF product would not meet our customers' requirements in therequired time span," an IBM spokesman said.  "The developmenteffort with Aratek [Toronto, Canada] never brought a product tomarket, so we withdrew it and replaced it with Soft Switch."Aratek did not respond by press time to questions about thedevelopments.The Soft Switch product will meet customer needs better than OIFwould have, according to analysts.  The OIF product did notsupport X.400, and it was not robust, commented one observer.While Soft Switch Central contains an X.400 interface, it is notthe same one the company introduced in October 1989.  The 400 Linkis a dedicated X.400 gateway between PROFS and/or SNADS and otherX.400-compatible systems.  Soft Switch said it might eventuallyput 400 Link on Central, but the X.400 interface is not arequirement today."The death of OIF isn't going to cause any large scale mourningthroughout the industry," observed Brian Jeffery, managingdirector for the International Technology Group (Los Altos,Calif.).  "Soft Switch is a standard in the industry, and IBMrepresentatives who were called upon to provide these types ofconnections would have called Soft Switch anyway.  The Soft Switchproduct is just so much more functional [than OIF]."SOLIDIFYING OFFICEVISIONSoft Switch's product is also important to OfficeVision'slong-term success because it will allow customers to mix and matchmultivendor office offerings -- something OfficeVision does notprovide, analysts said."The point of the whole product is that OfficeVision won't carewhat the other system it's communicating with is," said DonaldFisher, vice president of open systems at Soft Switch.  "Thecurrent release of OfficeVision doesn't hold much new for PROFSusers, but the next release will have an impact.  This productwill add to that."In addition to OfficeVision/MVS and /VM, Soft Switch supportsAS/400 Office through a SNADS gateway and said it plans to offersupport for OfficeVision/400 by June.  It will also supportOfficeVision/2 at the low end in the near future, according toFisher.  "We are working with IBM now to set a developmentschedule, [but] I would anticipate seeing something in 1990," hestated.OfficeVision itself is being held up by the delayed OS/2 ExtendedEdition (EE), which was slated to appear last November but is nowscheduled for March 30.  OfficeVision/2 will get much of itsfunctionality from OS/2 EE."The whole push to homogeneous computing is happening on the frontlines of many offices today.  Any package that can moveinformation around without the user knowing what kind of systemit's coming from is a valuable asset," commented Peter Kastner,vice-president of the Aberdeen Group (Boston, Mass.).  "Thebiggest problem is that the whole OfficeVision kit and caboodle ison hold until OS/2 EE and the LAN Server [also due March 30] arereleased."  (Michael Cooney)PRODUCT:Soft Switch CentralDESCRIPTION:Software package combining IBM's OfficeVision/MVS andOfficeVision/VM environments with multivendor office packages suchas Digital Equipment Corp.'s All-In-One and Data General's CEO.PRICING:$40,000 to $250,000, depending on configuration.AVAILABILITY:All products are available now, except for connections toOfficeVision/2.  That interface will probably appear in 1990.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990THE IBM COOPERATIVE SOFTWARE PROGRAMFormed as a pilot program in June 1987 and initiated in January1988, IBM's Cooperative Software Program has grown to includeapproximately 75 software vendors in the U.S.CSP's purpose is to bring in established third-party softwarevendors to provide solutions in niche areas where IBM does notoffer a product.Both IBM and its software partner (in this case, Soft Switch) sellthe programs, though IBM is not responsible for product licensing,terms, conditions, or pricing.  The third party provides serviceand training as well."CSP gives the software company greater exposure [to the businessworld], and we get to offer our customers an established solutionfor their networks," an IBM spokesman said.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990IBM PUTS WEIGHT BEHIND FDDI PUSH WITH SMT FORUM MEMBERSHIPIBM last month boosted its support of Fiber Distributed DataInterface (FDDI) standards by joining the SMT (Station Management)Development Forum, an organization advocating the rapid anduniform development of SMT and FDDI.The SMT protocol provides the intelligence that links workstationsto a network and allows those stations to be centrally managed.SMT is the only portion of the 100 Mbps FDDI standard stillundefined by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).Once SMT is resolved, vendors could begin developing interoperableFDDI systems (see sidebar).SMT Development Forum members will jointly define interoperabledesign specifications for FDDI SMT, according to Synernetics Inc.(North Billerica, Mass.), the FDDI LAN management specialist thatinitiated the forum.  The SMT Forum specification will build onthe ANSI standard, but will provide additional details necessaryfor actual product development, Synernetics said."The Forum provides members the benefits of a large, focuseddevelopment team at a fraction of the total cost required forindividual design specification development efforts," said BruceMcClure, president and co-founder of Synernetics.  "The resultingopen specification will be available to all Forum members."PUSHING FIBERIBM's forum participation is part of its recent push into the FDDIarena.  Last January, Big Blue invested in PCO Inc. (Chatsworth,Calif.), a fiber optic interface company.  In September, IBMscientists announced two experimental FDDI computer chips capableof transmitting and receiving a billion bits per second."FDDI is a hot topic for IBM, and 1990 will make it even hotter,"commented Frank Dzubeck, president of Communications NetworkArchitects (Washington, D.C.).  "I expect to see some FDDIproducts in IBM's LAN environment by the end of the year."Analysts say fiber will be the primary medium in manyorganizations' future backbones as well as between LANs in campusenvironments.Big Blue's graphics-oriented data systems division (DSD, Kingston,N.Y.) is IBM's official forum member, leading some observers topredict that IBM will initially push FDDI in the mainframe arena.DSD makes the 3090.LOSING THAT COPPER BUILD-UPAn IBM executive said last year that users could eventually seefiber "anyplace a copper cable is now."  Big Blue also said fibermay eventually show up inside -- or at least between -- IBMmainframes.  Analysts note that the promised peer-oriented host ofthe future certainly could use the extra bandwidth and speed of afiber optic network."There are many broad requirements for integrating corporate LANs,relational databases, and networks," commented Bob Simko,executive director of the International Technology Group (LosAltos, Calif.).  "This forum  offers and promotes interoperabilitybetween all the vendors out there.  This is very much an issuewith the end user."Simko said the forum will help IBM spread the new technology andvault back into a technological leadership role that it slippedfrom in the late 1980s."IBM wants to strongly apply the concept of an enterpriseinformation system, and it will be taking advantage of these newtypes of technologies to promote that," Simko stated.  "Right now,IBM is working to coexist with [the other members] of the forumwith the long-term goal of converging them."Other members of the SMT Development Forum include Apple, AdvancedMicro Devices, the CERN Laboratory for Particle Physics,Interphase Corp., Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, NationalSemiconductor Corp., SBE Inc., and Sumitomo Electric.The forum did not offer a schedule for completing theimplementation specification.  Synernetics did say it will offerits customers full documentation, complete integration support,and SMT software updates as the FDDI standard evolves.  (MichaelCooney)Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990SMT AGREEMENT WOULD MARK MAJOR FDDI MILESTONEThe Station Management (SMT) document, the stumbling block inpassing the Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) standard,should be ready for approval within a few months, according toFloyd Ross, chairman of the American National Standards Institute(ANSI) SMT working group.FDDI, which is being defined by the American National StandardsInstitute (ANSI) X3T9.5 committee, is an emerging local areanetwork (LAN) standard for 100 megabit per second (Mbps)transmission over fiber optic media.Chairman Ross predicted that by April, the SMT committee will havea document that will essentially be the SMT standard. "There areonly details to work out [in the next few months]," he said.However, with a fair amount of red tape still ahead, Ross said thestandard will not be officially completed until early 1991.According to Ross, the station manager is the focal point ofnetwork interoperability.  "The station manager acts as theinterface between any other management entity, monitors stationactivity, monitors station configuration and capabilities, andreconfigures the stations if there is a failure on the network."There are four documents that make up the proposed standard:Physical (PHY), Physical Media Dependent (PMD), Media AccessControl (MAC), and  Station Management (SMT).  Each segmentdefines a different set of specifications for a different aspectof the standard.The PHY, PMD, and MAC define hardware specifications and arealready in final draft form at ANSI.  (Caryn Fox)Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 19901990: HOTTER THAN USUAL?Unlike the weather over the holiday season, SNA should get anumber of "hot" developments in 1990 to warm the cockles of manyan IBM customer's heart.Of course everything can't be warm and fuzzy, but the year shouldprove interesting for a number of reasons.One of the hottest topics for 1990 won't even be SNA, but OpenSystems Interconnect (OSI).  With IBM's OSI/CommunicationSubsystem (OSI/CS) for MVS coming out in March and a VM versiondue in June, the OSI acronym will fly around Armonk in '90.OSI/CS will support OSI layers 3 through 7 and let NetView managelocal and remote OSI systems without NetView/PC, among otherfunctions.  Just seeing that idea on paper seems strange to manyIBM watchers.June will also bring IBM's OSI/File Services for MVS.  As anOSI/CS application, File Services provide OSI File Transfer,Access, and Management (FTAM) functions for the host.  A VMversion will be shipped in September.All of these new products will give U.S. users a chance to seeexactly how IBM really performs in the OSI realm.  It's been along time coming.SMOKY NETWORK MANAGEMENTNetwork management will be a hot '90 SNA topic, although IBM'sspecific plans are a little hazy.  The ability to manage non-IBMOSI devices via OSI/CS is quite a breakthrough, but how much willit help non-OSI customers?  Probably not much.Most network management experts say IBM will improve itsmanagement of non-SNA devices, but none can say when that willhappen.  Until then, most customers will be left to roll their ownsolutions or use NetView/PC (more on that later).Third parties will continue to develop direct interfaces toNetView without using NetView/PC, and users will benefit from moreefficient management of non-IBM devices.  The price tag, however,may be high.A Blue graphical user interface will be here in 1990, making therecently-purchased NetCenter Graphic Network Monitor a potentialdinosaur.  Whatever happens, a big, colorful, graphic NetViewmonitor is definitely in the cards for '90.Many large network managers starving for a database repositoryremained hungry in 1989.  This year should provide a few moreglimpses of IBM's direction for this lukewarm offering.  However,since Big Blue only issued a statement of direction in '89, itwill probably be 1991 before actual products take shape.Without question, network management issues will be hot in 1990.Time will tell if the pot will just simmer or really boil over.ALSO SIMMERING...Also heating up in first quarter 1990 will be OS/2 and IBM'sOfficeVision products.OS/2 Extended Edition (EE) 1.2 is scheduled to ship on March 30,and with it will come a whole new array of goodies -- an SNAgateway, Ethernet support, and a variety of other options.From the LAN end, OfficeVision will join with OS/2 EE to sprout awhole new crop of applications based on distributed processing.Many observers say OfficeVision could replace IBM's ProfessionalOffice System (PROFS) and Distributed Office Support System(DISOSS), two key staples of the SNA network environment.  Thatprobably won't happen in too many shops this year, but thepossibility makes it a hot topic for 1990.This year users should begin to reap the spoils of IBM'sall-out assault on the Transmission Control Protocol/InternetProtocol (TCP/IP) market in 1989.  Experts watching the TCP/IPfield say IBM can offer TCP/IP support just about anywhere thesedays -- so look for it in a network near you.WHAT'S NOT HOTOf course, everything can't be red hot in the Blue arena.  Withdiminishing demand, the old dumb 3270 terminal will lose more facein 1990.  Experts have been stomping on the resilient 3270terminal for years without much real damage.  But in 1990, withOS/2 finally showing some signs of life and some reasonable PS/2and PC prices hitting the market, the growth of 3270 hardware willslow even more.  Of course, "death" in this case may still mean 3to 4 percent growth, but there are certainly some nails in itscoffin.Another traditional slam-taker, NetView/PC, will continue takingthose slams despite picking up some new supporters in 1989.  Mostcustomers and third-party vendors are spending their time findingways to bypass NetView/PC.  Some observers go as far to say IBMwill officially pull the plug on this product in 1990.IBM activity in the voice/data integration field cooled off in1989, and will likely continue that route in 1990.  There could besome interesting treaties with Northern Telecom and its peers, butautumn is here for this area.All in all, there seems to be more in IBM's oven than inits deep freeze. IBM watchers predict 1990 will produce some hotitems -- at least enough to keep most customers warm.  (MichaelCooney)Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990MOBILE COMPUTER SYSTEM COMING SOON, GARTNER SAYSIBM may announce a mobile computer for the transportation industryas early as the end of the quarter, according to a Gartner Groupanalyst.Mobile computers are essentially ruggedized laptops connected to atransceiver and antenna.  IBM would not manufacture the lattercomponents, only the computer itself, said John Pemberton, ananalyst at Gartner (Stamford, Conn.).  Current mobile systemsgenerally use a non-intelligent terminal, rather than computer,for data entry.By switching to intelligent mobile systems, users could implementdistributed mobile applications, Pemberton noted.  If IBM madethem Systems Application Architecture (SAA) compatible, mobilesystems would become more useful to IBM customers, he said.IBM planned to enter the market in the third quarter, but moved upthe announcement to the first quarter, Pemberton said.  Themachines will ship no later than first quarter 1991, but IBM isaiming to beat that deadline, he added.To be successful in the field, the systems must be accepted by themajor communication companies.  IBM has been courting Qualcomm,American Mobil Satellite Corp., Telsat Mobile Inc., Geostar, andother satellite communications companies to ensure thisacceptance, according to Pemberton.  Negotiations with Locstarwill be critical to the system's success in western Europe, heobserved.  (Dan Carney and Michael Cooney)Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990SNA WILL REMAIN IBM'S BABY DESPITE GROWING OSI INVESTMENTIBM will continue to pour the majority of its research anddevelopment (R&D) dollars into SNA, but the computer giant hasmade a definitive investment in OSI, according to a recent NeilMiles Ltd. (New York, N.Y.) research report."IBM is never going to do what some of its competitors are doing,like DEC  [Digital Equipment Corp.] and HP [Hewlett-Packard Co.],and that is replace its proprietary network protocols with OSI.IBM will offer the ability to mix and match [SNA and OSI]," saidreport author Rob Garretson.The "Gateway To The Future" report does not break down the dollarproportions spent on R&D for SNA and OSI, Garretson said, but itdoes say while IBM has started a multi-million dollar OSI effort,it will continue to spend billions on SNA development."I would say the proportion of development resources is at least10 to one SNA to OSI," Garretson said.  He added that IBM spends"tens of billions of dollars in R&D with a very wide palette ofresearch" but R&D is still heavily weighted towards SNA."Though IBM is making its first real definitive investment in OSI,SNA is still [IBM's] baby," said Garretson.Big Blue will provide multivendor portals to all customers whowant them, according to the report.  Garretson said an IBMcustomer will have the option of using X.25 as the main transportprotocol across its SNA network, replacing IBM's Synchronous DataLink Control (SDLC) protocol for wide area networking. (BethBacheldor)Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990KNOWLEDGE-BASED SOFTWARE TOOL UNVEILEDIBM last week announced The Integrated Reasoning Shell (TIRS), anapplication enabling tool that will help businesses create and useknowledge-based applications within Big Blue's AD/Cycle andSystems Application Architecture (SAA) frameworks.IBM said the shell will make it easer for customers tobuild specialized libraries of information and apply them toproblem-solving situations.  These knowledge bases can bedeveloped on OS/2 or AIX and run on the PS/2, AIX/RT, and S/370 VMor MVS using the Runtime System.Scheduled to be available in July, TIRS will cost $7,500 for theDevelopment System and $750 for the Runtime System on the PS/2 andRT.  System/370 prices will range from $11,000 to $113,000 for theDevelopment System and $3,000 to $28,000 for the Runtime system.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990IBM, OTHERS SUBMIT PROPOSAL TO OSFIBM, Hewlett-Packard's Apollo Systems division, Locus ComputingCorp., and Transarc Corp. Monday proposed DEcorum -- an integratedset of software components for use in multivendor networkedenvironments -- to the Open Software Foundation.According to the companies, DEcorum's uniform distributedarchitecture supports integration of the different softwaretechnologies -- each chosen for its unique functionality -- andthe ability to work across heterogeneous environments.  DEcorumwill also allow Unix users and systems managers to distributeimplementations of Unix services and facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990PS/2 GETS X.25 CO-PROCESSOR SUPPORTIBM recently announced the X.25 Co-Processor Support Program,which allows PS/2 Models 50 and above to link with X.25 networksvia an IBM X.25 Interface Co-Processor/2 board.The software will support X.21 and X.21bis at speeds up to 64 Kbpsfull duplex.  According to IBM, the adapter code senses the typeof attachment interface and adjusts accordingly.  Each link cansupport up to 250 logical channels, including Switched orPermanent Virtual Circuits.  The program will be available inSeptember for $337.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990IBM ANNOUNCES NETWORK SERVICESIBM Wednesday announced the formation of the IBM Systems Servicesorganization to help customers manage their information processingand network operations.The new division will focus on reducing customer's data processingoperations costs and increasing their information processingcapabilities, IBM said.  It will do this by managing key aspectsof the user's network operations. IBM will also provide customizedsolutions for those customers who desire it.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990KODAK SELECTS IBM TO MANAGE WORLDWIDE SNA NETWORKEastman Kodak announced Monday that it has selected IBM to manageits worldwide SNA network.  Under terms of the agreement, IBM willmanage day-to-day network operations at Kodak locations inRochester, N.Y., Colorado, and Canada, as well as regional anddistrict locations.Big Blue will provide all network connectivity services forKodak's new data center, including Business Recovery Services fordisaster recovery.  Digital Equipment Corp. will manage Kodak'svoice and data facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990MADGE NETWORKS INTRODUCES SOFTWARE DRIVER FOR SMART AT, MCRINGNODESMadge Networks Inc. (San Jose, Calif.) has introduced a softwaredriver that it says gives its 4 Mbps Smart AT and MC Ringnodes theperformance of IBM's 16 Mbps Token Ring.  Madge's Smart Serversoftware uses the IBM PS/2's busmaster capabilities and leaves theCPU free by offloading low-level network activity onto the TokenRing adapter.The Smart Server automatically configures itself to the interruptsand I/O of the Smart Ringnode and is compatible with Micro Channeland AT-style PCs, Madge said.  Scheduled to be available thisquarter, Smart Server will be offered free to current Madge SmartAT and MC Ringnode users.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990IMS-NV -- NETVIEW SUPPORT AVAILABLE FOR CROSSCOMM'S ILAN LAN-WANBRIDGESCrossComm Corp. (Marlboro, Mass.) announced the availability ofIMS-NV -- NetView support for its ILAN LAN-WAN bridges.  CrossCommsaid the new support will let IBM customers use a single 327Xterminal and application software to manage IBM and CrossCommequipment.ILAN is a multi-function modular bridge that supports Ethernet,Token Ring, and StarLAN LANs.  CrossComm manages these bridgeswith its own IMS software.  NV-IMS will be available this monthfor $4,950, which includes the IMS-NV software and an Ethernet orToken Ring controller.Back to Headline List CopyrightSNA COMMUNICATIONS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1990SIMWARE INTRODUCES SIMHLLAPISimware (Ottowa, Canada) introduced SimHLLAPI, a high-levellanguage API allowing peer-to-peer communications between an IBMhost and PC applications.  SimHLLAPI allows users to accessapplications other than the traditional 3270 terminalapplications.  Built-in drivers handle communication with themainframe, while the PC is free to use its own intelligence andprocessing power.  The product is available immediately for $200.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-2IA059-000323-B024-325http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec87.html 205.156.212.5 19970114221856 text/html 20471HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:17:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:09 GMTContent-length: 20284Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec87.html Sample Issue Copyright MAINFRAME COMPUTING via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ALPHASERVER 8400 ARRAY PERFORMANCE SIMILAR TO MAINFRAME'S POWER (962 words) UNIX SERVERS REPLACE MAINFRAMES IN NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM (998 words) ALISA SYSTEMS SOLVES COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS BETWEEN MAINFRAME AND PERSONAL COMPUTERS FOR WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (390 words) VAX AND RISC-6000 NOW COMMUNICATE WITH PERSONAL COMPUTER E-MAIL SYSTEMS AT CARPET MANUFACTURER (346 words) CopyrightMAINFRAME COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 1996ALPHASERVER 8400 ARRAY PERFORMANCESIMILAR TO MAINFRAME'S POWERDigital Equipment Corporation has announced new technology,PCI Memory Channel interconnect, that enables its highlyscalable AlphaServer systems to deliver new levels ofaffordability and price/performance for the technicalcomputing market. Digital has showcased these new capabilitiesin an array of eight AlphaServer 8400 systems with a total of96 Alpha 64-bit processors running 64-bit Digital UNIX."Digital's new scalable AlphaServer 8400 array offers apreview of the next generation in enterprise supercomputing,"said Gary Smaby, president, Smaby Group, Inc. "By linkingdozens of its blazingly fast Alpha microprocessors through arobust memory interconnect architecture, Digital hasconstructed a mainframe-class computing platform for high-endtechnical users tackling applications that benefit fromparallel processing. The system leverages the cost benefits ofcommodity componentry to deliver a compellingprice/performance alternative to traditional supercomputersand MPPs."Digital makes high performance affordable for compute-intensive, technical applications such as computational fluiddynamics, computational chemistry, weather modeling, andmolecular and genetics research. Digital delivers outstandingprice/ performance by taking advantage of standard,high-volume, low-cost components including a high-speedinterconnect and optimized software. As each processordelivers 600 MFLOPS, a 96 processor system delivers 57.6GFLOPS of computing power -- for only $4.5 million.This combination of affordable price and high performanceenables a wide variety of users to attain performance levelspreviously available only with expensive, specializedsupercomputers. Users who would never have been able to affordsupercomputer-class power can now do so with Digital'ssystems."Digital is making high-performance computing affordable formore applications than ever before," said Dr. Michael Levine,scientific director, Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center. "We'refinding that Digital's approach to connecting AlphaServers iselegantly simple, and both very powerful and very costeffective. We can connect AlphaServers of different sizes,which is important to us because it enables us to match oursystems and applications most efficiently. We're currentlyusing the system for molecular dynamics, visualization, finiteelement and simulated annealing code, and think thistechnology prepares us for the future of high-performancecomputing."Standards-based Commodity Components for OutstandingPerformance and AffordabilityDigital delivers these new levels of price/performance byleveraging commodity hardware and software components. Astandards- based PCI bus Memory Channel interconnect is usedto link multiple AlphaServer systems. This low-latency (lessthan 5 microseconds), high-bandwidth (100 Mbytes/sec)interconnect provides high-speed, memory-to-memorycommunications among up to eight AlphaServer 8400 systems,which allows the multiple systems to operate essentially as asingle system with 57.6 GFLOPS of power. The Memory Channelinterconnect can also link lower-cost AlphaServer 2000systems for extremely cost-effective high-performancesolutions.Digital also provides a suite of software tools that allowstechnical users to optimize their applications for the newtechnology. The software includes:o Digital UNIX, the industry's only 64-bit UNIX operatingsystem, which provides greater standards-compliance and higherperformance than any other available UNIX operating system.o High Performance Fortran (HPF), which allows the arrayedsystems to be programmed as easily as a single system. HPFautomatically optimizes communications among processors formaximum performance and allows the system to be easily scaledfor a variable number of processors.o Parallel Software Environment (PSE), which provides theruntimes for HPF, and performance analysis and debugging toolsfor developing parallel applications.o Digital PVM (Parallel Virtual Machine), an enhanced versionof public domain PVM, which facilitates the creation ofparallel applications.o MPI (Message Passing Interface), software developed withEdinburgh Parallel Computing Centre, which enables users tocreate parallel applications for these systems using anoptimized version of the industry-standard software formessage passing.Digital's use of these standards-based, off-the-shelf hardwareand software components allow it to deliver systems that arelower cost, easier to expand and simpler to program thancompetitive systems."Digital is the leading provider of high-performance UNIXsolutions, as demonstrated by the industry's firstimplementation of 64-bit UNIX in 1993, our Very Large Memorysystems last spring, and now the new level of price andperformance of arrayed systems," said Pauline Nist, vicepresident, AlphaServer Business Segment, Digital EquipmentCorp. "Through our Technical Solutions Initiative, we have thehigh-level expertise to deliver solutions that meet the uniqueneeds of users in the technical segment. The technology inthese AlphaServer arrays leverages the fastest processors,the best interconnect, proven, shipping, software and low-costcommodity components to deliver the best availablehigh-performance solutions for technical computing."Digital's Very Large Memory (VLM) technology dramaticallyimproves application performance by increasing the amount ofinformation that can be stored in memory. Digital is the onlycompany delivering high-performance 64-bit servers,AlphaServer systems, and a 64-bit operating system, DigitalUNIX, which together make VLM64 possible. Whereas 32-bitsystems are limited to 2 Gbytes of memory, AlphaServer 8400systems can store up to 14 Gbytes of data in memory, for fastaccess to large amount of data.Digital's Technical Solutions Initiative provides customers inengineering and scientific environments with completeapplication solutions.Through the Technical Solutions Initiative, Digital providesAlphaStation and AlphaServer customers in mechanical designand analysis, electronic design and analysis, geographicinformation systems, technical CASE and science and researchwith industry- leading application performance andprice-performance advantages.Pricing and AvailabilityThe hardware and software components in the AlphaServer arraywill be available in January, 1996. The AlphaServer 8400array with 96 processors; 4 gigabytes of memory; 32 gigabytesof disk space; PCI Memory Channel interconnect; Digital UNIX,HPF, PSE and Digital PVM is priced at $4.5 million. Othercomplete configurations begin at $70,000, such as a systemwith an AlphaServer 2000 array with 2 processors; 256 Mbytesof memory; 4 gigabytes of disk space; PCI Memory Channelinterconnect; Digital UNIX, HPF, PSE and Digital PVM.More information is available athttp://www.digital.com/info/hpc/hpc.html.Back to Headline List CopyrightMAINFRAME COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 1996UNIX SERVERS REPLACE MAINFRAMESIN NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEMBest Western International, Inc., the world's largest hotelbrand, has selected multiple AlphaServer 8400 "TurboLaser"systems, the world's most powerful servers, together withthousands of Digital personal computers, to power BestWestern's new worldwide central reservation system (CRS).When fully implemented, the deal will be worth more than $12million in Digital revenue. A total of 10 AlphaServer 8400systems will power Best Western's operations center centralhost server, located in Phoenix, Ariz., as well as BWI'sreservation centers located in Phoenix, Wichita, Kan., Dublin,Ireland, and Milan, Italy. The new servers will run Oracle7relational database management system with the 64-bit DigitalUNIX operating system, handling in excess of 2,000transactions per second. AlphaServer systems will replaceoutdated and over-extended mainframes.In addition, Digital will deliver some 3,500 Digital Venturis535 PCs to every Best Western property worldwide, where theywill provide a full range of inventory and rate managementcapabilities. This part of the system will enable hoteliers toenroll in Best Western marketing programs and create their ownprograms and pricing packages."Today we unveil the hotel industry's most ambitious, advancedcustomer reservation system. We selected theDigital/Oracle/UNIX solutions because of its superiorperformance, flexibility, and growth potential -- at one-tenththe cost of competing systems," said William S. Watson, BestWestern International's executive vice president."We expect the Digital/Oracle solution to dramatically improveour ability to respond more rapidly to customer needs, toquickly provide our client agents more and more relevantinformation on our customers' travel preferences, to increaseour sales and revenues, and to enhance our company's image,"Watson added.The new system is expected to to generate more than $50million in incremental annual room revenue and willsignificantly reduce corporate and property level operatingcosts.Pace-setting Global Reservation SystemBest Western's new central reservations systems, scheduled fora March 15, 1996, start-up, offers unprecedented features andfunctions, both at the property level and at the Best Westerncentral reservations offices. It will be a serviceenhancement for the 40 million travelers worldwide who stay atBest Western hotels each year.With the new CRS, Best Western will be the only hotel chain toprovide comprehensive geographic, pictorial, and textualinformation to its reservation sales agents. These featureswill enable guests who call a Best Western central reservationoffice from any location, whether at home or on the road, tofind the Best Western hotel that is closest to their desireddestination.The new system will enable Best Western to provide detailedguest histories, group booking capabilities, revenuemanagement service, travel agent commission data, and a widerange of property-specific and destination information.Yet the new system is much more than a traditionaltransaction- oriented network. It will provide the businesstools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing andfuture customers."Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bringradical changes to the way products are distributed to itscustomers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital andOracle as technology partners for the new millennium," saidPauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServerBusiness Segment. "While Best Western customers may never knowwhat's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, BestWestern managers will sleep better knowing our systems areproviding those customers the fastest, most reliable servicesin the travel industry."Digital's AlphaServer 8400 SystemsAlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastestmicroprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12service, travel agent commission data, and a wide range ofproperty-specific and destination information.Yet the new system is much more than a traditionaltransaction- oriented network. It will provide the businesstools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing andfuture customers."Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bringradical changes to the way products are distributed to itscustomers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital andOracle as technology partners for the new millennium," saidPauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServerBusiness Segment. "While Best Western customers may never knowwhat's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, BestWestern managers will sleep better knowing our systems areproviding those customers the fastest, most reliable servicesin the travel industry."Digital's AlphaServer 8400 SystemsAlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastestmicroprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 1264-bit processors and 14 Gbytes of memory, and can beclustered for far greater performance.Recently, Digital and Oracle together shattered thetransaction processing world performance record in benchmarktesting (tpcC) defined and audited by the independentTransaction Processing Performance Council. This wasaccomplished on an AlphaServer 8400, Digital UNIX operatingsystem, and Oracle 7 database system. The Digital/Oraclesolution bested the previous record held by Hewlett Packard by75 percent, and was far better than the best systems from IBM,Sun, AT&T, and Tandem.Taken together, the 64-bit Alpha technology, 64-bit DigitalUNIX, and 64-bit databases such as Oracle7 enable thebreakthrough performance and price/performance of VLM64.Digital is unique in the industry in its ability to deliverthis capability to customers today.Applications such as data warehousing, financial management,and online transaction processing take particular advantageof VLM64 solutions. This is because more than 4 billion timesmore data can be stored in memory than even the most powerfulmainframe systems, at a fraction of the cost. This providesdramatic improvements in processing speed, applicationperformance, and system affordability.Digital's Venturis PCsDigital Venturis is Digital's value-oriented desktop PC familydesigned to meet the computing requirements of generalbusiness users in standard office applications, as well asthose of users in a client/server environment. Ideal for thevolume purchaser, Venturis systems are simple to install, easyto use and easy to maintain, while providing room to expand ascomputing needs evolve.Back to Headline List CopyrightMAINFRAME COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 1996ALISA SYSTEMS SOLVES COMMUNICATION PROBLEMSBETWEEN MAINFRAME AND PERSONAL COMPUTERSFOR WASHINGTON DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATIONThe Bridge Design Office in the Washington State Department ofTransportation had a serious E-Mail problem. Threeincompatible electronic mail systems were being used in thedepartment which made inter-sectional communication difficult."We had installed a VAX-based system in our Bridge DesignOffice, but NetWare and AppleTalk systems were being installedin the rest of the department," recalled Dick Stoddard of theDepartment of Transportation. "We used VMS Mail internally anddidn't worry about talking to other offices because phone andconventional mail was the normal way of doing business,"Stoddard said.Stoddard, who works in the office that is responsible fordesign calculations and "putting out bridge plans", wasbecoming increasingly concerned about the E-Mail compatibilityproblem because the department was changing the way it didbusiness. Department E-mail was becoming a critical tool foradministrators and designers. "We just had no integration toolbetween VMS Mail and other department mail systems," saidStoddard. The Bridge Design Office needed to integrate theirVMS mail system with the Microsoft Mail being used onAppleTalk and NetWare networks without spending a huge sum ofmoney to install a unified mail system. Luckily for them, theyfound Alisa Systems.Alisa Systems was referred to the Department by severaldifferent companies as an expert in electronic mailintegration. Alisa's AlisaMail software is designed to workwith all of the major mail systems in use today and can beinstalled as a central post office.Alisa sent in a systems engineer who set up the program andthe result was better communication between the Bridge DesignOffice and the rest of the department."I think it does a very good translation and connection," saidStoddard. "The connection into the Apple side was almosttransparent. If there's any VMS users out there that need tocommunicate with NetWare and MicroSoft Mail, the connectionswork very well." Stoddard added, adding, "It's great when anentire department gets plugged into compatible mail systems."Alisa Systems was able to provide the Department ofTransportation with a small, cost-effective solution thatallowed their systems to be compatible. The AlisaMail softwarewas not the only aspect of Alisa Systems that Stoddard waspleased with. "Their technical staff and their support wasvery prompt," he said.For more information, call Alisa Systems at (800)628-3274.Back to Headline List CopyrightMAINFRAME COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 1996VAX AND RISC-6000 NOW COMMUNICATE WITH PERSONALCOMPUTER E-MAIL SYSTEMS AT CARPET MANUFACTURERManufacturing depends on the right machinery to get the jobdone, but the "machinery" may not always be the kind thatactually makes the product. In addition to manufacturinghardware, production relies heavily on communication for theproduct to get out the door on time.Shaw Industries, in Dalton Georgia, the world's largest carpetmanufacturer, was having a difficult time keeping up with itsproduction schedule because departments housed in separatebuildings couldn't communicate. The departments weren'tignoring each other; their computers were speaking differentlanguages. Instead of instantaneous E-mail, Shaw wasinefficiently "snail mailing" messages between departments onfoot. The disadvantages were obvious."Our company is international, having branches in GreatBritain, Mexico and Australia and also working with outsidevendors and outside clients," said Martha Roberts, a TechnicalSpecialist for the company. "We have many internalE-mail systems including ccMail and MicroSoft Mail.  We alsohave a large 34-node DEC VAX system and an IBM RISC-6000computer, each with more E-mail users," she continued.  Allthese systems needed to be able to E-mail back and forthbetween users corporate-wide. Manufacturing needed to sendproduction reports and other information to distribution andwe didn't have the local infrastructure in place to where youcould do that easily," Roberts recalled.Rather than making a huge investment in a single compatiblecomputer system, Shaw contacted Alisa Systems of Pasadena,Calif. Alisa brought its technical support engineer on-siteand integrated the company's computers in record time."We were up and running in three days," said Roberts, adding,"I have 2200 AlisaMail users here and corporate-wide. I'd say,overall, we've got 40,000 users. Reporting time has beendramatically reduced because it's been automated through theAlisaMail system," Roberts added. Shaw Industries has alsobeen extremely pleased with Alisa's technical support staff."They're always there when we need them and the trainingclasses were great," Roberts said enthusiastically.Needless to say, with AlisaMail, departments at ShawIndustries are talking to each other again and production isback on schedule.For more information, cal 800-628-3274.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-3IA059-000323-B024-365http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec64.html 205.156.212.5 19970114221950 text/html 5941HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:17:27 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:00 GMTContent-length: 5755Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec64.html Sample Issue Copyright MICROCOMPUTER RESOURCES via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES %===================================% SIMBA INFORMATION (486 words) HIGH-DENSITY CD-ROM (224 words) CopyrightMICROCOMPUTER RESOURCES via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SIMBA INFORMATIONSIMBA Information, Inc was formed in 1989 to acquire thenewsletter business of Knowledge Industry Publications. Itsubsequently acquired the newsletter, magazine, conference andreports business of Communications Trends and several othersmaller publishers. The company is an affiliate of Cowles MediaCompany.Our products and services are used to monitor the global marketfor information publishing and distribution. Markets coveredinclude yellow pages, directory & book publishing, databases,multimedia, telecommunications, computer, advertising andeducational publishing.Today, SIMBA s information and communications network anddatabase of people, events, results, forecasts, analysis,statistics and commentary on the media/information industry iswithout parallel. We publish critically needed, time dependentinformation using tightly focused editorial/marketing teamsdedicated to delivering top quality information to a worldwidebase of nearly 10,000 clients.SIMBA has particular experience in electronic information systemsand services. The company uses information technology forproduction efficiency and flexible distribution and has developedseveral pioneering electronic services believed to be the firstof their kind.MULTIMEDIA BUSINESS REPORT -- NewsletterMultimedia Business Report is the only publication consistentlymonitoring the strategies companies are using to publish, marketand sell multimedia titles. Each week, it provides you with afocus on the intellectual property side of new media. You'll knowmultimedia's likely impact on important publishing markets, suchas entertainment, education, reference and business. AndMultimedia Business Report examines the sales and marketingprograms of leading title publishers in these competitivemarkets. With Multimedia Business Report, you'll have theinformation you need to position, market and sell your multimediaproducts more effectively. Published since 1992 ..... $479/yr. 46issues/yr.ECONOMICS OF MULTIMEDIA TITLE PUBLISHING -- Report Economics ofMultimedia Title Publishing puts everything you need to knowabout new media development at your fingertips: in-depth marketanalysis, up-to-date industry statistics and detaileddescriptions of the choices faced by multimedia publishers. Thisreport is the blueprint that will help you plan your company'smultimedia title publishing activities. It explores profitopportunities in three markets -- business, consumer andeducation. You'll learn all the decisions and potential snagsyou'll run into as you launch your product -- from productplanning to distribution. 1st edition -- June 1994 ..... $795($745 cash with order) 2nd edition -- 2rid-Q-95 ..... (Price TBA)MULTIMEDIA NOw: A MARKET CRITIQUE FOR PUBLISHERS -- Conference OnMarch 29, 1995, join publishing industry leaders as they sharetheir experiences in new media title publishing. Analyze 1994sales and the 1995 outlook with executives who publish, marketand retail new media titles. Network with key new mediapublishing industry decision-makers. Keynote address by JonathanNewcomb, President and Chief Executive Officer, Simon andSchuster. Conference sponsored by Publishers Weekly and SIMBAInformation. March 29, 1995, Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza, New York,NY ..... $395SIMBA Information Inc. P.O. Box 7430 Wilton, CT 06897 Tel:203-834-0033 Fax: 203-834-1771e-mail:simba99@aol.comBack to Headline List CopyrightMICROCOMPUTER RESOURCES via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HIGH-DENSITY CD-ROM3M ANNOUNCES DUAL-LAYER CONSTRUCTION PROCESS FORLAS VEGAS, Nev. -- November 14, 1994 -- 3M announced today at theCOMDEX show an advanced disc construction allowing the capacityof high density CD-ROM discs to be doubled for play-back in nextgeneration CD-ROM drives.Developed in cooperation with Philips and Sony, 3M's new discconstruction employs a second information layer to double thecapacity of the new high-density CD system under development. Theresult is a ten-fold increase in capacity over today's CD-ROMdiscs, or more than 6 Gigabytes of information on a single-sideddisc."By forming two separate information layers in a single, solidsubstrate, there is no need for bonding agents to adhere multipleplatters together with air gaps between which might collect dustparticles," said Rusty Rosenberger, business development manager,3M Software Media and CD-ROM Services. "3M's new dual-layerprocess essentially provides the benefits of blue lasertechnology today by doubling the capacity of the new high-densityCD-ROM disc, which is based on red laser technology," heexplained.This new CD technology is ideally suited for the distribution oflarge database and graphic image files such as medical and legalreference databases, radiography images, digital photography, andengineering drawing worksets. In the consumer markets, thistechnology provides increased content storage and presentationcapabilities to developers of multimedia titles.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-4IA059-000323-B024-398http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec97.html 205.156.212.5 19970114222231 text/html 22345HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:20:13 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:15 GMTContent-length: 22158Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec97.html Sample Issue Copyright MODEM USERS NEWS via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HAYES NEW PLUG & PLAY MULTIMEDIA MODEM INTEGRATES COMPUTER TELEPHONY AND MESSAGING (585 words) HAYES MULTIMEDIA DSVD MODEM OFFERS AFFORDABLE COMPLETE COMMUNICATION SOLUTION (478 words) HAYES SHIPS OPTIMA PC CARD WITH STANDARD CONNECTOR (304 words) LIST OF ENVIRONMENTAL BULLETIN BOARDS (889 words) "DOING BUSINESS ON THE INTERNET" SUBJECT OF CONFERENCE BOARD MEETING (123 words) JONES DIGITAL STORE OFFERS ON-LINE SHOPPING, EDUCATION, AND INFORMATION (388 words) CopyrightMODEM USERS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996HAYES NEW PLUG & PLAY MULTIMEDIA MODEMINTEGRATES COMPUTER TELEPHONY AND MESSAGINGHayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. has announced Q1 1996availability of the Hayes ACCURA 288B V.34 Message Modem. Thisnew internal plug & play modem features full voicefunctionality, including full duplex speaker phone, RadishVoiceView, digital voice messaging, and automatic paging,bringing professional office messaging capability to SOHOusers."Hayes ACCURA 288B Message Modem offers a low cost alternativeto traditional high cost answering services, with the addedbenefit of message management features such as automaticpaging and message retrieval," said Dennis Hayes, Chairman andCEO, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. "The marriage ofcomputer and telephone communications in this product bridgesthe gap between SOHO users and their office, making them moreresponsive to their customers needs."ACCURA 288B Message Modem features:Features BenefitsFull Duplex Speaker Phone Superior, low cost, hands-freespeakerphone operation.Digital Voice Messaging High quality voice mail system for aprofessional business image.Automatic paging To get that urgent call or fax while you areon the road.Remote Message Retrieval With 24 hour remote access tomessages, you can provide instant response to callers.Plug & Play Simplifies installation and configuration ofWindows 95 operating system. (In internal modems only.)VoiceView Allows easy switching between data, fax, and voicemodes during the same call.Caller I.D. Provides in-bound caller identification without acostly display phone.Distinctive Ring Directs calls to voice, fax, or data modem.Fax-on-demand Enables callers to select from a menu and havetheir selection faxed back to them.Data/Fax/Voice Modem automatically and transparentlyDiscrimination recognizes and handles data, fax, and voice onone phone line.The full duplex speaker phone capability in this productallows for simultaneous hands free communication and togetherwith its VoiceView capability can even exchange data\fax fileswith remote sites during the same call. Hayes ACCURA 288BMessage Modem will answer incoming calls, play recordedgreetings to the calling party, and store voice messages asdigital files to a PC's hard drive. The product also has ahigh quality, built in microphone which easily integrates intoa desktop PC's existing speakers."With the enhanced security features of the ACCURA 288BMessage Modem, users can establish password protection,manage or forward messages to others, and secure privatemessages," said Bob Meara, Senior Product Manager, ConsumerProducts, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. "Along with themodem's ability to do fax scheduling and receivefax-on-demand, users now have a powerful and secure messagingsystem that is flexible and easy to use."Hayes ACCURA 288B Message Modem supports 28,800 bits/s datatransmission and up to 115,200 bit/s throughput with ITU-TV.42bis compression. The modem also supports 14,400 bits/s faxtransmission and Class 1 and 2 fax capabilities. SRP for theACCURA 288B Message Modem is $259.The product comes bundled with Hayes Smartcom Message Center,a full-featured voice, fax and data product, as well asinternet access software packages, and complimentary AmericaOnLine and CompuServe software that come with 1-month free on-line memberships.Best known as the leader in microcomputer modems, Hayesdevelops, supplies and supports computer communicationsequipment and software for personal computers and computercommunications networks. The company distributes its productsthrough a global network of authorized distributors, dealers,mass merchants, VARs, system integrators and originalequipment manufacturers.For further information please contact:Andrew W. Dod Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. Phone:770/840-9200 ext. 6365 Facsimile: 770/441-1238 InternetAddress: adod@hayes.com Hayes World Wide Web Site:http://www.hayes.comBack to Headline List CopyrightMODEM USERS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996HAYES MULTIMEDIA DSVD MODEM OFFERSAFFORDABLE COMPLETE COMMUNICATION SOLUTIONHayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. has announced Q1 1996availability of the Hayes ACCURA 288 V.34 DSVD Message Modem-- an affordable, multimedia plug & play modem that allowssimultaneous voice and data communications over one phoneline. Available in both internal and desktop form factors,Hayes ACCURA DSVD Message Modem is a complete data and faxmodem, featuring computer telephony integration, with fullduplex speaker phone and Radish VoiceView."The Hayes ACCURA DSVD Message Modem provides SOHO userseverything they need for totally automated PC and voicecommunications," said Dennis Hayes, Chairman and CEO, HayesMicrocomputer Products, Inc. "Now small offices have acomplete data, fax and voice messaging system available tothem via a single telephone line. Everyone from power usersconducting video conferencing or real time document sharing,to consumers interested in interactive gaming will see thebenefits of this product's versatility and speed ."ACCURA DSVD Message Modem features:Features BenefitsDigital Simultaneous Voice & Simultaneous voice and data, orData (DSVD) fax, over one phone line.Full Duplex Speaker Phone Superior, low cost, hands-freespeakerphone operation.Digital Voice Messaging High quality voice mail for aprofessional business image. VoiceView Allows easy switchingbetween data, fax, and voice modes during the same call.Plug & Play Simplifies internal modem installation andconfiguration of Windows 95 operating system.Caller I.D. Provides in-bound caller identification without acostly display phone.Remote Message Retrieval With 24 hour remote access tomessages, you can provide instant response to callers.Fax-on-demand Enables callers to select from a menu and havetheir selection faxed back to them.Features BenefitsData/Fax/Voice Discrimination Modem automatically andtransparently recognizes and handles data, fax and voice onone phone line.Automatic Paging To get that urgent call when you are on theroad.Distinctive Ring Directs calls to voice, fax or data modem.Hayes ACCURA 288 DSVD Message Modem supports 28,800 bits/sdata transmission and up to 115,200 bit/s throughput withITU-T V.42bis compression. The modem also supports 14,400bits/s fax transmission and Class 1 and 2 fax capabilities.The external product comes with high quality, built-inmicrophone and speakers, and the internal product comes withmicrophone and easily integrates into the desktop PC'sexisting speaker system.The product comes bundled with Hayes Smartcom Message Centerfull-featured voice, fax and data software, as well asinternet access software packages, and complimentary AmericaOnLine and CompuServe software that come with 1-month freeon-line memberships.The SRP for Hayes ACCURA external 288 DSVD Message Modem is$359 and the SRP for the Hayes ACCURA internal 288B DSVDMessage Modem is $339.For further information please contact:Andrew W. Dod Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. Phone:770/840-9200 ext. 6365 Facsimile: 770/441-1238 InternetAddress: adod@hayes.com Hayes World Wide Web Site:http://www.hayes.comBack to Headline List CopyrightMODEM USERS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996HAYES SHIPS OPTIMA PC CARD WITH STANDARD CONNECTORNew Product Displays Company's Continued Commitment to PC CardTechnologyHayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. has announced that it isshipping its popular line of PC Card modems with a standardcable connector. The new Hayes OPTIMA 288 V.34 for PCMCIAdemonstrates the company's continued commitment to PC Cardtechnology."The increasing demand in the PC Card market clearlyillustrates that customers want fast, reliable andmulti-functional mobile communication products," says DennisC. Hayes, Chairman and CEO, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc."From 1994 to 1995 PCMCIA modem shipments grew over 117% andrevenue increased over 75% in North America."Special enhanced features of Hayes OPTIMA 288 V.34 for PCMCIAinclude:Feature Benefit8x Data Compression Enhanced implementation of V.42bisprovides 8x compression and throughput rates of up to 230,400bit/s --double the speed of most other modems.Plug & Play Simplifies installation and configuration, andenhances support of future Operating Systems.Hot Swapping Allows users to plug in and remove the modemwithout rebooting the PC.Automatic Idle Mode Extends the PC battery life by drawingonly five milliamps of power when in idle mode.Class 1 and Class 2 Supports industry standard fax protocols.FAX supportBong Detection Recognition of telephone company bong makes iteasy for you to use your credit card to pay for the call.PBX Current Protection Provides additional protection to themodem hardware from high current or power spikes.Flash ROM Ensures product longevity--new features can be addedanytime via downloads of new firmware.Hayes OPTIMA 288 V.34 for PCMCIA will be available forestimated retail prices US$319 and CDN$469.For further information please contact:Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. Phone: 770/840-9200 x6365Facsimile: 770/441-1238 Internet Address: adod@hayes.com HayesWorld Wide Web Site: http://www.hayes.comBack to Headline List CopyrightMODEM USERS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996LIST OF ENVIRONMENTAL BULLETIN BOARDS**********************************************************************NOTE!: Numerous Bulletin Board Systems Have Environmental Conferences,So THIS List Is Comprised Of Those Either PRIMARILY Environmental, TheHOST Of An Environmental Relay Themselves Or Just Worthy Of Inclusion.CANNOT GUARANTEE ACCURACY OF TELEPHONE NUMBERS OR IF BOARD IS STILLACTIVE.******************************************************************************************************************************************** NAME OF BULLETIN BOARD   PHONE NUMBER  BAUD HR   NAME OF SYSOP    BBS________________________  ____________ _____ __ _________________  ___Bird Info Network ($-CO)  303-423-9775 14400 24 Terry Rune         TBBCBFWA (Fish & Wildlife!)  503-326-7792  2400 24 Shawn Swagerty     WILCCS BBS (For Eco-Topics)  410-476-5098  9600 24 Jo Campbell (Mod.) PCBCanadian EarthCare Socy.  604-765-5097 14400 24 Jim Dixon(ENVIRON) MAXCapricorn Rising (RIME).  503-370-9777  2400 24 Bob Covington      GAPCoin of the Realm BBS...  301-585-6697  2400 24 Dan Wendling       PCBColorado Sierra Club....  303-860-1242  2400 24 Mark Collier       SEAContinental Divide BBS..  601-957-3016 14400 24 Mike Seal          AUNEPA Online Library (OLS)  919-541-4642  9600 24 Joe Steigerwald  (7E1)Earth Art BBS (GreenNet)  803-552-4389 16800 24 Bob Chapman (GND)  PCBEco-Net $ (On InterNet!)  415-322-0284  2400 24 Geoff Sears       X-25Ecology Research (USFWS)  303-226-9365  2400 24 Joe Richards       MAJEnviro-Facts BBS(Canada)  604-433-2431  2400 24 Bob Lyons          MAJEnviro-Facts BBS(Sysops)  604-434-3934  9600 24 Bob Lyons          MAJEnvironmental Action BBS  207-439-0633 16800 24 John Burns          RAEnviroNet (Greenpeace)..  415-512-9108  2400 24 Dick Dillman       TBBEnviro BBS (Eco-Science)  703-524-1837  2400 24 Kurt Riegel        RBBFish House BBS (EcoGulf)  601-460-5970 16800 24 Rick Cooke         MAXGeorgia Sierra Club(HUB)  404-634-0304 14400 24 Mike Witten        PCBGlendale Litera (Nature)  818-956-6164 14400 24 Abel Iwaz          WILHOME BBS (Organic/Agric)  317-539-6579  9600 24 Cissy Bowman       QBBHazardous Material(HMIX)  708-972-3275  9600 24 Cathy Gerard       PCBHeartBeat Earth BBS (CA)  408-257-2306  2400 24 Marcus Johnson     WILHelix BBS (Wash. State).  206-783-6368 14400 24 Scott Parks         RAHerb Patch, The (Canada)  604-545-8068  2400 N1 Shanta McBain       RAHome Power Communication  707-822-8640 14400 24 Michael Welch      TBBHOTLine BBS/Fido SIERRAN  318-255-4710 14400 24 Eddie Rowe         RBBMakaao BBS (Eco-Hawaii).  808-672-8276 14400 24 Dennis Leong       PCBMNS Online (Eco-Linking)  518-381-4430  2400 24 Don Rittner        MacNASA SpaceLink (Alabama)  205-895-0028  9600 24 Bill Anderson     MiniOne World (Fido/Usenet).  310-372-0987 14400 24 Larry Fletcher     MAXOsprey's Nest (Birding).  301-989-9036  9600 24 Norm Saunders      ROSPPIC (Pollution Preven.)  703-506-1025  2400 24 The EPA            PCBParameters$(ID=PRESERVE)  618-549-8448 14400 24 Bob Pauls          WILPenguin Point(Fido Ecol)  414-338-4897 16800 24 Lon Levy            RASWICH (Solid Waste Info)  301-585-0204  2400 24 The EPA & SWANA    PCBSan Diego Sierra Club #1  619-299-4018  2400 24 Geoffrey Smith     SEASan Diego Sierra Club #2  619-299-4032 14400 24 Geoffrey Smith     SEASprawl (GTNet Envi-Echo)  606-278-9709 14400 24 Scott Estes(Bridge) GTTimberline Online/Canada  416-537-1242 14400 24 Christine Morte    ROBTranquility Base (Texas)  210-699-1710 14400 24 Shannon Blackburn  SBBWELL $(Whole Earth Link)  415-332-6106 14400 24 Julian Gordon     X-25Weidner &Sons Publishing  609-486-4783  9600 24 Jim Weidner        PCB**********************************************************************TOLL FREE ENVIRONMENTAL BULLETIN BOARDS (Some Now Use YOUR Tax Money!)**********************************************************************DRIPPS(Drink Water Info)  800-229-3737  9600 24 Barry Gates (EPA!) PCBFlorida Recycling Market  800-348-1239  2400 24 Paul Still         RBBGulfLine (GMP)(3 Lines!)  800-235-4662  9600 24 Kay McGovern (EPA!) RAWTIE (Waste Water Info!)  800-544-1936  2400 24 Harry Kidder       PCBWorld Link $ (ActionNet)  800-827-2835  2400 24 Bill Ryan          MAJ**********************************************************************ENVIRONMENTAL BULLETIN BOARDS ADDED SINCE LAST LIST (Try them NOW!)**********************************************************************American Hydrogen Assoc.  415-494-3116 14400 24 Howard H. Smith    WILBulldog-Eagle Link (KS).  913-582-4636  2400 24 Jon Rueck          TBBCoyote Gulch (Colorado).  719-578-1340 14400 24 Scott Robert Ladd  MAXEEC (EnviroEquipment/CA)  714-644-4181 14400 24 Bjorn Sundbakken   PCBEPA-NPS(NonPoint Source)  301-589-0205  9600 24 The EPA            PCBEPA-PIN (Pesticide Info)  703-305-5919  2400 24 The EPA          (7E1)Land of Sky BBS (N.C.)..  704-254-7800  2400 24 Michael Havelin    PCBOEA (Off.Enviro.Affairs)  202-208-7119 14400 24 John Sell (D.O.I.) WILSave The Earth BBS (CA).  805-833-1437 14400 24 Michael Holland    WILThe Green Machine/Canada  705-721-9508  9600 24 John Winslow        RAWater/Wastewater Network  517-686-4055 16800 24 John DeKam (AWWA)  PCB**********************************************************************VERIFIED INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL BULLETIN BOARDS (Not USA/Canada!)**********************************************************************EkoNet BBS (Belgium).... +32-91-525509 14400 24 Bruno De Vos   (Dutch)EnvITNet BBS (Hong Kong) +852-567-7182 14400 24 Anthony Kwan       MAXGreen Base($) (Essex,UK)+44-81-5012164  2400 24 David Cooper       PCBMany Glacier (Belgium).. +32-3-4480880 14400 24 Ward Dossche GREEN.029********************************************************************************************************************************************BBS TYPES: "?"=Unknown and/or Custom, GAP=Gap, MAJ=Major, MAX=Maximus,PCB=PCBoard, RA=Remote Access, RBB=RBBS, ROS=Remote Operating Systems,AUN=Auntie, ROB=RoboTerm (Requires Special Terminal You Can Download!)X-25=Local Access Exchange #'s Available! (Call For Subscription Info)More [Y]es,N)o,C)ont,A)bort,J)ump?GT=GTBBS, SBB=SuperBBS, VBB=Virtual BBS, QBB=Quick, ???=Log-On ProblemSEA=Searchlight, TBB=TBBS, WIL=Wildcat - ALL May Be Subject To Change!(7E1)=7 Stop Bits, Even Parity, 1 Stop Bit (Change From 8-N-1 Setting)----------------------------------------------------------------------$ = Subscription Required!  GreenNet Is Mostly Looking For FREE BBS's!8-N-1 (8 Data Bits, No Parity & 1 Stop Bit) Unless Noted As Otherwise.Hours Key For Part Time Boards: N1 = 6P-8A & 24 Hrs. On Weekends Only!On UNverified Boards, The More "??" Shown, The LESS Likely To Connect.English Is The DEFAULT Language, But MOST PCBoard's ARE Multi-Lingual!----------------------------------------------------------------------We Hope You Will Find This List To Be Valuable!  The GOAL?  To Keep ItShort, EASY To Follow And POWERFUL In Its Mission To Help Preserve OUREnvironment For Future Generations. GreenNet Salutes The SysOps WhoHave Gone Out Of Their Way To Provide YOU The Chance To TRULY MAKE ABIG DIFFERENCE!  ALL Of Us Can Help And, If We ALL Work Together,NOTHING'S IMPOSSIBLE!----------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightMODEM USERS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996"DOING BUSINESS ON THE INTERNET"SUBJECT OF CONFERENCE BOARD MEETINGAlthough technologies are making electronic commerce possible,senior executives are discovering that getting their companieson-line is only the beginning once the technology is in place,upper management has final responsibility for strategy andtactics in dealing with the practical side of doing businesson the Internet, the fastest growing now commercial territory.Addressing this reality, The Conference Board and the U.S.Department of Commerce have scheduled a second-generationconference about commerce on the Internet, focusing on issuesthat transcend technology. The two-day conference, which will be heldFebruary 6-7 at the Now York Hilton & Towers, is beingpresented with assistance from IBM, GE Information Servicesand Arthur D. Little, Inc.For further information, call The Conference Board at (212)339-0232.Back to Headline List CopyrightMODEM USERS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996JONES DIGITAL STORE OFFERS ON-LINESHOPPING, EDUCATION, AND INFORMATIONDenver-Based Dixon Paper Stores Marketto the Home Office On-LineInternet browsers looking to wrangle great bargains oninteresting products and services, register for an educationcourse, or enter a fun contest can now gallop over to theJones Digital Store, a World Wide Page which uses western-style graphics. The service has been launched by Jones DigitalCentury, an Englewood, Colo.-based electronic publishingcompany.The Jones Digital Store Web Page offers several trails tofollow including Merchants: store locations; Orders, whichtakes the user directly to each store's order form; More Info,information on how to become a Jones Digital Store vendor;Trail Mix, a list of reciprocal web links; Fun and Games, achance for users to enter contests; Comments, an area to askquestions and leave comments about the service; and What'sNew, for new product entries.At http://wwwjii.com/jds/dixon, Dixon Paper Store offers 170of its most popular laser paper products."We have 11 retail outlets throughout the western UnitedStates, but going on-line will give us the opportunity toreach the burgeoning home office market on a national levee,"said Cynthia Scaggs, Dixons Marketing Manager for RetailOperations. "Customers with questions can enter informationthrough our storefront to receive an immediate callback from aDixon Paper Store representative."Currently, customers purchase items from the Jones DigitalStore through order forms on the Home Page which prompt areturn phone call from the vendor. A new secured serviceallows customers to place items into a virtual shopping basketand enter their credit card account for payment.Dr. Bernard Luskin, president of Jones Digital Century, said"Jones Digital Store is a key element of our long-termbusiness strategy to provide education, entertainment andinformation services via electronic means."Jones Digital Century develops digital publishing andinteractive multimedia projects, television series anddocumentaries, productivity software and on-line services. Thecompany published "Charlton Heston's Voyage Through the Bible"on CD-ROM and will issue "The Jones Multimedia Encyclopedia"in 1996.Jones Digital Century is an affiliate of Jones Intercable,Inc., one of the nations ten largest cable televisionoperating companies; Mind Extension University, the only 24-hour cable network dedicated to distance education andprofessional training; and Jones Computer Network, the first24-hour cable network devoted to computers and emergingtechnologies.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-5IA059-000323-B025-55http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec70.html 205.156.212.5 19970114222351 text/html 182710HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:21:22 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:03 GMTContent-length: 182522Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec70.html Sample Issue Copyright MULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES COVER STORY Netscape and Sun Release JavaScript (646 words) Microsoft Reveals Internet Strategy, Jumps on Java Bandwagon (465 words) EDITORIAL Online Christmas (783 words) NEWSLINE Microsoft and NBC Enter Cable Television, Online Deal (278 words) IMA and Blockbuster Both To Release CD-ROM Matching Software (338 words) Intuit Plans Internet Banking Service, Skirts Deal with AOL (201 words) Jones Launches The Internet Channel in Virginia (235 words) 3DO Signs Definitive Agreement with Matsushita, Buys Cyclone Studios (287 words) Group of Nine Agree On DVD Format Name and Specifications (380 words) Monitor Correspondents Make "Top 100 Multimedia Producers" List (65 words) Pioneer Drops LaserActive (203 words) Quark Brings Desktop Publishing Online (134 words) SoftKey Works Deal with Tribune, Woos TLC Away from Broderbund (373 words) Correction (54 words) APPLICATIONS LINE AICPA Offers CPA Disc (150 words) DataMark Media, Katz Offer Free Online Shopping Service (301 words) HomeArts Launches Breast Heath Center on WWW (105 words) New McGraw-Hill Division Debuts CD-ROM Titles (83 words) Sega to Open Interactive Entertainment Center in Southern California (162 words) SilverPlatter, AMA Introduce Surgery Technique CD-ROM (230 words) WNET Expands Onto The Web (186 words) PERSONALS o Cor Boonstra has been named to succeed Jan Timmer as chief (178 words) o Evan Shubin has been named manager of Business Development (51 words) o Joy Solomon of IVI Publishing Inc. has been named chief (58 words) o Randy Thier, formerly with Sony Multimedia Productions, has (66 words) o Stuart Weinstein, formerly manager of the Multimedia (50 words) TOOLS & TECHNOLOGY Computer Associates Offers Secure Internet Solution (239 words) Dimension X Offers Web Users a "Liquid Reality" (183 words) Kodak Unveils Photo CD Technology for World Wide Web (156 words) Macromedia Ships SoundEdit 16 Version 2 (122 words) OSTA Establishes Interchange Standard (204 words) Philips' Next Generation CD-Recorder Well Under $2,000 (127 words) Philips Develops CD-R and Erasable Chip for SCSI and ATAPI Interfaces (189 words) Speech Systems Unveils PCMCIA-Based Speech Recognition System (251 words) BUSINESS LINE Aimnet, Mitsubishi Subsidiary Partner to Spur Japanese Internet Use (210 words) Big Hand Restructures, Prepares for Expansion (149 words) Davidson Acquires Maverick (132 words) Graphix Zone, StarPress To Merge (246 words) Innovus Gets NASDAQ Listing (49 words) IMA Joins in Launch of EC-Funded Intellectual Property Consortium (190 words) ITC Partners With VIS Development (110 words) Motorola Invests in Terisa Systems (113 words) Pac Bell Moves Into Wireless TV (213 words) Thomson Invests $25 Million in StarSight (238 words) COMDEX Multimedia is Disappearing Fall Comdex 1995 (4512 words) COMDEX, CONTINUED: Other New Products (3582 words) COMDEX SPOTLIGHT Keynote Address by Louis V. Gerstner, Jr., IBM Corporation (2240 words) MEDIA WATCH o The January 1996 issue of CD-ROM Professional includes a (40 words) o The January 1996 issue of Internet World features "The Best (46 words) o The January 1996 issue of PC Graphics & Video offers (48 words) o YOU magazine, a quarterly visual lifestyle journal created (73 words) MULTIMEDIA DEVELOPER Multimedia Partnering: A Clash of Cultures (2478 words) STATLINE 3DO Reports Second Quarter Results (161 words) Study Shows Apple's Worldwide Market Share is Up (126 words) Hall Dickler Forecasts Says Internet Lawsuits Inevitable (223 words) IDC/LINK Says International Market Hot for Home PCs (183 words) Consumer CD-ROM Titles in Print Up 93 Percent in 1995, Says InfoTech (252 words) Zona Says Consumer Potential of Internet Over-Hyped (230 words) STOCK MARKET REPORT (425 words) CALENDAR January (379 words) February (298 words) March (330 words) And Furthermore ... (103 words) CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Netscape and Sun Release JavaScriptNetscape Communications Corporation and Sun Microsystems Inc.have released JavaScript, an open, cross-platform objectscripting language for the creation and customization ofapplications on enterprise networks and the Internet.  Acomplement to Java -- Sun's object-oriented, cross-platformprogramming language -- JavaScript is available in its initialform as part of the beta version of Netscape Navigator 2.0, whichmay be downloaded from Netscape's Web site.The draft specification of JavaScript, as well as the final draftspecification of Java, will be published and submitted toappropriate standards bodies for industry review and comment thismonth.  Netscape and Sun plan to propose JavaScript to the W3Consortium (W3C) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)as an open Internet scripting language standard.Twenty-eight companies -- America Online Inc., Apple ComputerInc., Architext Software, Attachmate Corporation, AT&T, BorlandInternational, Brio Technology Inc., Computer Associates Inc.,Digital Equipment Corporation, Hewlett- Packard Company, IconovexCorporation, Illustra Information Technologies Inc., InformixSoftware Inc., Intuit Inc., Macromedia, Metrowerks Inc., NovellInc., Oracle Corporation, Paper Software Inc., Precept SoftwareInc., RAD Technologies Inc., The Santa Cruz Operation Inc.,Silicon Graphics Inc., Spider Technologies, Sybase Inc., ToshibaCorporation, Verity Inc., and Vermeer Technologies Inc.  -- haveagreed to adopt JavaScript as an open standard object scriptinglanguage and have stated their intentions to provide it in futureproducts.Complementary to and integrated with both Java and HTML,JavaScript is designed specifically for the Internet and network-centric applications.  It is designed to be used by people withlittle or no programming experience to quickly construct complexapplications.  While Java is used by programmers to create newobjects and applets, JavaScript is designed to allow HTML pageauthors and enterprise application developers to create liveonline applications that link objects and resources on bothclients and servers.Java "was designed from the ground up for the Internet," saidBill Joy (vice president of research, Sun).  "JavaScript is anatural fit, since it's also designed for the Internet andUnicode-based worldwide use.  JavaScript will be the mosteffective method to connect HTML-based content to Java applets."Netscape will support Java and JavaScript in client and serverproducts, as well as in programming tools and applications.  Thecompany is building Java and JavaScript support into all Netscapeproducts to provide a unified, front-to-back, client/server/toolenvironment for building and deploying live online applications.Netscape Navigator Gold 2.0 enables developers to create and editJavaScript scripts; Netscape LiveWire enables JavaScript programsto be installed, run, and managed on Netscape servers; andNetscape LiveWire Pro adds support for JavaScript connectivity tohigh-performance relational data bases from Illustra, Informix,Microsoft, Oracle, and Sybase.Java, the Java Compiler, and the Java Developer's Kit, as well asthe HotJava browser and related documentation are available freeof charge from Sun's Web site at http://java.sun.com.  Inaddition, the Java source code can be licensed for a fee.Existing Sun Java licensees will receive a license to JavaScript.Moreover, Sun and Netscape intend to make a source code referenceimplementation of JavaScript available for royalty-freelicensing, further encouraging its adoption as a standard in awide variety of products.To date, Sun has licensed Java to a number of companies,including IBM Corporation, Borland, Macromedia, Mitsubishi,Oracle, Silicon Graphics, Spyglass, Toshiba, and MicrosoftCorporation (see related story ).IBM plans to implement the Java technology in products such asWeb browsers and Web servers.  In addition, IBM intends to portthe Java technology to its OS/2 and AIX operating systems, aswell as Microsoft's Windows 3.1.  IBM will make those portsavailable over the World Wide Web so users can begin to work withJava on these platforms starting in the first quarter of 1996(Sun, 2550 Garcia Avenue, Mountain View CA 94043-1100, 415/336-5337; Netscape, 501 East Middlefield Road, Mountain View CA94014, 415/254-1900, fax 415/528-4124).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Microsoft Reveals Internet Strategy, Jumps on Java Bandwagon7 December -- At a day-long press briefing in Seattle,Washington, Microsoft Corporation outlined a broad set ofInternet strategies and products designed to propel the softwaregiant to the forefront of the exploding Internet industry.  Inthe most dramatic announcement of the day, Microsoft chairmanBill Gates not only endorsed Sun Microsystems Inc.'s Javaprogramming language, but revealed that Microsoft has licensedthe rival technology for use in its operating systems, softwareprograms, and Internet tools.Acknowledging the "importance of embracing the industry's love ofJava," Microsoft's Internet strategy involves a shift away fromproprietary standards and a nod toward the overwhelming supportof Java as an emerging Internet standard.  A report in The WallStreet Journal called Microsoft's move a "key gesture, since Javahad become a rallying cry for Internet competitors alignedagainst [Microsoft]."  The Java licensing deal was reached justten hours before the Microsoft press briefing was scheduled tobegin.Microsoft said it plans to include the technology in its InternetExplorer browser, to be offered in 1996 as part of a free add-onproduct for users of the Windows 95 and Windows NT operatingsystems.  Under the licensing agreement with Sun Microsystems,Microsoft will make sure that Java works well with its twooperating systems and then will submit the altered code to Sun.At that point, either Sun or Microsoft may license the Java codeto third parties.In addition to the Java announcement, Gates also said thatMicrosoft will accelerate its repositioning of the MicrosoftNetwork (MSN) subscription service as an Internet gateway --offering much of its content free of charge over the Internet orat a discount to MSN members.Gates also discussed Microsoft's new interactive 3D multimediaanimation technology for the Internet, ActiveVRML.  Optimized forauthoring and playback on personal computers, ActiveVRML allowscontent authors to create three dimensional effects on Web pages.The technology is being offered as an open industry specificationand has been submitted as a proposal to VRML industry workinggroups.In addition, the company has signed a host of cross-agreementswith companies that include Computer Associates, Oracle, andSpyglass.  The Microsoft-Spyglass deal calls for Spyglass toenhance its popular Web browser Mosaic with support for OLE(object linking and embedding) Controls, Visual Basic Script, andthe latest HTML extensions.  It also will include support forseveral new Microsoft server technologies.Also making its debut at the press briefing was Visual BasicScript, an Internet scripting language Microsoft will offer overthe Internet at no cost.  The OLE-based Visual Basic Script willallow developers to link and automate elements among Web pages --not unlike what may be accomplished with Java and thecomplementary JavaScript languages (Microsoft, One Microsoft Way,Redmond WA 98052, 206/882-8080).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Online ChristmasBy ROCKLEY L. MILLEREDITOR AND PUBLISHERThe early results are in, and it seems to have been an "OnlineChristmas."  While many retailers reported weak sales in mostgift categories, multimedia computers and high-speed modems wereon a roll, with Dataquest projecting a 46 percent increase in1995 modem sales to 17.8 million units and IntelliQuest claimingthat nearly 90 percent of new computers are being sold withinstalled modems -- up from 70 percent last year.  Also sellingbig were books having anything to do with the Internet andsoftware for getting connected.The pace of people moving online is matched by the migration ofmultimedia capability to the World Wide Web.  New browsers andhome page development tools abound.  The Hot Java programminglanguage from Sun Microsystems allows programmers to create smallcross-platform applications or "applets" that can includemultimedia and interactive elements, can be transported easilyover the Internet, and can be swapped in and out of user'scomputers on an as needed basis.  These specialized self-contained programs gain value from their small size and targeted,purpose-specific functionality and ability to interact with otherJava-based programs to perform intelligent tasks such as updatingpersonalized stock prices or weather reports.The Java language is being embraced by many of the major Internetplayers including Netscape and Microsoft and will allow anyone tocreate and upload Java applets as building blocks for others touse in assembling larger Java applications.Low-cost hardware devices for Internet access are about to arrivefrom Philips (as a CD-i variation) and from Bandai (in the newlyconfigured Pippin, based on Apple's Power PC chip and operatingsystem).  Right on their heels are IBM and Oracle, each promisingto develop powerful $500 network terminals that will providededicated communications capabilities and run Java-style softwareapplets.For most users, however, the online experience remains afrustrating series of "clicks and waits" as large graphic filesload slowly via even the fastest 28.8 Kbps conventional modems --taking more than a minute for a simple two megabit image.  Eventhose who step up to ISDN 58 Kbps service will be twiddling theirthumbs for over 30 seconds.  Start downloading video andanimations, and the wait can easily become hours or days.Thus, I predict that the "giant sucking sound" we hear in 1996,won't be Ross Perot's jobs heading south of the border, butconsumers sucking up high-speed cable modems as fast as the cablecompanies can process the orders.  Offering 4 Mbps data rates, acable modem will pop that same two megabit image up on yourscreen in half a second.  Large file transfers become viable, asminutes become seconds and hours become barely minutes.  Cablecompanies already have ordered more than 500,000 of the devicesfor distribution beginning in early 1996.  Given the patiencelevel of the typical American consumer, and given a competitivelylow monthly cost for both modem leasing and service access, thesedevices promise to totally transform the online landscape in thecoming new year.  qNote:  This is not a joke.  In the Christmas rush, we received aninteresting letter, dated 30 December, from Keith Barland at theMicrosoft corporate library.  It seems that Microsoft hasdeveloped a whole new perspective on copyright protection andsite licensing that might contain good news for users of itssoftware.The letter humbly requests permission to reproduce articles fromMultimedia Monitor "obtained from any source and in any format,whether print or electronic, for distribution solely to employeesof Microsoft for internal use only."  This permission was to begranted without additional payment and without any otherlimitations.  The clincher was the last sentence, which read, "Ifwe do not hear from you we will assume your approval of thisagreement."Might I humbly suggest that we all issue similar requests toMicrosoft for permission to reproduce its software for internaluse only, without additional payment or any other limitations.Of course, should Microsoft fail to specifically and directlydeny such a request -- or should their denial become convenientlylost in the mail -- we can all presume they have approved ourrequest, and we can save a bundle on corporate-wide softwarepurchases and site licenses.Get real, Microsoft.  The request alone is arrogant enough, butthe presumption of a default loss of rights is beyond the pale --and this from the company that hopes to pave most of theinformation highway.  Are information providers like us mere roadkill in the Microsoft vision? Or is Microsoft somehow exempt fromthe intellectual property rules that they expect everyone else torespect?Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Microsoft and NBC Enter Cable Television, Online DealAfter weeks of speculation, Microsoft Corporation and NBC haveentered into a joint venture to form MSNBC Cable, a 24-hour cabletelevision news channel, and MSNBC Online, a complementaryinteractive online service.  Under the terms of the agreement,totaling approximately $420 million, Microsoft will invest $220million over the next five years for a 50 percent stake in thecable network.  In addition, NBC will put up $200 million overfive years for its part in funding the cable channel and thesupporting online service.MSNBC Cable will feature NBC News correspondents, live coverageof world events, news analysis, and "a multimedia presence on-screen."  According to Bob Wright (president of NBC), the newcable service will be launched in late 1996.  Wright said heexpects the new cable service to have between 25-35 millionviewers by the end of 1996, compared to CNN's 67 million viewers.The MSNBC Online service, accessible through the MicrosoftNetwork, will leverage content available globally from NBC andsister service CNBC.  According both parties, NBC will handle allnews gathering for the joint venture, as well as for theMicrosoft Network online service.Executives with both companies expect that the three services --NBC News, MSNBC Cable, and MSNBC Online -- will work in concertto strengthen the other's position through cross-promotion.Furthermore, the new cable service will extend its reachinternationally through NBC's ownership and interest in NBC SuperChannel in Europe, CNBC in Asia, CNBC in Europe, Canal deNoticias NBC in Latin America, and the soon-to-be-launched NBCAsia (Microsoft, One Microsoft Way, Redmond WA 98052, 206/882-8080; NBC, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York NY 10112, 212/664-4444).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMA and Blockbuster Both To Release CD-ROM Matching SoftwareThe Interactive Multimedia Association and Blockbuster VideoCorporation separately have released CD-ROM matching software toaid consumers in pairing CD-ROM software titles with theirpersonal computer systems.For its part, the Interactive Multimedia Association (IMA) hasreleased the beta version of its CD Match software.  The CD Matchinitiative (Monitor 12/95 p7) is an industry-wide campaign tohelp consumers better match CD-ROM software titles with theirpersonal computing systems.  The software runs on a variety ofplatforms and creates a printout of a system's capabilities.Consumers can then take this printout to a local retail outletand compare it to the IMA-recommended "Uniform Label" that willappear on CD-ROM packages to determine if their computer systemwill support a particular title's system requirements.  The CD-Match package labels will not be seen in high quantities untillate second quarter 1996.The beta version of the CD Match software is available on theIMA's World Wide Web site (ftp://ftp.ima.org/pub/cdmatch) andalso through Horizons Technology Inc.'s Web site(http://www.horizons.com/cdmatch).  According to Ken Christie(vice president of marketing at the IMA), "Getting the variousindividual companies in both hardware and software publishing toagree was not difficult.  The industry had seen a need for CDMatch and the IMA has a working relationship with SoftwarePublishers Association (SPA) to ensure that the systemsrequirement portions are in sync.  SPA is doing a similar thing,so they are in support of uniform labeling, as we are in supportof uniform packaging."Meanwhile, Blockbuster Video Corporation, in conjunction withWindows utility software publisher Touchstone SoftwareCorporation, rolled out the Blockbuster PC MatchMaker on 4December 1995 into eight markets.  This utility lists all the CD-ROM titles available at the retailer and indicates which titlesare compatible with a shopper's computer.  The floppy disk willsell for $9.99, but will be free to consumers who buy and rentCD-ROMs at Blockbuster (IMA, Suite 202, 48 Maryland Avenue,Annapolis MD 21401-8011, 410/626-1380; Blockbuster, PO Box407060, Ft.  Lauderdale FL 33340-7060, 305/832-3000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Intuit Plans Internet Banking Service, Skirts Deal with AOLDespite signing a strategic agreement with America Online Inc.just last month to jointly provide electronic banking services toAOL customers (Monitor 12/95 p5), Intuit Inc.  has announcedplans to introduce an independent Internet-based home bankingservice.  The new service will be available to customers by thesecond half of 1996.  According to Intuit, customers will be ableto download free software via the Internet to establish a "homebanking link" that will work essentially the same way theAOL/Intuit banking service will work -- but at no charge to theuser.Currently, Intuit offers users of its popular Quicken personalfinance software the option to bank online via the company'sprivate network.  With the new Internet service, customers willbe able to bank online without being required to own Quicken.Customers will be able to monitor bank accounts, transfer fundsbetween accounts, and pay bills via the Internet -- with alltransactions protected by an encryption process.  Intuit willreceive a fee from the participating bank for each transaction.The company said it also intends to offer a similar banking linkfor users of Netscape's Navigator browser (Intuit, 155 LinfieldAvenue, PO Box 3014, Menlo Park CA 94026, 415/322-0573).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Jones Launches The Internet Channel in VirginiaJones International Ltd.  has launched The Internet Channel, ahigh-speed Internet gateway service now available to Alexandria,Virginia cable TV customers who are served by Jones Intercable (asubsidiary of Jones International).  Through a cable modemconnected to a home PC, customers may access The Internet Channelto explore a virtual "Old Town" Alexandria, where storefrontssymbolize Internet destinations -- as well as local, regional,and global merchants.For example, users can click on a movie theater marquee to accesslocal showing information and hyperlink to the home pages foreach featured movie title.  Other destinations include:  aNewsstand that connects users to cover pages of magazines and aCity Hall building that links users to municipal information.Because cable modems can provide connections that are as much as100 times faster than telephone modems, "the Internet Channelwill allow its subscribers unlimited usage of the service for afixed rate of about a dollar per day," according to Bill Nestel(president, The Internet Channel).The Internet Channel, which will operate as a sister company ofJones International, has entered into an arrangement with LANcityCorporation, which will supply the cable modems that will be usedin Alexandria.  Eventually, The Internet Channel plans to licenseits gateway services to other cable TV systems, in addition tothose operated by Jones (9697 East Mineral Avenue, PO Box 3309,Englewood CO 80155-3309, 303/792-3111, fax 303/792-5608).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 19963DO Signs Definitive Agreement with Matsushita, Buys CycloneStudiosSix weeks after announcing plans to license its M2 technology toMatsushita Electric Industrial Company, The 3DO Company hassigned a definitive agreement effecting the $100 million deal(Monitor 12/95 p5).  Under the agreement, signed on 7 December1995, Matsushita will pay 3DO a $100 million license fee plusadditional royalties.  3DO will receive $60 million in mid-December and the remaining $40 million by the middle of 1996.The agreement gives Matsushita exclusive rights to use the M2technology to power next-generation consumer and commercialproducts (including DVD, set-top boxes, and 64-bit gamesmachines).  Matsushita also may sub-license the M2 technology tohardware companies and software developers.  3DO has the rightsto develop products based on the M2 technology for coin-operatedarcade game systems, personal computer applications, generalcomputing, and software development tools.Trip Hawkins (CEO, The 3DO Company) said 3DO will use the fundsto diversify.  "We will exploit our core technology to enter thePC market with software and hardware, the Internet arena, as wellas the 64-bit video game market," he said.As a part of its diversification efforts, 3DO has entered into anagreement to acquire the assets of Cyclone Studios, a companydevoted to developing action/arcade-style video games.  Theacquisition is intended to bolster Studio 3DO's ability todeliver titles on advanced 32-bit, 64-bit, and PC platforms.  3DOwill acquire the assets of Cyclone Studios for a combination ofcash, common stock, and other considerations.  Terms of theagreement were not disclosed.  Cyclone Studios will operate as anindependent division within Studio 3DO (3DO, 600 Galveston Drive,Redwood City CA 94063-4746, 415/261-2792; Matsushita, 1006Kadoma, Osaka 571 Japan, +81-6/908-1121; Cyclone, 3515 EdisonWay, Menlo Park CA 94025, 415/568-1800).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Group of Nine Agree On DVD Format Name and SpecificationsThe core group of nine digital videodisc (DVD) developmentcompanies -- Sony Corporation, Philips Electronics NV, ToshibaCorporation, Time Warner Inc., Matsushita Electrical IndustrialCompany, Pioneer Electronic Corporation, JVC, Hitachi Ltd., andMitsubishi Electric Corporation (reportedly, Thomson Multimediaof France will become the tenth member of the group) -- haveformally adopted "Digital Versatile Disc," or "DVD" for short, asthe official name of forthcoming high-density CD format.The group also reached an agreement on the basic technicalspecifications for DVD hardware media.  The discs will be 120 mm,or five inches, in diameter and 1.2 mm thick with 4.7 GB ofmemory per side (allowing 133 minutes of video per side).  Theformat also will be backwards compatible with existing compactdisc technology, meaning that it will run current CD music discs,as well as CD-ROM storage and game discs.For video storage, MPEG-2 (Motion Picture Experts Group type 2)video compression will be the standard.  For audio, Dolby AC-3will be used.  The discs will be able to carry a maximum of eightsound channels and 32 subtitle data channels alongside eachmovie.  For computer data storage applications, the group agreedto use the Micro UDF or ISO-9660 file management structure.Specifications for music applications will be completed after thegroup hears opinions from music industry representatives.The group reported that the first DVD players are expected to goon sale in late 1996 or early 1997 and are expected to retail inthe $500 to $600 range.  These early machines will not be able torecord until copyright issues are resolved.In related news, Toshiba Corporation proposed to the companiesinvolved in the DVD development that a joint company beestablished to centralize management of royalty contracts andrevenues.  The purpose of the joint company will be to avoid anydoubling of royalty charges or unnecessary increases in licensefees for users of the technologies.  Sources within Toshibareport that a company will be established by the end of January(Sony, 9 West 57th Street, New York NY 10019, 212/371-5800;Philips, 28th floor, 825 8th Avenue, New York NY 10019, 212/333-6767; Toshiba, 1251 Avenue of the Americas, New York NY 10020,212/596-0600; Time Warner, 75 Rockefeller Plaza, New York NY10019, 212/484-4000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Monitor Correspondents Make "Top 100 Multimedia Producers" ListThe "Top 100 Multimedia Producers of 1995," selected byMultimedia Producer magazine, include long-time MultimediaMonitor correspondents Mary Marlino and Tom Reeves.  Marlino iscurrently the director of educational technology at the US AirForce Academy, and Reeves is professor of instructionaltechnology at the University of Georgia.  We at the Monitor sendour congratulations to Mary and Tom.  We're proud you're on ourteam!Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Pioneer Drops LaserActivePioneer Consumer Electronics is quietly closing out itsLaserActive interactive videodisc system, with players nowselling for around $299.  According to David McCollough (AV brandmanager at Pioneer), the company intends to sell through itsremaining LaserActive inventory by early 1996.  A Sega modulewill be packaged with each player.  The LaserActive system --which combines a videodisc/CD combi-player with optional controlpacks developed in cooperation with Sega and NEC -- was launchedin 1993 in an attempt to appeal to the upscale interactiveentertainment consumer.McCollough said, "In the game industry, a lot of people make themoney on the software, not on the hardware.  We were trying tomaking some profit on the hardware side, as well as the softwareside, which is not how that industry is structured."  He addedthat, "LaserActive suffered from software developers' reluctanceto invest in authoring tools needed to create games for thesystem."  According to McCollough, Pioneer is still dedicated tothe videodisc format.  Current plans for the company call for ashift in focus towards the entertainment and home theater aspectof videodisc by adding such features to standard videodiscplayers (Pioneer, 600 East Crescent Avenue, Upper Saddle River NJ07450, 201/327-6400).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Quark Brings Desktop Publishing OnlineEnvisioning a leap into the next generation of online publishing,Quark Inc.  has developed QuarkImmedia -- a multimedia softwareprogram that will allow users of the company's popularQuarkXPress desktop publishing system to package material for theInternet and the World Wide Web.QuarkImmedia consists of two components -- an authoring tool,which builds on QuarkXPress, and a viewer.  The viewer will beavailable for downloading, free of charge, via the Internet onceQuarkImmedia is released in the first half of 1996.  Prior to itsfinal release, QuarkImmedia will be distributed to 300 customersat Quark's Vail customer conference (12-15 December) for thepurpose of "test driving" the program.  Feedback from the testgroup will help determine the look and feel of the final product(Quark, 1800 Grant Street, Denver CO 80203, 303/894-8888).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996SoftKey Works Deal with Tribune, Woos TLC Away from BroderbundOn 30 November, SoftKey International Inc.  entered into adefinitive agreement with Tribune Company to purchase two Tribunesubsidiaries -- Compton's NewMedia Inc.  and Compton's LearningCompany -- in a stock-for-stock transaction valued at $106.5million.  SoftKey also has agreed to assume up to $17 million ofintercompany debt in connection with the acquisition."By combining Compton's NewMedia with SoftKey, we can reachmillions of new homes that were previously untapped.  We view theSoftKey investment as a part of our commitment to the future ofthe consumer marketing business," said Robert Bosau (executivevice president, Tribune New Media/Education).In a related deal, Tribune Company agreed to make a $150 millionstrategic investment in SoftKey in the event that SoftKeyacquires a majority of the common stock of The Learning Company(TLC).  Tribune's investment would be in the form of 5.50 percentconvertible/exchangeable notes from SoftKey (due in the year2000).  The notes will be convertible into SoftKey common stockat a conversion price of $53 per share.Within a week, TLC signed a definitive merger agreement withSoftKey International Inc., terminating its earlier mergeragreement with Broderbund Software Inc.  (Monitor 9/95 p12).Under the terms of the 7 December agreement, SoftKey's wholly-owned subsidiary, Kidsco Inc., will offer to purchaseapproximately 8.28 million shares of TLC for $67.50 per share incash.  These shares represent all TLC shares outstanding,including vested stock options, as of 6 December 1995.Approximately 1.1 million unvested TLC options will be convertedinto SoftKey options, a transaction valued at about $606 million.Commenting on his company's decision to terminate its Broderbundmerger agreement and to pursue the SoftKey deal, Bill Dinsmore(president and CEO, The Learning Company) said, "Our board ofdirectors unanimously concluded that the revised SoftKey mergerterms are clearly in the best interests of the... stockholders."Broderbund -- which had filed a lawsuit against SoftKey alleging"questionable business and accounting practices" -- has agreed towithdraw all litigation related to TLC, SoftKey, and TribuneCompany (SoftKey, 1 Athenaeum Street, Cambridge MA 02142,617/494-1200; Tribune, 435 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago IL60611, 312/222-3333; TLC, 6493 Kaiser Drive, Fremont CA 94555,510/792-2102; Broderbund, 2305 West Parker Road, Plano TX 75023,214/964-3262).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996CorrectionIn our "Statline" column last month, our story on InfoTech(Monitor 12/95 p28) included erroneous information.  In the firstparagraph, the text should have read "... revenue will haveincreased by only 70 percent during the same period, climbingfrom $10.7 billion in 1994 to 18.1 billion in 1995."  Ourapologies for the error.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996AICPA Offers CPA DiscThe American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA)has introduced Room Zoom:  The CPA SourceDisc, a multimedia CD-ROM that offers CPA career guidance information to collegeaccounting, finance, and business majors.  The disc allows theuser to enter a "virtual" home office and zoom in on variousgraphic, audio, video, and textual information.  The home officemetaphor features eight "gateways" that provide key informationfor students who are exploring career opportunities in the CPAprofession:  "Career Opportunities," "Human  Resources," "Day inthe Life," "Tools of the Trade," "Salaries," "Organizations,""Ladder of Success," and "Library."The CD-ROM was developed by the AICPA in conjunction with HillHolliday, a national advertising agency, and The DI Group, acomputer consulting company.  Room Zoom ($5 plus shipping andhandling) will be revised and updated annually and is availablethrough the AICPA Order Department (AICPA, 201 Plaza Three,Jersey City NJ 07311-3881, 800/862-4272).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996DataMark Media, Katz Offer Free Online Shopping ServiceDirect marketing services firm DataMark Systems Inc.  and KatzMedia Group have unveiled plans for an advertiser-supportedonline direct marketing service called ValuOne Online.The free service -- designed to drive purchase decisions inretail and catalog channels -- helps consumers easily find andselect information about a broad range of products and services.ValuOne Online offers consumers the ability to preview productsand promotions before making a purchase; gives them a directconnection to catalog marketers; and includes a "coupon clipping"feature that gives lets users print out coupons for theirfavorite products for redemption at their local supermarket."ValuOne Online takes advantage of how consumers really prefer touse online services:  as a resource before buying rather than asa place to actually make purchases," said Chad Evans (chiefexecutive officer of DataMark Systems).  Evans noted thataccording to a recent Advertising Age study, 60 percent ofrespondents said they were interested in interactive servicesthat allow them to research products before purchasing.DataMark Systems used a proprietary consumer profiling technologyto "hand-pick" four million online consumers who will be thefirst to experience ValuOne Online.  DataMark Systems willdistribute ValuOne Online diskettes to these qualified users.The service is scheduled to launch in the first half of 1996.Katz Media Group will sell advertising space on the service.Advertisers can display or promote products through a number ofadvertising options, including Power Display "prime" displayspace; Prime Marquees; Sponsor Marquees; time-sensitivepromotions for limited time opportunities,; and coupons for usersto view and print for redemption.  In addition, ValuOne Online'sAdmaker function allows marketers 24-hour access to their ads, sothey can change any part of their promotional offer almostinstantaneously (DataMark Media, Suite 220, 348 East Winchester,Salt Lake City UT 84107, 801/268-2202).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996HomeArts Launches Breast Heath Center on WWWHomeArts, a division of Hearst New Media & Technology, haslaunched the Breast Health Center(http://homearts.com/depts/health/00breaf1.htm), a World Wide Website that offers broad coverage of breast cancer and breasthealth awareness issues.  The site also contains a forum forthose affected by breast cancer to share support and information.According to HomeArts, online access to this type of informationhas been compromised in recent days by some commercial servicesthat censor content containing the word "breast," therebypreventing subscribers from participating in breast cancersurvivors' bulletin boards and other services (HNM, 3rd Floor, 4Columbus Circle, New York NY 10019, 212/649-2901, fax 212/977-4025).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996New McGraw-Hill Division Debuts CD-ROM TitlesMcGraw-Hill Inc.  has outlined the publishing plans for its newMcGraw-Hill Home Interactive division (MHHI).  The division beganshipping its first line of CD-ROM-based educational titles,targeted to children ages 8 to 14, in time for the 1996 holidayseason.  Designed specifically for children and their parents athome, the new MHHI titles cover subjects such as math, socialstudies, and science presented via immersive environments, strongcharacters, and narratives (McGraw-Hill Home Interactive, Suite650, 255 Shoreline Drive, Redwood City CA 94065, 415/802-9010).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Sega to Open Interactive Entertainment Center in SouthernCaliforniaSega Enterprises Inc.  (USA) plans to open a high-techentertainment center at the Entertainment Center at IrvineSpectrum in Irvine, California.  The center, named Sega City,will feature virtual reality attractions, motion simulators,special-feature interactive rides, and the latest amusement andsimulation games.  Among the attractions will be a racing gamethat features an eight-player Indy Formula racer and eight-playerDaytona Special; Players compete head-to-head on giant monitors,racing to the finish line on either the Indy or Daytona tracks.The R-360 is a flight simulator in a closed environment thatsimulates a 360 degree roll at the player's control.Sega City joins 23 other entertainment outlets, restaurants, andspecialty shops, occupying 14,700 square feet of the single-level, open-air Entertainment Center at Irvine Spectrum.  Withits partners Dreamworks SKG and MCA Inc., Sega intends to open 50high-tech theme parks throughout the US by the turn of themillennium (Monitor 11/95 p6) (130 Shoreline Drive, Redwood CityCA 94065, 415/508-2800).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996SilverPlatter, AMA Introduce Surgery Technique CD-ROMSilverPlatter Education and the American Medical Association havereleased Current Techniques in Surgery:  Open Repair of InguinalHernia, an interactive multimedia training tool for physicians.The CD-ROM-based title delivers a step-by-step approach to threedifferent adult hernia operations; the Lichtenstein Repair,Shouldice Repair, and Bassini Repair.Current Techniques in Surgery:  Open Repair of Inguinal Herniacontains live video of actual surgical procedures, hundreds ofdetailed diagrams, and narration to detail and explain each stepof the operation; to offer procedure variants; to demonstrate"dos and don'ts" in treatment; to discuss problem solvingtechniques; and to provide anatomical references.  Users maychoose the method of operation and annotate each surgical stepwith their own comments and suggestions.  They may performcalculations that predict the degree of difficulty of theoperations, and they can calculate the maximum safe volumes ofanesthesia.An international editorial board made up of surgeons from theUnited States and Europe reviewed the content of the disc,providing detailed reviews of each surgical step presented.Current Techniques in Surgery:  Open Repair of Inguinal Herniawas reviewed by the American Medical Association and carries four(4) hours of Category I CME credit.  The CD-ROM is available forthe Windows platform at a price of $125 for individual users and$399 for libraries and institutions (SilverPlatter, CynthiaJohnson, 100 River Ridge Drive, Norwood MA 02062-5026, 617/769-2599 x249).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996WNET Expands Onto The WebThirteen/WNET, the New York-based public broadcasting station, isexperimenting with the expansion of its programming onlinethrough the launch of a new "station" on the World Wide Web.  ThewNetStation (http://www.wnet.org) was developed throughThirteen's Kravis Multimedia Center and offers programmingcreated solely for the Web -- in the form of original andcompanion pieces related to Thirteen's broadcast programs.Among the wNetStation pieces currently available to users are:Marsalis on Music, featuring interactive music games and onlinediscussion; City Arts, a weekly guide to arts and culturethroughout the five boroughs of New York City featuring links toother artists' Web sites; and the outreach program Women's HealthDay, a resource directory that helps tri-state users contact thehealth professionals they need.On the marketing front, corporations and foundations that fundspecific wNetStation programming receive logo identification,promotional pages, a link to their home sites, and a minimum ofthree on-air spots broadcast each week on Thirteen/WNET.  Todate, funders of the wNetStation include Texaco, SonyCorporation, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and PBS (356West 58th Street, New York NY 10019, 212/560-2000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    Cor Boonstra has been named to succeed Jan Timmer as chiefo    Cor Boonstra has been named to succeed Jan Timmer as chiefexecutive of Philips Electronics NV.  Boonstra, a seniormarketing executive within Philips, plans to succeed Timmer nextOctober, at which time Timmer will join the company's supervisoryboard.  According to a report in The Wall Street Journal, manyindustry analysts believe that under Boonstra's leadership,Philips will restructure some of its money-losing endeavors --notably divisions involved with the digital cassette player andthe CD-i entertainment system...In other personnel moves within Philips, Henry Kaplan has beenappointed to the newly created position of president and CEO ofPhilips Media Software, the company's North American softwarepublishing division.  Kaplan will assume full operationalresponsibility for all of Philips Media Software's activities.He will report to Philips CEO Scott Marden... Further, GaryLafferty has been named vice president and general manager ofPhilips Professional Products (Philips Electronics, 5600 MDEindhoven, The Netherlands, +31/407-58686; Philips ConsumerElectronics, One Philips Drive, PO Box 14810, Knoxville TN 37914,423/541-5800; Philips Media, 10960 Wilshire Boulevard, LosAngeles CA 90024, 310/444-6500).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    Evan Shubin has been named manager of Business Developmento    Evan Shubin has been named manager of Business Developmentwith the Interactive Multimedia Association.  Shubin will work torecruit new member companies into the association, assist inmember services and member retention, and assist with the launchof IMA Expo (Suite 202, 48 Maryland Avenue, Annapolis MD 21401-8011, 410/626-1380.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    Joy Solomon of IVI Publishing Inc.  has been named chiefo    Joy Solomon of IVI Publishing Inc.  has been named chiefoperating officer -- a new position -- in addition to her dutiesas executive vice president.  Solomon was previously senior vicepresident and general manager.  In her new position, Solomon isresponsible for all company publishing operations (7500 FlyingCloud Drive, Minneapolis MN 55344-3739, 612/996-6000, fax612/996-6001).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    Randy Thier, formerly with Sony Multimedia Productions, haso    Randy Thier, formerly with Sony Multimedia Productions, hasbeen named senior vice president and general manager ofStormfront Studios' publishing division... Meanwhile,Stormfront's product development division has split into threeunits, each of which will be headed by a newly named director ofproduct development:  David Bunnett, Mark Buchignani, and HudsonPiehl (Suite 450, 4000 Civic Centre Drive, San Rafael CA 94903,415/479-2800, fax 415/479-2880).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    Stuart Weinstein, formerly manager of the Multimediao    Stuart Weinstein, formerly manager of the MultimediaProducts Group at GRC International, has joined UnisysCorporation, Worldwide Professional Development as director ofDistance Learning.  Weinstein will coordinate the delivery ofinternal training via worldwide satellite business television,Internet, and learning resource centers (8008 Westpark Drive,McLean VA 22102, 703/556-5000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Computer Associates Offers Secure Internet SolutionComputer Associates (CA) has introduced CA-Unicenter/ICE(Internet Commerce Enabled), a technology for securing andmanaging electronic commerce.  Available stand-alone orintegrated with Netscape Web server software, CA-Unicenter/ICEprovides security, event management, help-desk, storagemanagement, resource accounting, Intranet or enterprisecapabilities, and data-base monitoring -- effectively "bullet-proofing the 'Net," according to CA.(CA chairman and CEO) Charles Wang noted, "As organizations moveto transact commerce over the Internet, they are demandingtighter controls over the infrastructure... The Internet willonly realize its full commercial potential when it becomes asmanageable and secure as corporate computing environments."CA-Unicenter/ICE allows server managers to secure, monitor, andtrack Web users.  It features enhancements such as TCP/IP portsecurity and automated capture and auditing of securityviolations.  To improve Web reliability and availability, CA-Unicenter/ICE monitors HTTP servers for errors and exceptionalevents.  CA-Unicenter/ICE manages reduces storage requirements byoffloading non-critical files when the server becomes full.  Anintelligent restore capability automatically brings back a filewhen access is attempted.  The technology also supports automatedbackup and recovery of data for disaster recovery.CA-Unicenter/ICE provides automatic workload scheduling, as wellas software distribution to simplify system management.  ForIntranet customers, CA-Unicenter/ICE ensures reliable and secureservice; manages the client configuration in a central data base;and provides complete auditing and reporting of data access,attempted security breaches, and security policy modifications(711 Stewart Avenue, Garden City NY 11530-4787, 516/227-3300,http://www.cai.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Dimension X Offers Web Users a "Liquid Reality"Dimension X has released Liquid Reality, which fully integratesthe Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML) into a Java-basedbrowser to transform static VRML objects into realisticcharacters with lifelike responses and behaviors using motion andaudio.According to Dimension X CEO Karl Jacob, Liquid Reality turnsexisting three-dimensional VRML sites into "interactive Webmovies.  Right now, VRML worlds are lifeless and static places.Liquid Reality enables us to create environments which mimic theworld around us, full of motion, sound, and interaction," hesaid.Liquid Reality lets users customize VRML Web sites that can thenbe viewed and shared by other Liquid Reality users.  A Web sitecan be developed to automatically trigger responses based on thelocation of the user within the site, or they can be developed sothat the users must select objects to activate the responses.Liquid Reality is available for licensing to commercial users andis accessible to anyone that wishes to download it for non-commercial use.  To download, visit the Dimension X site athttp://www.dimensionx.com/ (111 East Lime Avenue, Monrovia CA91016-2839, 818/359-8989).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Kodak Unveils Photo CD Technology for World Wide WebEastman Kodak Company and the National Center for SupercomputingApplications (NCSA) have released a technology that allows WorldWide Web users to zoom in and examine small details of Photo CDimages transmitted over the Internet.  To experience thetechnology firsthand, online users may access the NCSA Web site(http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/Software/WinMosaic/HomePage.html)and download special Photo CD-Aware NCSA Mosaic 2.1 for Windowssoftware.  Web users can, for example, zoom in and read tailnumbers of historic planes featured on the Smithsonian's NationalAir and Space Museum Web site.The current enabling technology is available to users of NCSA'sMosaic browser software on the Windows 3.1, Windows forWorkGroups, Windows 95, and Windows NT platforms.  To discourageunauthorized use of copyrighted images, Kodak also is developingtechnology that will limit access to higher-resolution Photo CDdata and which will allow providers to watermark their imageswith identifying words or graphics (Kodak, 343 State Street,Rochester NY 14650, 716/724-4000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Macromedia Ships SoundEdit 16 Version 2Macromedia has introduced SoundEdit 16 version 2 for the PowerMacintosh and Macintosh, a Power Macintosh-native upgrade to itsSoundEdit tool for multimedia audio.  In addition to runningnatively on Power Macintosh systems, SoundEdit 16 v.  2 offersbatch processing of audio files and support for advancedcompression technology.  SoundEdit 16 also supports direct-to-disk audio CD capture and the use of Xtras (plug-ins) from third-party developers.  The product also employs the common MacromediaUser Interface (MUI) which permits greater continuity with otherMacromedia products, such as Director, FreeHand, Authorware, andExtreme 3D.  The suggested retail price of SoundEdit 16 version 2is $399.  Registered users of SoundEdit 16 may upgrade for $129(600 Townsend Street, San Francisco CA 94103, 415/252-2000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996OSTA Establishes Interchange StandardThe Optical Storage Technology Association (OSTA), a tradeassociation representing optical product manufacturers, hasestablished the Universal Disk Format (UDF), a single-file systeminterchange standard for computer applications.The UDF, developed by OSTA to make optical storage solutionsindependent of the data or operating system, will work with theInternational Standards Organization interchange standard fornon-sequential recording of data, called ISO 13346.  The aim ofthe UDF "is to facilitate data interchange independent ofhardware, software, and operating system," said Isaac van Kempen,senior product line manager at Fujitsu America Inc.  and chairmanof the OSTA Technical Committee.OSTA said it will develop a new specification based on its UDFthat will provide a standard file system for digital videodisc(DVD) to ensure playback compatibility between DVD players andcomputer-based systems supporting the OSTA compliant portion ofthe ISO 13346 file system.According to a report in the Electronic Buyers' News, thespecification to be developed will extend data interchange toinclude the consumer environment, will separate hardware fromcontent, and will create compatible file systems for bothentertainment and computer-based content.  The UDF format willthen support read-only, write once, and rewritable applications,as well as combinations of those applications.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Philips' Next Generation CD-Recorder Well Under $2,000Philips Electronics has begun shipping the low-cost CDD2000 CD-Recorder.  A successor to the CDD522 drive, the CDD2000 istargeted to professional markets, including document imagingmanagement, multimedia title creation, and data archiving anddistribution.  The new recorder functions as both a CD-Recorderand a CD-Reader, delivering double-speed recording and quad-speedreading.  Further, the CDD2000 complies with all standardizedcompact disc formats.  It records at 300 KB per second and readsdata at up to 600 KB per second.Among the features of the CDD2000 are:  built-in errordetection/correction software and an optical linear-accessmechanism; and availability in several configurations, includingPC/Windows, Apple Macintosh, OS/2, and Unix.  The CDD2000 isavailable now for $1,395 (Suite 100, 2099 Gateway Place, San JoseCA 95110, 408/453-7373, fax 408/453-6444).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Philips Develops CD-R and Erasable Chip for SCSI and ATAPIInterfacesPhilips Semiconductors has developed a highly integrated CD-R/Echip with a choice of external SCSI or ATAPI interfaces.  TheSAA7390 also condenses sophisticated functions from fourintegrated circuits (ICs) into one to reduce both board area andcosts.The SAA7390 contains all of the logic required to connectdecoders to a host.  The IC is capable of 6X read and 4X writewith a maximum burst data transfer rate of 16.9 MB per secondinto the external interface IC.  The SAA7390 includes third levelerror encoding and decoding in hardware and an easy-to-use memorymanagement system with ten levels of arbitration.  Philips offersthe chip with a choice of SCSI or ATAPI interface capability withhigh level of integration.The SAA7390 chip will cost $25 per 10,000-piece quantity and willbe available in January 1996.  In early 1996, CD-ROM developerswill be able to purchase total systems software from PhilipsSemiconductors that will be fully tested for compatibility andfunctionality.  The total systems packages are expected to reducethe drive development time by about eight months (811 East ArquesAvenue, PO Box 3409, Sunnyvale CA 94088-3409, 408/991-2000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Speech Systems Unveils PCMCIA-Based Speech Recognition SystemSpeech Systems Inc.  has unveiled the Phonetic Engine 1000(PE1000), a PCMCIA card that enables mobile, Windows-basedcomputers to run speech-driven applications using Speech Systems'continuous speech, speaker-independent speech recognitiontechnology.Based on a Multimedia PC Card from DSP Solutions Inc., the PE1000is a Type II Extended PC card that integrates a Texas InstrumentsTMS320C50 Digital Signal Processor (DSP) for highly accuratespeech recognition in real-time.  The PE1000 PC Card receivesincoming speech through a microphone, and the DSP converts it tospeaker-independent phonetic codes that are used for recognizingspeech.  The PE1000 card features two jacks for speechrecognition -- one for voice input, the other for audio output --allowing card to serve as a single source for sound and CD-ROMplayback.Speech Systems also plans to offer an OEM version of the PE1000PC Card, which can be embedded in mobile data terminals such asbelt units or hand-held computing devices with the ability toprocess speech input and send it to a host computer.Scheduled to begin shipping in the fourth quarter of 1995, thePE1000 will be available as a Run-time System (RTS) that includesthe PE1000 PC Card, RTS software, and a noise-cancelingmicrophone ($595).  Speech Systems' VoiceMatch SDK software is$595.  A bundled development system that includes a PE1000 RTSand VoiceMatch is available for $995.  SpeechWizard software,also for use with the RTS, is an additional $295 (Speech Systems,2945 Center Green Court South, Boulder CO 80301-2275, 303/938-1110).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Aimnet, Mitsubishi Subsidiary Partner to Spur Japanese InternetUseAimnet Corporation and DT Internet (DTI), a Mitsubishi ElectricGroup company, have formed an alliance to initiate new consumerInternet services in Japan, under which DTI will license Aimnet'snew Internet access software, Aimnet Internet Ranger.  DTI alsowill gain access to Aimnet's Internet Management System, aturnkey system specifically designed to manage an Internetservice business that includes modules for billing, sales,customer service, trouble ticketing, POP management, andinventory control.Aimnet Internet Ranger is an integrated Internet access packagethat will be distributed to new Internet subscribers in Japan.Aimnet Internet Ranger includes a unified interface, MIME-compliant e-mail with built-in voice mail, a World Wide Webbrowser with support for new extensions, news reader, Telnet,FTP, ISDN-compatible dialer, and TCP/IP stack.  An advanced "Pro"version of Aimnet Internet Ranger, due in early 1996, willintegrate secure e-mail, anti-virus control, browser plug-inssuch as Hot Java and Adobe Acrobat, content filtering, faxing,and other telecommunications features."This is the first step in creating a broad US-Asia strategicalliance for the Internet," said Dr.  Hong Chen (president andchief executive officer of Aimnet).  "We plan to develop partnersthroughout Asia, Europe, and South America" (Aimnet, 20410 TownCenter Lane, Cupertino CA 95014, 408/567-3800, DTI (Japan), +81-3-3505-8305).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Big Hand Restructures, Prepares for ExpansionBig Hand Productions Inc.  has reorganized in preparation forfuture acquisitions and expansion into the entertainment market.According to Jay Wolff (CEO of the newly-formed parent companyBig Hand Inc.), "We plan to expand our business and product lineby acquiring and supporting young studios and establishing aleading brand in the consumer market."Big Hand's subsidiaries now include the original studio inDallas; a second studio in Sydney, Australia; a publishing anddistribution company set up to market consumer software; and arecently-acquired design group which has been refocused toproduce multimedia titles for the music industry.Over the past few months, Big Hand management has named SteveO'Brien president of Big Hand Inc.  to allow Wolff to focus onthe direction of the subsidiaries.  O'Brien also will maintainhis position as chief operating officer (Suite 220, 4514 TravisStreet, Dallas TX 75205, 214/526-2888, fax 214/526-2889).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Davidson Acquires MaverickDavidson & Associates Inc.  has acquired Maverick Software Inc.,which produces the Dinosoft and Essential Software educationalCD-ROM lines.  Davidson acquired Maverick for 223,476 shares ofcommon stock.  The acquisition will be accounted for as a poolingof interests and will be accretive.  Maverick will continue tooperate independently with its current staff intact, focusingexclusively on the value-priced segment of the educationalsoftware market.  Maverick plans to release in 1996 40 to 50 newvalue-priced CD-ROM titles ($9.95-$19.95 suggested retailprices)."This acquisition allows us to strongly and separately addressthe growing and important value-priced segment of the market,without impacting Davidson's premium lines," said Bob Davidson(chairman and CEO, Davidson) (Davidson, 19840 Pioneer Avenue,Torrance CA 90503, 310/793-0600, fax 310/793-0601; Maverick, 9801Dupont Avenue South, Minneapolis MN 55431, 612/881-3738).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Graphix Zone, StarPress To MergeGraphix Zone Inc.  and StarPress Inc.  have signed a letter ofintent to merge the two companies.  Final execution of adefinitive merger agreement was expected by 31 December 1995.Upon completion of the merger, holders of StarPress common stockwill receive approximately .15 shares of Graphix Zone commonstock for each share of StarPress stock.  Approximately 4.4million shares of Graphix Zone common stock will be exchanged forStarPress stock, valuing the transaction at approximately $39.05million based on Graphix Zone's closing stock price of $8.875 asof 1 December 1995.  Upon consummation of the merger, currentstockholders of StarPress will own approximately 54 percent ofthe combined company on a pro-forma basis.  Graphix Zone willalso assume all outstanding options of StarPress.Following the execution of the definitive merger agreement,Graphix Zone and StarPress will operate as a combined company.StarPress Chairman Ron Posner will take on the responsibilitiesas Graphix Zone's chairman.  Chuck Cortright will continue asGraphix Zone's president and CEO, and Angela Aber will continueas Graphix Zone's executive vice president.  The merged companieswill have headquarters in Irvine.  The merger is expected toclose in March 1996 after the necessary approvals are obtained."This merger will allow us to broaden our product line and createthe ultimate product mix of interactive entertainment andreference software," said Cortright (GZI, Suite 100, 30 CorporatePark, Irvine CA 92714, 714/833-3838; StarPress, 2nd floor, 303Sacramento Street, San Francisco CA 94111, 415/274-8383).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Innovus Gets NASDAQ ListingMultimedia development company Innovus Corporation has beenaccepted for listing on the NASDAQ Small Cap stock market.  Thecompany's common stock, which began trading on the NASDAQexchange in early December, is listed under the symbol INUS (2060East 2100 South, Salt Lake City UT 84109, 801/487-9388, fax801/484-9561).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMA Joins in Launch of EC-Funded Intellectual Property ConsortiumThe Interactive Multimedia Association (IMA) has joined in thelaunch of IMPRIMATUR, an international consortium funded by theEuropean Commission (EC) and announced at the EuropeanInformation Technology Conference in Brussels on 29 November.The goal of IMPRIMATUR is to develop international consensus onpractices for managing intellectual property to support"electronic commerce for content" -- making intellectual propertyaccessible, yet secure.  While a number of proprietary solutionsexist for such information management, there are as yet noagreed-on specifications that allow different systems tointeroperate.IMPRIMATUR's 15 members include ALCS, Bertelsmann AG, the BritishLibrary, CISAC, CliPet Communications, Digicash, EUSIDIC,Florence University, IFPI, ILC Ltd, Imperial College, Teles GmbH,Telia AB, Thomson Multimedia, and, now, the InteractiveMultimedia Association.  The Authors Licensing and CollectingSociety (ALCS) in the United Kingdom is the coordinator of theConsortium.Unlike other members of the consortium, the IMA will not receivefunding from the European Commission.  Instead, the IMA willcommit itself to providing a link between the other members ofIMPRIMATUR and US industry (IMA, Evan Shubin, Suite 202, 48Maryland Avenue, Annapolis MD 21401-8011, 410/626-1380, FAXBack410/268-2100, e-mail:  info@ima.org).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996ITC Partners With VIS DevelopmentIndustrial Training Corporation (ITC) has entered into a long-term development agreement with VIS Development Corporation.Under the terms of the agreement, VIS will become ITC's exclusivedevelopment partner for enhanced digital versions of ITC's Activfamily of PC Skills courseware.According to ITC, "The enhanced versions of the Activ librarywill include several new features, permit a broader range ofcompatible hardware options, and enable efficient operation ofthe programs in the network and laptop delivery systems."  Thenew programs are scheduled for release before the second quarterof 1996 (ITC, 13515 Dulles Technology Drive, Herndon VA 22071,703/713-3335; VIS, 100 Fifth Avenue, Waltham MA 02154, 617/890-7777).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Motorola Invests in Terisa SystemsMotorola Inc.  has made an equity investment in Terisa SystemsInc., developer of the SecureWeb toolkit products for universaltransaction security for the Internet.  Allan Schiffman (chieftechnology officer for Terisa) said of the deal, "With Motorola'ssupport of our unified approach to Internet security, we arebetter able to address the present and future security needs ofthe global Internet community."  The dollar amount of theinvestment has not been disclosed at this time.  However, as partof the deal, Motorola will take a seat on Terisa's board(Motorola, 1303 East Algonquin, Schaumburg IL 60196, 708/576-5304; Terisa, 800 El Camino Real, Menlo Park CA 94025, 415/919-1752 or 415/617-1836, fax 415/617-8019).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Pac Bell Moves Into Wireless TVPacific Bell plans to acquire, for approximately $175 million,all of the stock of Wireless Holdings Inc.  (WHI) and VideotronBay Area Inc.  (VBAI) -- giving Pacific Bell access into cabletelevision markets in California, Florida, South Carolina, andWashington State.According to a Newsbytes report, Craig Watts (manager ofcorporate communications for Pacific Telesis Group) said, "Themove into wireless TV is our means of competing with theaggressive moves of Cox Cable and TCI Cable into telephony overcable.  Our acquisitions to date give us the ability to offer 100channel television to over seven million homes in California."The consideration will be payable by delivery of $120 million ofPacific Telesis common stock and the assumption of approximately$55 million of debt to Videotron and Transworld.  The transactionis intended to be tax free to the Transworld shareholders, whowill receive shares of Pacific Telesis common stock in exchangefor their Transworld stock on its liquidation.Pacific Bell also reported that, through its Pacific TelesisVideo Services unit, it plans to develop content for the cableoperations.  It will also obtain video content from Tele-TV, thejoint venture formed by Pacific Telesis, NYNEX, and Bell Atlantic(Pacific Telesis Group, 130 Kearny Street, San Francisco CA94108, 415-542-6864).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Thomson Invests $25 Million in StarSightThomson Multimedia has become the second largest owner ofStarSight Telecast Inc., by purchasing 13.25 percent ofStarSight's stock for $25 million, with an option to raise itsinvestment to 19.5 percent at $42 million.The move provides working capital for StarSight, a developer ofon-screen TV program guides, which reported a loss of $25.5million in the first nine months of its fiscal year'.  "The realstory is that we are banking on the success of StarSight andbacking it with our dollars in an aggressive move.  We would liketo see StarSight become the standard," said James Myer (seniorvice president, Thomson Consumer Electronics).  "We... believethat electronic program guides will become a very importantfeature in televisions and VCRs in the future."Under the agreement, Thomson is expected to ''aggressivelyincorporate'' and promote StarSight technology and relatedservices in selected product lines.  In return, Thomson will becompensated for its marketing efforts and will share in StarSightTelecast revenues with respect to StarSight Telecast's consumerelectronics business.  According to StarSight, the two companiesalso will establish a marketing fund for joint promotion ofStarSight-capable products.Other corporate "partners" in StarSight are:  Viacom, which owns23.4 percent; Cox Broadcasting (8.6 percent); The Tribune Company(4.5 percent); Providence Journal (3.15 percent); and Time Warner(3.1 percent) (Thomson, 10330 North Meridian, Indianapolis IN46290, 317/267-5000; StarSight, Ann McDougall, 39650 LibertyStreet, Fremont CA 94538-2223, 510/657-9900).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Multimedia is DisappearingFall Comdex 199513 - 17 November:  Las Vegas NVSponsored by SoftbankBy JOHN N. LATTA, Ph.D.Senior Contributing EditorWelcome to Comdex.  In a town packed with 200,000 visitors over afive-day period, patience certainly wears thin.  While theconference seemed to run more smoothly under new owner Softbank'sguidance, no matter how you describe the event, the bottom lineis that Comdex is a one-of-a-kind -- unpleasant to navigate, yetessential to attend.Comdex continues to deliver the best keynotes in the industry.An outstanding talk was given by Louis Gerstner (Chairman andCEO, IBM Corporation) which is summarized in this issue.  Inanother keynote, Bill Gates (Chairman and CEO, Microsoft)examined the future of computing with the aid of a videodepicting life in a small town.  In many respects Gates'presentation was similar to the "Information at Your Fingertips -- 2000" speech he delivered last year.  However, his emphasis hasshifted to the Internet and how PCs and applications(Microsoft's, of course) can be seamlessly linked together.Missing from his presentation was the wallet PC which Gates haddescribed several times in the past -- including his presentationat last year's Comdex (Softbank, Softbank, 303 Vintage ParkDrive, Foster City CA 94404, 415/578-6900).3D Comes OutIn the area of 3D chip development, what was a trickle only sixmonths ago (see Siggraph 95 coverage, Monitor 10/95 p20) has nowturned into a flood.  What follows is a summary of the chipannouncements at Comdex.Analysis:  The Significance of 3Do    For consumers, 3D means "fun."  Because real-time 3Dtechnology allows users to change their viewpoint, it places theusers in control and not subject to the whims of the designer.This flexibility extends beyond games and is applicable to theproliferation of consumer programs which permit walk-throughs ofspaces, the design of homes, and 3D visualization.o    3D brings a new level of visual realism to the PCexperience.  The public has become accustomed to higher levels ofentertainment quality, founded on multimedia, and 3D is the nextlogical step.o    3D is rapidly becoming a mainstream component of software.Already, home design programs, especially those in 3D, areselling very well.  Individuals relate to visual realism, easy-to-use programs, and their ability to control the creation of thecontent and participation in it.  With 3D, the PC becomes avisual computer, even more so than it did with the introductionof video.o    PC entertainment software is continually looking for ways topress the leading edge of the user experience.  3D extends therange of opportunities for content developers.  q3D Game and Content Developerso    Mindscape Inc.  recently released CyberSpeed, the first gameto use Microsoft-owned Rendermorphic's Reality Lab API and adirect port of the Sony PlayStation game.  Mindscape wanted toshow how well 3D can be accomplished in a software onlyapplication, and the company achieved 25 frames per second in320x240 mode -- stretched to 640x480.  Kevin Bachus (Manager ofInternational Development) said, "the improvement in graphicsquality will be a major boost to the game industry." Mindscape'sdevelopment strategy, according to Bachus, is to price titlesaggressively (from $19.95 to $29.95) and to stress thedevelopment of fewer titles -- which imparts a sense of qualityto consumers.  This combination will enable Mindscape to set newlevels of sell through -- in the 500,000 to 1,000,000 range pertitle (60 Leveroni Court, Novato CA 94949, 415/883-3000, fax415/883-3303).o    Velocity chairman and chief technology officer Moses Manoted that many market opportunities for 3D software come fromthe many bundling deals being offered by the chip and boardcompanies.  "As with CD-ROM bundling in the early phases of thismarket, bundling with 3D will drive most of the installed base,"according to Ma "Bundling will force the developers to squeezeevery bit of performance from the 3D chips."  At the same time,he said that an essential component to the success of 3D is theneed for the business 3D equivalent of Lotus 1-2-3.  "There mustbe a mainstream 3D application," said Ma.  Unfortunately,according to Ma, developers are limited by a lack of good 3Dtools (Suite 3100, 4 Embarcadero Center, San Francisco CA 94111,415/776-8000).o    Aaron Howard (president and CEO, Media Station) said thepotential for 3D lies in the context of its existing underlyingobject-oriented technology.  He said that "3D should be a plug-inmodule." Predicting that 3D will reach its potential in 1996 andbeyond, Howard said, "The move to 3D will be incremental." Heexpressed some reservations on the potential of Microsoft'sDirect X tools for game development -- not because of thetechnology, but because it limits the delivery platform toWindows 95.  "Media Station has the technology to allow a singleCD-ROM to work on either a PC or Mac," he noted.  "Thus, cross-platform support is essential."The Internet, according to Howard, has the potential to increasethe sense of community and experience when used in conjunctionwith CD-ROM.  For example, it is possible to add, via theInternet, other characters to a title.  "Although today's modelfor the Internet with Web home pages is a publishing metaphor,"Howard said, "VRML and Java allow possible extensions to avirtual world."  However, he warned, creating this new Internetmodel will be an evolutionary process.  As with many executiveslooking at the Internet, Howard is still examining how theInternet can be a money-making proposition.  One way might be tocharge a nominal fee to give the user access to a new metaphor,provide control, and offer value-added features (1140 EisenhowerPlace, Ann Arbor MI 48108, 313/971-1112).o    Dave Feldman (director of technology at PF Magic) said,"With 3D acceleration, the PC is finally competitive with homevideo game systems; however, the $2,000 price for a PC willalways position it as a high-end, general purpose solutionagainst the low-price home video game." Feldman said 3D chipswill be used more and more for accelerating the functions inMicrosoft's Reality Lab in order to obtain maximum performance.The first-generation 3D cards are inadequate, and it will take ayear to get cards which take maximum advantage of Microsoft'sDirect 3D capabilities."One of the key issues in the game industry is that the profitsare not there yet.  The attention, budgets, and talent still goto the feature movie productions," he said (Suite 400, 501 SecondStreet, San Francisco CA 94107, 415/495-0400).o    According to Rob Harris (vice president of technology atAccolade Inc.), two components are missing in PCs equipped with3D chips:  3D acceleration and a PC game controller.  When PCsfinally acquire these missing ingredients, they will begin be ona more level playing field with home video game systems."Neither platform will dominate the other, however," he said.Harris said that Microsoft's Direct X, Direct 3D, and Direct Playwill make the PC more truly "plug and play."  However, theindustry remains in a transition period while Windows 95 gains afoothold, and titles are developed which make best use of boththe operating systems and the new additions for gaming (5300Stevens Creek Boulevard, San Jose CA 95129, 408/985-1700).3D Software Companieso    Eric Hautemont (president, Ray Dream) predicted asignificant shift in the market to the casual user of 3D.Originally, Ray Dream positioned its tools for the graphicsprofessional.  However, with the recently released Ray DreamStudio, Hautemont expects more than 40 percent of sales will beto hobbyists -- mostly young males from 15 to 30 who are anxiousto replicate their game experiences enhanced with 3D.With the addition of animation capabilities, Hautemont's productswill be able to compete with high-end packages such as 3D StudioMAX, but are much more cost effective and -- at the same time --provide a tool for the graphics professional and the buddingcasual user.  To bolster the position of Ray Dream Studio, thecompany supports an open architecture with an open API.  Theprogram CD-ROM includes a 400-page document on how to write plug-ins for Ray Dream Studio (1804 North Shoreline Boulevard,Mountain View CA 94043, 415/960-0768, fax 415/960-1198).o    Mark Walton (vice president for Marketing and Sales at3D/Eye Inc.) said that his company's emphasis on intelligentmodels and drag-and-drop functionality "will make it possible foranyone to create 3D content."  Walton said that although thecurrent chip sets are tuned for the game market, this technologyalso will still support the task of making 3D omnipresent in theworkplace.  To do this, 3D/Eye has taken its CAD modelingexperience and included visual, physical, functional, andbehavioral information in the model.3D/Eye wants to make 3D simple enough to allow it  to be used bymany parts of an organization.  This scope of modeltransportability requires a new level of model description andease of use -- an objective which 3D/Eye expects to fulfill (1050Craft Road, Ithaca NY 14850, 607/257-1381).o    Doug Richard (CEO, Visual Software Inc.) said, "The 3Daccelerator chips will make applications much easier to use."  Tocreate a large 3D software market, Richard said, models must bereadily available and reusable.  His company's Visual Realityincludes 2 GB of models and textures.Visual Software is geared to meet the needs of three audiences:the professional (via Visual Reality 2.0), the enthusiast orhobbyist (Simply 3D), and the office worker who must create apresentation (Instant 3D).  "Our strategy requires that we musthave the highest level of tools to gain the broadest marketacceptance," said Richard (21731 Ventura Boulevard, WoodlandHills CA 91364, 818/883-7900).o    Another view of the 3D market comes from those with a longhistory in it -- the professional animators and those who supplythe software.  One leading company, Side Effects, offers twoprograms for the Silicon Graphics family of computers:  PRISMS, a3D animation system, and Houdini -- a next-generation animationtool which integrates 2D and 3D.Greg Hermanovic (principal, Side Effects) said that the high-end-- that is, SGI -- platforms provide real-time interaction forthe artist.  The introduction of high-performance, 3D chips willallow professional animators to use lower-cost platforms -- butfor the PC to be effective against the SGI platform, it needs notonly chips, but an operating systems and work station level-performance.Hermanovic said that Windows NT could provide the necessarysoftware, and DEC Alpha systems could provide the hardware.However, he said, "as long as the SGI platform is superior inprice performance -- even at the $30,000 to $50,000 range, itwill offer the more viable high-end solution."  He predicted thatthe market for 3D animation software and hardware will continueto grow at a rate of 40 percent per year (Suite 1001, 477Richmond Street West, Toronto ONT MSV 3E7 Canada, 416/504-9876).3D Home Designo    3D has already established an important market niche withhome design programs.  Planix, which merged with Softdesk Inc.in January 1995, is a company that has moved from the high-endCAD market to the mass market with products such as Planix HomeArchitect and Exterior Designer.  Augie Grasis (vice presidentfor Retail Products, Planix) said he credits the growth of thismarket with the fact that "people like 3D -- it's fun.  Thetypical home user does not relate well with how a plan will look.Having 3D visualization brings plans alive."  From a developer'sperspective, Planix is continually faced with the trade-offbetween realism and performance.  What the 3D chip allows is asignificant increase in realism.  The Planix software has alreadysold 100,000 units.  Grasis predicted a potential market upwardsof 500,000 to 1,000,000 units (Softdesk, 13618 Robin Hill Court,Houston TX 77059, 713/480-4630).o    Ken Tarolla (vice president for development, Expert SoftwareInc.) reported that his company has already sold one millioncopies of its 3D home design programs.  One of the newestenhancements allows users to produce a layout of the outside ofthe house.  Another feature enables the placement of plants andtrees and simulates the growth of this flora over a five tofifteen year period -- all in a matter of minutes.Tarolla said the future success of this product category hingeson the inclusion of texture mapping and built-in links to homeconstruction products and furnishing companies.  Such links willallow the home user to realistically see the home beforecommitting to a design.  Tarolla said he looks forward to 3Daccelerators, "but I cannot have my products dependent on theirpenetration."  Growth in capabilities and performance will fromthe improvement in processors, he predicted.  Tarolla alsoexpressed reservations about the potential for VRML and networked3D.  "I am not sure it will provide the support and quality whichmy products need," he said (1443 Franklin Street, Santa Monica CA90404, 310/828-8719).3D Networkingo    An early pioneer in networked 3D is Ziff-Davis Interactive,which announced a interactive virtual reality area, called ZD3D,on its Web site (http://www.zdnet.com) and in its MicrosoftNetwork edition (GO ZDNET).  ZD3D is based on software technologylicensed from InterVista.  Tom Aley (product manager) said that"3D will lower the barriers of entry into the Internet and bringan element of entertainment."The Ziff-Davis mission is to support early adopters, and ZD3D isvery much in line with that objective, said Aley.  According toAley, the Ziff-Davis Web site is seventh most heavily visitedsite in existence, with 350,000 hits per month.  Aley noted thatthe impact of the 'Net as an advertising medium are only nowbeing felt.  "The impact of the 'Net caught many advertisers offguard," he said, "and, already, ten percent of the media spendingwill be shifted to the Internet in 1996 (25 First Street,Cambridge MA 02154, 617/252-5000).3D Creative Talento    Many producers and suppliers to the industry repeatedlysited a significant problem present in the industry today:  thelack of enough 3D animation and content development talent.According to Bob Stanton of TSC Management Services Group, theskills most in demand are at the high-end (i.e.  SGI platforms).Top talent commands salaries of $80,000 to $140,000, plusroyalties and commissions.  "The industry has become socompetitive," according to Stanton, "that the recruiting model ischanging to a talent agency model."  Individuals or firms havebegun to hire firms to represent them in negotiations forprojects or productions.  "The net result," said Stanton, "isthat the price of success continues to escalate, which makes itmore difficult for the small production company to create amarket presence without the help from major publishers orproduction companies."3D Animation and Productiono    Chris Wallace of TOPIX Computer Graphics and Animationreported that his firm recently opened a division called TOPIXInteractive, which is specifically focused on creating contentfor CD-ROMs and the Internet.  He pointed out that "much of the3D we see today is of low quality, and this parallels the earlyproducts from the desktop publishing systems."  Thus, hepredicted, the market will gravitate to the professionals (ofwhich he sees far too few) to create compelling content.Multimedia in ChipsComdex was something of a "coming out party" for the firstgeneration of multimedia chips.  The last several years have seenan important transformation of the PC industry.  With the home PCgrowth rate at 25 percent and household penetration at 33 percentand climbing, it is no wonder that the home PC market isincreasingly dominating the industry.Central to the success of the PC in the home is multimedia.Beginning in 1994 and continuing in 1995, the Pentium processorhas been the processor of choice among consumers.  The Pentiumhas fueled the market for better video display and bettermultimedia titles.  Yet, the economics of silicon continue toforce increased functionality into fewer and fewer chips.  Whatwas once supplied on add-in cards will move to the motherboard.Rumor has it that in 1996, Intel will announce instructions forthe next generation Pentium, the P55C, which will supportmultimedia.  An overriding question within the industry is, "WillIntel make the multimedia instruction set on these machinesopen?"By reducing the technology to silicon, costs can be significantlydecreased and the functionality increased.  The last six monthshave seen increasing numbers of multimedia chips announced.  Itwill take at least 12 months for these chips to migrate to themotherboards.  When this migration happens, the quality ofmultimedia should again increase (i.e.  the image quality of thefull-motion video playback, along with improved sound and 3Dquality).o    ATI Technologies Inc.  introduced the ATI-264VT, a full-featured 64-bit multimedia processor that offers 2D graphicsacceleration, as well as full-screen, full-motion video playback(including MPEG).  This latest addition to ATI's mach64 family ofproducts uses a unique video buffer architecture that scales inboth the horizontal and vertical directions, resulting in smooth-and natural-motion video.  It supports full screen, full-motiontelevision-quality MPEG or Video CD output.  In addition, theATI-264VT was built specifically to enhance game play and hasbeen designed to take advantage of Microsoft's Windows 95 GameSDK.  The accelerator contains an integrated 135 MHz RAMDAC andsupports multiple memory types, including FP/EDO DRAM, SDRAM, orSGRAM.  In production in the first quarter of 1996, it will beavailable for $33 in large quantities.ATI also introduced its Enhanced Visual Architecture (EVA), whichprovides a method for multimedia devices to share resources andexchange video, audio, and graphics data.  The EVA architectureis supported the ATI-264VT.ATI also showed the 3D Rage accelerator chip for 3D graphics andmultimedia.  In addition to 3D graphics performance of up to600,000 Gouraud shaded triangles per second, the accelerator alsoprovides 2D and video acceleration.  The 3D capabilities include:perspective corrected bi-linear and tri-linear texture filteringmodes, alpha blending, and fog and texture lighting.  Sportingbroadcast-quality, full-screen, full-motion MPEG video, 3D Rageoffers the easy add-on design of TV tuners, hardware MPEG, andvideo conferencing.  Also integrated into the chip is a 135 MHzDAC with a true 24-bit palette that supports gamma correction.Priced at $48 for large quantities, full production is slated tobegin in the first quarter of 1996.Further, ATI introduced Video Xpression, an extendable, 64-bitmultimedia accelerator board designed to bridge the gap betweenthe PC, television, and game console.  The product features TV-quality video on a PC and significantly enhanced Windows 95utilities.  By using the video processor capabilities of the ATI-264VT, Video Xpression displays full-screen, full-motion TV-quality video for MPEG and Video CD movie discs on the PC.  Itdisplays 30 frames-per-second video on all Pentium-class systems.Video Xpression will be available in January 1996 for $199 (33Commerce Valley Drive East, Thornhill ONT L3T 7N6 Canada,905/882-2600, fax 905/882-2620).o    Avance Logic Inc.  introduced a 64-bit PCI graphics/videoaccelerator chipset, combining video acceleration, graphicsfunctions, and the ability to input live video data streams fromMPEG and TV decoders.  The ALG25128 chipset supports full videoinput and output and enables full-screen MPEG playback.  Itincludes the company's Video Wizard technology, which isnecessary for MPEG playback, and includes functions for colorspace conversion, XY interpolated zoom, and pixel packing.The scaling technology also has been enhanced to provide 30 fpsfull-screen viewing for television signals, MPEG video, andinteractive CD-ROMs.  In addition, the ALG25128 has the abilityto output to either VGA or NTSC/PAL, allowing consumers to outputvideo to a TV screen.  Application drives will be available forXing and Mediamatics MPEG decoders and Indeo, CinePak, andQuickTime.  The chipset is being offered to OEM customers at lessthan $18 for large quantities.  Full-scale production isscheduled to begin in January 1996 (47509 Seabridge Drive,Fremont CA 94538, 510/226-9555, fax 510/226-8039).o    Chromatic Research Inc., together with Toshiba AmericaElectronic Components Inc.  and LG Semicon Company Ltd.,presented the Mpact media engine (Monitor 11/95 p7), a multimediaacceleration chip whose two components -- a single, ultra-high-bandwidth, highly parallel media processor, and "mediaware"software modules -- enable seven chip functions:  video, 2D and3D graphics acceleration, audio, fax/modem, telephony, andvideophone.The chip includes a PCI interface; Rambus interface; PeripheralBus (PBus) interface, Display interface, Video interface, and theMpact Mediaware Modules (for JPEG, MEPG-1, MPEP-2, VGA, and GUI2D Windows acceleration, 3D graphics, audio, fax/modem,telephony, and video conferencing).  The high bandwidthcapabilities of the Mpact are evident in the Rambus Interfacewhich will support 500 MB/second burst data transfers.  The PBuscan support up to 14 virtual channels (programmable), which caninclude DMA, parallel, and serial interfaces.  The DMA channelshave a total bandwidth of 25 MB/second.The Mpact will support a wide variety of display resolutions,from television standards (including NTSC) to computer displaysas large as 1,200x1,600.  The programmable Video interfacesupports both the input and output of video in 16-bit YUV format,and the chip can handle pixel scaling, color space conversion,and dithering.Currently the only chip to offer a complete multimedia solution -- combining VLIW (Very Long Instruction Word) and SingleInstruction Multiple Data (SIMD) architectures for very fastperformance -- the Mpact also makes use of Rambus memorytechnology, offering very high bandwidth coupled with reducedboard space and cost (CRI, 800 East Middlefield Road, MountainView CA 94043-4030, 415/254-1600; Toshiba, 9775 Toledo Way,Irvine CA 92718, 714/455-2000, fax 714/453-0125).o    MicroUnity Inc.  revealed some of the details of itsanticipated MediaProcessor design.  The MediaProcessorarchitecture is a revolutionary multimedia and broadbandcommunications technology based on a mixture of CISC, RISC, andDSP technologies.  It is expected to run at clock frequencies upto 1 GHz, which is three times faster than the fastestmicroprocessor today.  The MediaProcessor is intended toeventually supplant today's microprocessors by providing high-speed networked processing power.  In addition, it can alsoimplement all conventional multimedia functions, such as 2D and3D graphics acceleration, video compression and decompression,and audio synthesis.MicroUnity plans to start production on the first generation ofMediaProcessors in early 1996.  The key discriminator ofMicroUnity is its focus on broadband signal processing.  Todaythese broadband solutions typically are accomplished by usingmultiple ASIC chips, a method that certainly can accomplish thetask.  However, MicroUnity purports that such a method results infragmented , poorly integrated, inflexible designs.The MicroUnity solution is based on three components:MediaBridge, MediaProcessor, and the MediaCodec.  The MediaBridgeconnects the MediaChannel to DRAM memories or the PCI bus.  TheMediaCodec is a mixed-signal device which has two broadband RFtransceivers (6-8 MHz channels within a 1 GHz range) and supportfor video I/O, stereo audio I/O, telephony, and infrared.  Thecritical component of MicroUnity strategy is software whichenables the MediaProcessor to exercise its flexibility.  Integralto the design of the MediaProcessor is a MediaChannel whichprovides multi-Gigabytes per second interfaces between theprocessor and outside devices, operating at a peak bandwidth of 4GB/second.MicroUnity claims that the MediaProcessor would be very wellsuited for 3D processing and image generation.  The companyintends to provide a library of functions which include:  audio(MPEG, Dolby AC-3); video (MPEG-1, MPEG-2, and NTSC encode anddecode); communications (QAM and QPSK modems); Reed-Solomon errorcorrection; DES encryption; broadband MAC protocols; and networkprotocols including Ethernet, MPEG control, and ISDN.MicroUnity has been described as a high-risk, high-paybackproposition.  The company is understood to have in excess of $100million in funding.  Although its backers have not beendisclosed, they are widely rumored to include Microsoft,Motorola, Hewlett-Packard, TCI, US West, and Cray Research (255Caspian Drive, Sunnyvale CA 94089-1015, 408/734-8100, fax 408-734-8136).o    nVidia Corporation displayed its NV1 multimedia accelerator,which was unveiled earlier in the year (Monitor 10/95 p24).  Inaddition to 2D Windows GUI acceleration, the chip also featuresphoto-realistic 3D graphics capabilities based on nVidia's unique"curved-surface polygon" rendering techniques, as well as"lightning fast" texture-mapping.  Based on a second orderquadratic surface description, the NV1 rendering technologyallows for simpler objects and lower memory bandwidthrequirements in the rasterization process.  However, thismodeling approach requires features in tools which are not widelyavailable today.  The vast majority of 3D content is presentlydone using a polygonal approach.The chip supports wavetable audio synthesis and full-motion videoplayback with a sustainable rate of 30 frames per second of true-color digital video.  The NV1 chip is also the first of its kindto features a digital game port, which allows a joystick todirectly access the PC's main memory.  The NV1 is priced around$200 (1226 Tiros Way, Sunnyvale CA 94086, 408-720-6100, fax 408-720-6111).o    Philips Semiconductors Inc.  introduced the TriMediaembedded microprocessor architecture, on which the first product,the TriMedia-1 will be based.  Consisting of a singlemicroprocessor, the TriMedia-1 architecture combines the benefitsof VLIW and DSP architectures, resulting in a peak performance of2.5 billion operations/second operating at 100 MHz.  One goal ofthe design was to integrate digital signal processors,specialized chips (or ASICs), and a general purpose processorinto one chip.This high-performance design permits mixed multimedia processingincluding MPEG-1 decoding at 30 fps with superimposed texture-mapped 3D graphics.  A 100 MHz TriMedia chip uses only 22 percentof its processing power to perform MPEG-1 decoding, while theremaining 78 percent will support 3D at 150,000 polygons/secondwith texture mapping, alpha blending, and Z-buffering.The TriMedia processor contains a programmable CPU core, whichcan be programmed and optimized at the C language level.  A fullsoftware development environment is provided, offeringprogrammers powerful and easy tools for developing software.  TheTM-1 -- the first in a family of TriMedia processors -- is thecore processor with a PCI bus (due for release in mid-1996).  TheTM-VP, a Video Phone Chip, is also due out in 1996.  Anotherchip, expected in 1997 or 1998 is the TM-TV the digital TV chip.(811 East  Arques Avenue, Sunnyvale CA 94088-3409, 800/234-7318,fax 708/296-8556).o    Tseng Labs Inc.  unveiled the ET6000, a high-speed graphicsand multimedia engine.  Designed to take advantage of the Windows95 operating system, the ET6000 offers a 128-bit graphicsaccelerator employing the new MDRAM memory architecture by MoSysInc.  It also supports Microsoft's DirectDraw API for an advancedgaming experience.  An internal video processing engine deliversfull-motion, high-resolution video playback and allows thesimultaneous display of up to four digital video windows.  Thechip supports YUV to RGB conversion, color keying, gammacorrection, and 128-bit GUI acceleration.  The ET6000 will handleplayback of software codecs for Indeo, Cinepak, TrueMotion, andMPEG.  Production is scheduled to begin in the first quarter of1996 (6 Terry Drive, Newton PA 18940, 215/968-0502, fax 215/860-7713).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996COMDEX, CONTINUED: Other New ProductsWindows 95 Updateo    Microsoft Corporation provided a snapshot of the "state ofWindows 95."  As of this writing, more than seven million unitsof Windows 95 had been purchased (including OEM and upgradesales) and over four million PCs had been sold with Windows 95preinstalled.In the first eight weeks of availability, Windows 95 waspurchased and deployed by at least 160 companies worldwide; andmore than half of Microsoft's top 1,000 US corporate accountshave moved beyond the pilot stage to deploy Windows 95 acrosstheir organizations.  More than 25 percent of software revenuegenerated in September 1995 was attributed to products designedto run on Windows 95; currently, some 700 products are designedto run on Windows 95.  Finally, according to a survey by BurkeCustomer Satisfaction, more than 90 percent of customers inEurope and the US are satisfied with Windows 95 (One MicrosoftWay, Redmond WA 98052, 206/882-8080).3D Graphicso    3D Labs Inc.  introduced Permedia, its second-generation,low-cost 3D graphics accelerator family, which offers 2D, 3D, andvideo acceleration.  The Permedia provides high-performance 3Dacceleration based on 3D Labs' GLINT graphics processors, with upto 25 million texture-mapped pixels/second, with perspectivecorrection and full bi-linear filtering.  Other 3D capabilitiesinclude Gouraud shading, optional z-buffering, fogging,transparency, overlays, and stencils at a rate of up to 500,00050-pixel triangles/second.  3D Labs will first make the Permediachip available to selected OEMs in the first quarter of 1996.Catering to the home PC market, the resulting multimedia graphicssolutions are expected to be priced at under $250 (Suite 403,2010 North First Street, San Jose CA 95131, 408/436-3455, fax408/436-3458).o    3Dfx Interactive Inc.  introduced Voodoo Graphics, a 3Dgraphics accelerator targeted at 3D entertainment applications inboth the coin-operated/arcade and home consumer markets.  Theaccelerator features several 3D functions including advancedtexture mapping, texture compositing, texture morphing, andanimated textures.  Optimized for real-time 3D generation, VoodooGraphics supports perspectively correct polygons with point-sampled texture mapping, z- and double-buffering, Gouraudshading, LOD MIP-mapping, and bilinear filtering.  On a typicalPentium-90 computer system, the resulting performance is morethan 45 megapixel/second fill rate, with over 350,000triangles/second.Voodoo Graphics consists of two separate chips:  the pixelfx,which is the primary graphics controller, and the texelfx, anadvanced texture-processing unit.  The chipset operates undermost PC operating systems and development environments (DOS,Windows NT, Window 95, and SGI's IRIX) and provides support for anumber of 3D APIs.To date, both Orchid Technology Inc.  and FMI Graphics Productshave signed OEM agreements with 3Dfx to develop consumer 3D gameboards based on Voodoo Graphics.  In addition, 3Dfx is workingwith a large number of leading PC and coin-op game developers tocreate multimedia titles based on the chipset.  Voodoo Graphicsis priced at less than $75 in 20,000 piece quantities (Suite 105,415 Clyde Avenue, Mountain View CA 94043, 415-934-2400, fax 415-934-2424).o    Elsa Inc.  introduced the Winner 1000Trio/V, a low-costmultimedia graphics accelerator board.  Winner 1000Trio/Vfeatures 64-bit graphics and full-screen MPEG/AVI acceleration,DirectDraw/DCI support, and flicker-free VGA refresh rates.  Theboard also includes a software MPEG decoder and support for VideoCD full-screen playback (Suite 165, 2041 Mission CollegeBoulevard, Santa Clara CA 95054, 800/272-ELSA, fax 408/565-9650).o    Rendition displayed its Verite graphics processor, whichprovides hardware acceleration for 3D graphics, video color spaceconversion, and 2D graphics acceleration.  Using an on-chip RISCprocessor, the Verite accelerates more of the 3D graphicspipeline than conventional low-end rasterization chips.  It canrender up to 160,000 Gouraud-shaded, bi-linear filtered,perspectively correct texture-mapped, fogged, 50-pixeltriangles/second -- double-buffered scenes to be rendered at 30frames/second at 640x480x65 KB colors, resulting in smooth,realistic animations.  In addition, the chip provides MPEG-1color space conversion and video scaling at 30 frames/second.The Verite chip will be available in early 1996.Rendition also announced it has signed an agreement with CreativeTechnology Ltd.  to provide the Verite graphics processor forCreative's next-generation 3D Blaster products (1675 NorthShoreline Boulveard, Mountain View CA 94043-1366, 415/335-5900,fax 415/335-5999).o    S3 Inc.  introduced the ViRGE and ViRGE/VX 64-bit graphicsand video accelerators.  Based on the company's S3d architecture,these single-chip products integrate 3D rendering, 2D GUI, videoacceleration, and a clock synthesizer.  The S3d providestriangle-based polygon rendering, along with complete texturemapping capabilities.  It also supports advanced features such asbi-linear filtering, MIP-mapping and tri-linear MIP-mapping forclear and realistic-looking images.  In addition, the S3d MUXbuffering feature permits z-buffering support without the highcost of dedicated hardware z-buffer memory.The ViRGE chip, which is targeted at the mainstream home PCmarket, offers 2D GUI acceleration for resolutions up to1,280x1,024x256 colors at 75 Hz, as well as support for 30frames/second video and audio decoding.  The ViRGE/VX chip --geared for the high-end of the market, such as arcade-levelgames, PC-based CAD, and large-screen applications  -- supportsresolutions up to 1600 x 1200 x 16 million colors at 75 Hz.  Ithas RAMDAC performance levels of 220 MHz.The ViRGE chip will begin shipping in the first quarter of 1996for $40 each in volumes of 10,000 or more.  The ViRGE/VX will gointo production in the first quarter of 1996 and will beavailable for $65 each in 10,000-unit or more quantities (2770San Thomas Expressway, Santa Clara CA 95051-0968, 408/980-5400,fax 408/980-5444).o    Trident Microsystems Inc.  displayed its T3D2000 2D GUI and3D graphics acceleration chip.  The product features a graphicsaccelerator, VGA controller, bus interface, and memorycontroller, providing 3D and video playback acceleration,hardware rendering, and image enhancement.  The T3D2000's 64-bit2D GUI accelerator supports resolutions up to 1,600x1,280 withcolor depths up to 24 bits.  The 3D rendering engine sports a 64-bit pipelined architecture, with support for Gouraud shading,texture mapping, alpha blending, and up to a 24-bit z-buffer.The chip also provides acceleration for video playback with up to16-bit color.  Optimized for Windows 95 and Windows NT, theT3D2000 is priced at $60 each (189 North Bernardo Avenue,Mountain View CA 94043-5203, 415/691-9211, fax 415/691-9260).Multimedia Hardwareo    Diamond Multimedia Systems Inc.  has begun shipping Edge 3D($299), a 3D, 2D, video, and audio accelerator for Windows 95 PCgames.  Edge 3D features photo-realistic 3D animatedenvironments, true-color 2D graphics, full-motion digital video,and hardware wavetable audio.  Edge 3D ships bundled with Sega'sVirtua Fighter Remix and Papyrus' NASCAR Racing, with other gamesupcoming.  Diamond also has begun shipping the Stealth64 Video2001XLe multimedia accelerator series ($199, $259 with 2 MB RAM),which will be bundled with entertainment reference software (2990Junction Avenue, San Jose CA 95134-1922, 408/325-7000, fax408/325-7070).o    Digital Video Arts Ltd.  demonstrated WakeBoard ($2,995), avideo capture and compression board that enables real-time, high-quality video capture and compression from S-Video and compositesources, supporting a variety of resolutions up to 640x480 at 30frames per second.  WakeBoard employs wavelet compressiontechnology that provides professional-quality, scalable videowith less noticeable artifacts.  Based on a programmable digitalsignal processor, WakeBoard support of multiple video codecs.An MPEG-1 option will be available as a software upgrade for theboard in the spring of 1996.  An MPEG II -2 upgrade will follow.WakeBoard ships with video editing and 3D effects software,including Adobe Premiere 4.0, Crystal Graphics Flying Fonts Pro3.0, and Caligari trueSpace2 (Suite 107, Twining Center, 715Twining Road, Dresher PA 19025, 215/576-7920, fax 215/576-7932).o    Factura Interactive Kiosk Enclosures introduced theDurashell, an outdoor interactive kiosk designed to meetUnderwriters Lab/Federal Communications Commission severe weatherand security requirements.  Durashell (approximately $2,500)houses any standard PC system in an outdoor environment, such asshopping centers or sporting stadiums.  The kiosk also can befitted with a weather-tight touch screen from MicroTouch SystemsInc.  The Durashell kiosk includes the enclosure, an airconditioning and heating system, and a power distribution system(882 Linden Avenue, Rochester NY 14625, 716/264-9600, fax716/264-9575).o    Fast Electronic US Inc.  is now shipping the FPS 60, adigital video addition to its Movie Line desktop video system(Monitor 8/94 p23).  The FPS 60 features S-Video throughput forenhanced resolution, 60 fields/second Motion JPEG for full-motioncapture, and  optional MPEG playback for viewing MPEG-1-compliantmedia.  The FPS 60 ships with Adobe Premier 4.0 LE editingsoftware, Adobe Photoshop 2.5, Visual Software Inc.'s Simply 3Danimation package, and the XingMPEG Encoder.Fast Electronic US also is shipping Studio Quad and Video Quad,turnkey nonlinear editing systems.  Studio Quad is housed in aCompaq ProLiant rack-mountable PC.  Video Quad, housed in aCompaq ProSignia PC, is a S-Video/Hi8 editing suite targeted tocorporate A/V departments, animators, educators, and mid-tierpost production facilities (393 Vintage Park Drive, Foster CityCA 94494 415/345-3400, fax 415/345-3447).o    FutureTel Inc.  showed the PrimeViewII ($15,000), a single-board YUV-in MPEG encoder.  The encoder features horizontal andvertical filtering, scaling, RGB Pedestals, gain and linearitycontrol, and black and white stretch.  FutureTel also offeredMPEGTools ($2,000), a set of MPEG production utilities that offerMPEG encoders a higher degree of control over the production andhandling of MPEG.  MPEGTools includes Video Clip MPEG-1, MPEGAnalyzer, MPEG File Converters, and MPEG Album applications.Further, FutureTel introduced MPEGWorkshop ($2,500) whichcombines MPEGWorks with MPEGTools.  This package is designed forIBM-compatible PCs with or without a Windows MCI-compliantdecoder card.  An integrated software decoder operatestransparently in the background.  Finally, FutureTel introducedthe MPEGPublisher bundle ($3,500), which combines MPEGWorkshop,the PrimeViewII encoder, and WinONCD and VideoPack fromCeQuadrat.  This package enables the transfer of video contentfrom videotape to interactive CDs (1092 East Arques Avenue,Sunnyvale CA 94086, 408/522-1400, fax 408/522-1439).o    Gateway 2000 introduced the Gateway Solo, a 120 MHz Pentiumprocessor in a multimedia notebook.  The Gateway 2000 notebookline also includes 75 MHz and 90 MHz models (610 Gateway Drive,PO Box 2000, North Sioux City SD 57049-2000, 605/232-2000, fax605/232-2023).o    Matrox Graphics Inc.  introduced a line of multimedia add-ons for its MGA Millennium card.  The new products include:  theMediaXL, a live video playback and frame grabbing module; theMedia TV board; and the MediaXL-MPEG, an MPEG and live videomodule.  MediaXL ($249) allows users to capture any NTSC, PAL, orSECAM signal in Y/C or composite from a video camera, a VCR, or avideodisc, and change it into a digital format.  Media TV ($179)is an ISA board which can be connected to a TV antenna or cablethrough an outside connector and feeds to the monitor through theMediaXL video capture module.  MediaXL-MPEG ($349) adds hardwareMPEG playback capabilities to the live video playback and framegrabbing features of the MGA MediaXL (1055 Saint-Regis, DorvalQUE H9P 2T4 Canada, 514/685-2630, fax 514/685-2853).o    Media Station Inc.  introduced T3, a proprietary technologyfor creating high-performance multimedia CD-ROM products onmultiple platforms.  The product combines portable playbacksoftware and an array of proprietary asset formats for images,sounds, and movies.  T3 can run on various platforms or acrossthe Internet (1140 Eisenhower Place, Ann Arbor MI 48108-3248,313/971-1112, fax 313/971-7722).o    MultiTech Systems Inc.  introduced the MT1432PCS3 ($249), alow-cost addition to its Digital Simultaneous Voice and Data(DSVD) MultiModemPCS line of modems.  The MT1432PCS2 modemsupports telephony operations such as telephone answering machineand DTMF tone detection.  The modem comes with MultiExpress PCSvoice mail software that determines whether calls are voice,data, or fax, and turns on the appropriate software to handle thecall (2205 Woodale Drive, Mounds View MN 55112, 612/785-3500, fax612/785-9874).o    SAI Technologies Inc.  launched Enigma (priced at less than$5,000), a plug-in PCI board for PCs that provides real-timeMPEG-1 video and audio encoding/decoding.  The board can encodevideo at data rates of up to 4 MB per second and processes at upto 30 frames per second -- enabling the board to provide multi-standard support and real-time transcoding between formats.  Theminimum hardware requirement for Enigma is a 486-22 MHz IBM-compatible PC or greater with 8 MB RAM, a 200 MB hard disk, andVGA monitor (1-4 Rockware Avenue, Greenford, Middlesex, UB6 0AAEngland, +44-181-578-5668, fax +44-181-578-1603).o    Sigma Designs Inc.  demonstrated the RealMagic Pro, achipset for card and PC manufacturers.  The chipset -- whichprovides 16 million color MPEG playback at 1,600x1,200 with 85 Hzresolution -- enables the manufacture and marketing of OM-1 andRealMagic-compatible MPEG playback cards.  In addition, theRealMagic Pro chipset features Windows 95 and MPC3 compliance anda direct interface for a NTSC/PAL decoder to support TV tunerinput (46501 Landing Parkway, Fremont CA 94538, 510/770-0100, fax510/770-2640).o    Smart and Friendly Inc.  and Incat Systems have jointlyproduced the CD-R1002/Pro ($899), a fully-featured CD-Recordingsystem.  The system includes an internal double-speed CD-Recorder, a 650 MB CD-R disc, an Adaptec SCSI host adapter, andmulti-platform Incat software (Smart and Friendly, 20520 NordhoffStreet, Chatsworth CA 91311, 818/772-8001, fax 818-772-2888).o    SRS Labs Inc.  has entered into a licensing partnership withKenwood Corporation which allows Kenwood to incorporate patentedSRS technology (such as SRS 3D sound) into new audio products.Kenwood will introduce the SRS-based US product lines at theWinter CES Show in January 1996.  SRS (the Sound RetrievalSystem) produces a fully immersive, 3D sound image from any audiosource with two or more standard stereo speakers.SRS also announced that it is bringing its 3D sound to theInternet via its World Wide Web site (www.srslabs.com).  The sitecontains creative graphics, information on products featuring theSRS technology, and two downloadable demonstrations of the SRS 3Dsound, as well as an e-mail feature that connects customers withthe SRS representatives (SRS, 2909 Daimler Street, Santa Ana CA92705, 714/442-1070, fax 714/852-1099; Kenwood, 2201 EastDominguez Street, Long Beach CA 90810, 213/639-9000).o    VCON Inc.  showed a number of videoconferencing productsthat support high-speed Internet access.  The Armada Cruiser 50System ($1,395) and the Armada Cruiser 100 System ($1,595)provide H.320-compliant videoconferencing capability over ISDNand can be used as a high-speed ISDN modem for remote LAN accessand Internet access.  With the Armada Cruiser products, users candownload MPEG video clips off the World Wide Web, play theseclips back on their PCs, and conduct H.320-compliantvideoconference sessions (Suite 700, 5000 Quorum Drive, Dallas TX75240, 214/774-3890, fax 214/774-3893).Softwareo    CompuMedia Inc.  introduced the CompuEdit line of desktopdigital video editing products ($399 to $999), which allow usersto add numerous features to video, including 3D effects, wipes,dissolves, titles, morphing, narration, and music (Suite 6105,350 Fifth Avenue, New York NY 10118, 212/290-2432, fax 212/268-7572).o    Horizons Technology Inc.  (HTI) showed its OpenInfo Managermultimedia construction kit ($299), a Windows-based softwarepackage that combines multimedia authoring and media managementcapabilities.  The new product is targeted to the presentationsand desktop publishing markets.  HTI also announced plans tobundle OpenInfo Manager with Corel Corporation's CD Creator CDwriter software and Ulead Systems Inc.'s MediaStudio Pro 2.0multimedia toolkit/video editing software.  The OpenInfo Managersbundled kit will be offered by HTI for a limited time at $495(3990 Ruffin Road, San Diego CA 92123-1826, 619/292-8331, fax619/292-7321).o    OmniMedia Plc.  introduced its multimedia, software-onlyMPEG technology and introduced the Video CD Production Toolkit($7,820 for single licensing fee), an MPEG-based toolkit forlinear title production.  With the toolkit, users can produceWhite Book 1.1- and 2.0-ready CD-publishing for Windows,Macintosh, Sega Saturn, 3DO, Amiga CD32, VideoCD for Karaoke, andCD-i.  OmniMedia also showed Video CD Plus Toolkit ($11,850,available in the second quarter of 1996), a toolkit that allowsdevelopers to generate interactive MPEG CD-ROMs with fullInternet connectivity.  Discs produced by this tool displaydownloaded World Wide Web information in the same format as thetitle's interface (The Old Police Station, 6 London Road,Kingston-Upon-Thames, KT2 6SW England, +44-181-974-6766, fax +44-181-547-1031).o    Ray Dream introduced Ray Dream Studio ($499), a 3D animationsoftware package featuring Ray Dream Designer, Ray DreamAnimator, Dream Models, and Extensions Portfolio.  The Animatorprogram features inverse kinematics, keyframe/time line edit-ins,and rotoscoping.  The software is fully integrated for operationunder Windows 95  (1804 North Shoreline Boulevard, Mountain ViewCA 94043, 415/960-0768, fax 415/960-1198).Multimedia Titleso    7th Level Inc.  has added to its Lil' Howie's Fun House CD-ROM series with The Great Word Adventure, a language skills titlefor children.  The product is compatible with Windows 95 andWindows 3.1 is available for $39.99.  7th Level also launched TheUniverse According to Virgil, an educational CD-ROM series onscience.  The title uses dialog, participation, and animation tointroduced children to the worlds of physical, life, and earthsciences.  This product will be available in March 1996.Further, the company debuted G-Nome, a real-time rendered 3Dgame.  G-Nome is an adventure game with fully texture-mappedgraphics and fluid animating vehicles, creatures, and characters.G-Nome integrates a new process that allows comic book stylecharacters to be smoothly animated and blended into 3Dbackgrounds.  The game will ship in the second quarter of 1996(#122, 1110 East Collins Boulevard, Richardson TX 75081, 214/498-8100, fax 214/437-2717).o    Via America Online, Compton's NewMedia Inc.  has addeddirect Internet connectivity to its Compton's InteractiveEncyclopedia, 1996 Edition ($69.95).  Other gateways to theInternet will follow.  Compton's also introduced Zak's Look ItUp!  ($29.95), a multimedia reference collection on CD-ROMtargeted to children ages 6-12.  The title offers  thousands ofarticles, children's books, an atlas, and historical timeline.Zak's Look It Up!  will be available in February 1996 for Windows3.1 and Windows 95  (2320 Camino Vida Roble, Carlsbad CA 92009-1504, 619/929-2500, fax 619/929-2511).o    Essex Interactive Media is adding low-priced MPEG titles toits budget CD-ROM product line.  The new titles sell for $9.99and include Desert Storm:  100 Hours to Victory, JFK:  The Man &His History, and The Civil War.  MPEG titles are produced forWhite Book playback, using either an MPEG-1 card, an MPEG-1enabled player, or an appropriate software player (560 SylvanAvenue, Englewood Cliffs NJ 07632, 201/894-8700, fax 201/894-1479).o    Living Books introduced Sheila Rae, The Brave ($39.95), asing-along, interactive adventure in reading featuring music andanimated screens to help children learn to read.  Sheila Rae, theBrave will be available in the spring of 1996  for Macintosh,Windows, and Windows 95 (Suite 201, 160 Pacific Avenue Mall, SanFrancisco CA 94111, 415/352-5200).o    PC World debuted the first issue of PC World Interactive, aquarterly CD-ROM publication that provides access to the Internetfor optimal information sources.  PC World Interactive is sold bysubscription and at computer stores, bookstores, and newsstands.A four-issue subscription is $49.95.  Single copies sell for$17.95 (501 Second Street, San Francisco CA 94107, 415/243-0500,fax 415/546-1673).o    SoftKey International Inc.  unveiled Infopedia 2.0, acomplete 29-volume Funk & Wagnall's New Encyclopedia on CD-ROM.The product is now available in the Windows format and is soon tobe released in the Macintosh format, both for $39.95 (OneAthenaeum Street, Cambridge MA 02139, 617/494-1200, fax 617/494-1219).Comdex in ContextSeveral interesting parallels are apparent in the progression ofcomputing technology.  Desktop publishing, for example, broughttogether the Apple Macintosh, Apple Laser Writer, and AldusPageMaker and, in the process, decimated the pre-press business.Multimedia has yet to completely transform the audio productionbusiness, but very few facilities exist without a Macintosh orPC.  Likewise, the computer is changing the face of televisionstudio and post production facilities.  Avid Technology Inc.  isat the forefront of integrating general purpose computers intothe television production environment.All of these are examples illustrate how general purposetechnology -- albeit smaller in form and less expensive -- hasmanaged to assimilate the functions of older technology, becomingubiquitous in presence and still providing improved functionalityand performance over the old technology.  Where do 3D andmultimedia chips fit into this advancing tide of technologyprogress? With the success of the movie Toy Story the prospect ofcreating Toy Story-like animations on the computer and in real-time is a frontier which companies are anxious to explore.While 3D chip technology is in its infancy, it's potential hasexcited many.  More fundamentally, multimedia technology ismaking inroads upon itself.  Where multimedia brought sound tothe PC, we now see sound as part of a chip which offers all themultimedia functions -- what one might call the super multimediachip.  What was standalone and isolated on the PC as an add-infunction has now disappeared into a chip with many functions.This is the progressive pattern of electronics functionality --the integration of more functions into silicon, so that itsdistinct identity as a component is lost, but the functionalcapabilities continue to increase.  Thus, as the quality ofmultimedia improves, it becomes present in every PC, butdisappears as separate technology.  In the next wave oftechnology advancement, multimedia is being transformed again.One might say that at the same time it is disappearing,multimedia is becoming omnipresent.  qJohn N.  Latta is president of 4th Wave Inc., a multimediaproduction and systems company and is a senior contributingeditor of Multimedia Monitor.  Latta may be reached at PO Box6547, Alexandria VA 22306, 703/360-4800, fax 703/360-2311.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Keynote Address by Louis V. Gerstner, Jr., IBM CorporationBy JOHN N. LATTA, Ph.D.SENIOR CONTRIBUTING EDITORIBM CEO Louis Gerstner's keynote was unique, because it featuredvery few visual aids.  In a relaxed, walk-around-the-stagemanner, Gerstner gave a compelling assessment of the impact ofinformation technology on society.  His announcement of theInterpersonal Computer received considerable press --  but hiskeynote was more profound than a product pitch.  Gerstner'sspeech was both historical and visionary.  It challenged theindustry to address future issues on how computing technologywill impact society (PO Box 2150, Atlanta GA 30355, 404/238-3182)."Every now and then," Gerstner said, "a technology or an ideacomes along that is so profound, so powerful, so universal thatits impact changes everything -- the printing press; theincandescent light; the automobile; manned flight.  It doesn'thappen often, but when it does, the world is changed forever.  Ijoined this industry and IBM because I believe that informationtechnology has that potential."Gerstner offered his thoughts on the future of IBM and its rolein making information technology "the defining technology of thisdecade" and of the next century.  "IBM researchers see no limits,for at least a decade, to the underlying technologies that driveour industry," he said.  "Processor power, memory, disk capacity,bandwidth -- the trajectories will continue upward."To illustrate, Gerstner shared a few of the projects underdevelopment in IBM labs.  He described a new kind of opticalmicroscope that could potentially image a single atom in visiblelight.  "This same technology may eventually enable incrediblydense storage devices that can pack information at densities onehundred times higher than anything we can demonstrate today," hesaid.  "That's the equivalent of putting the entire collection ofthe Library of Congress -- sixteen million books -- on a diskettethe size of a penny."Another product under development at IBM is a high-resolutionThinkPad flat-panel display.  According to Gerstner, theprototype that he saw at IBM's research laboratory delivered sucha high-quality image that he was unable to tell the differencebetween a color photo attached to a ThinkPad display and a colorpanel displaying an actual digital image.Gerstner also described a speech-technology interface "thatdoesn't just recognize dictation -- we have products today thatalready do that.  This interface understood what I was saying, itextracted the meaning of what I was asking for and delivered someinformation in response."The future of computing, said Gerstner, may be more than justsuper high-resolution displays and speech recognition.  As he putit, "Some [technologies] are really 'out there.'" Noting theindustry's tendency to describe itself in terms of faster,better, cheaper pieces of hardware and software, Gerstner said,"We're at the threshold of the next major phase of computing," hesaid.  "It draws upon many of the technologies we've beendiscussing, but one in particular -- high-speed, high-bandwidthnetworking -- which is why we refer to it as 'network-centriccomputing.'"This phase of computing, Gerstner pointed out, follows twoothers:  "The first was 'mainframe-centric' -- with a largecentral processor, centralized data, centralized applications,centralized systems and network management -- all servinghundreds and hundreds of 'dumb' terminals," he said.  "Thiswasn't a great model for end-users, because they were chained tothe central I/S department for computing power and applications."The second phase of computing history occurred in the 1980s withthe emergence of the microprocessor, "which made possible the PC,which made possible shrink-wrapped software, local area networks,and on and on," according to Gerstner.  "So the model ofcomputing went from centralized to decentralized, and -- notsurprisingly -- so did the composition of our industry.  We wentfrom a few large integrated companies to 60,000 niche players,and that nearly blew IBM up."However, noted Gerstner, the promise of distributed computing hasnot been fully realized.  "Our industry promised customers thatthey could buy all these individual pieces, and put them togethervery easily.  But that hasn't happened."  Faced with such issuesas system incompatibility and the expense of client/servercomputing, "customers are beginning to wonder if they're gettingfull value from all of the horsepower and software capabilitythey buy," said Gerstner.While the PC solution is a step in the right direction, "is itreally the end-game?" asked Gerstner.  "We've come to understandthat client/server is, in fact, not a full-blown phase ofcomputing.  It's really the leading edge of what will be the nextphase:  network-centric computing."While PCs and servers have become enormously powerful, he said,"they communicate through the equivalent of soda straws."Gerstner predicted that "very powerful networking technologies --principally ATM -- will be to the next phase of computing whatthe microprocessor was to the current phase... If thecommunications link between the PC and the network is cheapenough, fast enough, and has virtually unlimited bandwidth, whynot migrate a lot of the functions that currently reside insidethe PC to the network -- the applications, the data, the storage,and even some of the processing?"Customers, he pointed out, don't care where these functions takeplace, "as long as what happens in front of the screen iscompelling, simple to use, and is the least-expensive solutionavailable."In making the jump to network-centric computing, end-users willfind a number of advantages.  For example, Gerstner noted,customers will be able to upgrade their PCs "by subscribing tohigher levels of computational power on the network."  Instead ofthe consumer having to "figure out those arcane things calledoperating systems," the network will "mask that complexity andincompatibility."  In addition, with network-centric computing,consumers will no longer have to buy "a shelf-full ofapplications, swapping dozens of diskettes in and out, andrepeating this delightful task when version 2.5.4 comes out innine months."Envisioning the evolution of a new "Interpersonal Computer" thattruly is suited for communications and interaction, Gerstnerpredicted that there will be fundamental changes in PCs.However, he said, "the network-centric world will not replace thePC world entirely any more than the PC world replaced themainframe world entirely."Network-centric computing will arrive in a number of guises, saidGerstner.  It has already arrived in the form of the explosivegrowth of the Internet, and it will come to the consumer marketin the form of interactive services to the home.  "We are seeing[network-centric computing] take off first in businesses andlarge institutions," Gerstner said.  "Technology is only anenabler of a much more powerful force:  a whole new way thatinstitutions and companies have conceptualized their strategicpriorities.  They've discovered a powerful new form of leverage:the leverage of organizational knowledge as a means to competemore effectively and to differentiate themselves in themarketplace."Gerstner opined that the "most important, most valuable, mostsought-after content in the world belongs to corporations andlarge institutions.  It's created and collected every minute,around the world:  intellectual property, designs, marketintelligence, supply and demand, customer trends."  He said thatpowerful networks can "unlock this knowledge, and move it to thepeople who can use it effectively.  This drives shorter cycletimes and allows teams of people to become more productive andcreative."  These concrete, real-world benefits, said Gerstner,are key in convincing companies to make large-scale investmentsin network technology.Gerstner predicted that as companies use networks to reach out totheir customers directly, the nature of competition will changedramatically.  "Companies that stand between a supplier and acustomer will be on dangerous ground," he said.  "Something verysignificant is happening here.  For the first time, the models ofcomputing that support businesses and institutions on the onehand and individual users on the other are coming together...They're converging network-centric computing."As network-centric computing evolves, said Gerstner, "it willtransform every business, organization, and institution in theworld... It will change the way we do business, the way we teachour children, communicate and interact as individuals."  Notingthat IBM is making "enormous investments in Internet products andservices," Gerstner stated, "We're taking network-centriccomputing very seriously at IBM.  I'd say we're betting much ofour future on it."According to Gerstner, some of the important issues involved innetwork-centric computing include "complex network management,systems management, heavy transaction processing, massive databases, powerful scalable servers, and systems integration... Now,let me think, what company knows how to do all that?"All kidding aside, Gerstner said that the future of computing is"right before us," but will only happen if "we step up to certainresponsibilities as an industry."  These responsibilities, hesaid, fit under one banner:  listening to the customer.  "I don'tthink we pay nearly enough attention -- or spend nearly enoughmoney -- being sensitive and responsive to customers," he said."I think we need to work on many things, but three inparticular," said Gerstner.  "The first is ease of use" -- anissue that "ranges from basic confusion over on-off switches andloading software to the way we integrate and manage complexsystems."The second major issue facing the industry is standards.  "Oursis the only major industry I can think of that refuses to rallyaround standards," he said.  "How are we ever going to get aroundthe problem of incompatible hardware and software systems?"Gerstner offered two choices:  asking customers to set asidetheir freedom of choice, and "all of us move to one architectureprovided by, priced by and controlled by one company.  Or, we canembrace open industry standards.  Compliance with standards doesnot mean that we won't compete aggressively or that we can'tdistinguish our products.  We will.  But we'll compete on thebasis of innovative implementation of industry-standardstechnologies and architecture -- on performance, features,design, service, and support."Finally, said Gerstner, "We've got to come to grips with the factthat the proliferation of our technology raises some veryprovocative and serious societal issues... Our industry operatesin free space.  It's part of the reason for its success.  Thisfreedom must be honored and protected -- but it also must beearned."  He pointed out that while some people see the Internetas the proverbial "information superhighway," others view it as"a dangerous pipeline for pornography, intellectual propertytheft, and a serious threat to commerce and privacy."Another grave concern, Gerstner noted, is the issue of universalaccess.  People are concerned about "creating a society oftechnological 'haves' and 'have-nots.' Just last week," he said,"I read a survey in Time magazine.  Nearly half the respondentssaid that technological change was responsible for the growingeconomic inequality between people."These are serious issues," he continued.  "There are manydifferent and divergent views on what to do about them.  Frankly,most of the solutions that are being proposed are equallytroubling.  They raise questions of censorship, over-regulation,and, of course, the specter that the fires of innovation thatdrive our industry will be stamped out."The information technology industry, said Gerstner, has grand andambitious visions.  "We're talking about no less than changingthe world in very fundamental ways," he said.  "Yet... what willyou hear and see here at Comdex? Megahertz, gigabits, andmultitasking.  There's a disconnect between our priorities andthose of a lot of people and governments."The time has come, said Gerstner, "to step up to thesechallenges... We must do this as individual companies, but alsoas an industry."  He pointed to several effort already underwayto address some of these issues:  "The Worldwide Web Consortiumbased at MIT is working with many companies, including IBM, onfiltering technologies and content rating for parents to use.The Center for Democracy and Technology, also with the support ofmany companies and advocacy groups, is working on free speech andchild protection.  And trade associations like the ComputerSystems Policy Project are working on privacy and cryptography."While these organizations "have a lot of good thinking underway," said Gerstner, "we have to be careful not to confuseactivity with results... We've got to lead, rather than be led."Referring to such monumental events in history as the inventionsof the printing press and the incandescent light bulb, Gerstnernoted that it is "extraordinary and rare -- and humbling --opportunity to earn a place in history.  I, for one, think wewill.  I think we will make our visions reality.  I think that asstewards of our industry, we will step up to the challenges ofsocial responsibility."Gerstner summed up his vision of the industry's future with aninspirational call to arms.  "We will improve the world, and theway we work, the way we communicate and live and learn as people.I'm excited about that," he said.  "That's why as much as I'vetalked to you today about various phases of computing, I alsowanted to emphasize that we must now also pass into a new phaseas an industry."We have grown, we have innovated, and we have prospered at arate unsurpassed by any other.  It's been an amazing,breathtaking ride.  It can continue -- and accelerate -- if weremember that our future rests on how well we respond to thetotal needs of society and of our customers all around theworld."Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    The January 1996 issue of CD-ROM Professional includes ao    The January 1996 issue of CD-ROM Professional includes aspecial feature on the new Blue Book specification, "The EvolvingMarket for Enhanced CDs:  Blue Book Blues," by Debbie GalanteBlock (Online Inc., 462 Danbury Road, Wilton CT -6897-2126,203/761-2466).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    The January 1996 issue of Internet World features "The Besto    The January 1996 issue of Internet World features "The Bestand Worst of 1995," a year-end review of the top Internet-relatednews stories, the top Web sites, and the most influential peopleinvolved with the Internet (20 Ketchum Street, Westport CT 06880,203/341-2872, fax 203/454-5840).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    The January 1996 issue of PC Graphics & Video offerso    The January 1996 issue of PC Graphics & Video offers"Mastering Video CDs" by Steve Gillmor.  This article provides asurvey of digital video production -- from high-end digital videosystems to CD-ROM technology (Suite 600, 201 East SandpointeAvenue, Santa Ana CA 92707, 714/513-8400, fax 714/513-8612).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996o    YOU magazine, a quarterly visual lifestyle journal createdo    YOU magazine, a quarterly visual lifestyle journal createdspecifically for the World Wide Web, has made its debut online.YOU was founded by Tom Soulanille of Presence Information Designand is located at http://youmag.com.  Future editions of YOU willbe sponsorship supported and "javatized" using Sun's Javaprogramming language.  For further editorial or sponsorshipinformation contact the editor at:  editor@youmag.com (175 SouthFair Oaks Avenue, Pasadena CA 91105, 818/405-9971, fax 818/405-1817).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Multimedia Partnering:  A Clash of CulturesBy Harrison M. RoseSENIOR CONTRIBUTING EDITOR -- WEST COASTIn the November issue of Multimedia Monitor, this column focusedon raising money for multimedia production and development(Monitor 11/95 p16).  This month, we will discuss multimediapartnerships, with an emphasis on the people part of theequation.One way of looking at multimedia is through the convergence ofdigital technology development and creative media development.With this convergence comes the cultural clashes of language,thought processes, deal making, and, especially, ego.  Manymultimedia industry participants are aware of the differencesarising from the conflicting methods of doing business, but theconflicts of goals and ideals can be just as big a problem.Though these problems are always there, the enthusiasm and spiritof the entrepreneurial effort will often mask them, hiding themfrom view -- only to have them come out to the deal-killingforeground right when the legal groundwork is being laid to makethe deal real.  Avoiding the legal issues only make matters worsein the long run, and trying to deal with the matters right upfront can destroy the project by souring the creative juices.There is no easy time to get it right, especially when thepartners are in a rush to bring the project together.  If the potis big enough, and all of the necessary team members have enoughshared vision to either set their egos aside or to invest theiregos in the project, then the project has a good chance tosucceed.  However, often team members' personal goals are notaligned with the project's goals.  This divergence becomescritical when the misalignment is over the long-term purpose ofthe venture -- is this to be an on-going business, or is this aone-time project that may lead to additional projects in thefuture?The creative teams that produce intellectual property in themovie business have a long history of "being virtual."  Many willgo from project to project together, adding value from theirhistory of working together, but there is no long-term commitmentto building added value.  In the software industry, only contractprogrammers work to build such commitments.  Many executives,marketers, and software developers (who prefer employmentpositions over consulting contracts) see themselves in thebusiness of creating living products.  While most media-basedentertainment producers expect their participation to end oncethe product ships (with the exception of public relations andsome marketing activity), software developers build productsexpecting them to require after market service and support.While entertainment producers may license previously existingmedia (e.g., movie rights for a published book) or producesequels, software developers constantly build the new productionfrom scratch -- leveraging previously developed code, concepts,or technologies.Some entertainment producers, such as television producers ormagazine publishers, amortize creative costs over a series ofrelated story-line products.  With TV series, for example, majorsets will support several episodes, possibly the whole series,like Star Trek:  Voyager.  Currently, multimedia titles do nothave available audiences the size of a television show or motionpicture.  Therefore, amortizing creative costs over a series ofCD-ROM titles is not currently in vogue.  In time, it willprobably come to be so.  The size of the installed base for theCD-ROM and Internet markets (and maybe in several years,Interactive TV) will grow to allow the cost-benefit equation tofit the new creative medium.Multimedia developers, especially ones seeking venture capitalfunding, will often amortize the cost of the technology engineover several proposed titles, while traditional film and videoproducers build the technology for one-time usage and thereforeaccount for it on a cost basis.  Besides the accounting issue,herein lies an obvious strategic-level conflict:  Softwaredevelopers need to plan for multiple titles, while entertainmentproducers plan single titles.On 8 November 1995, the Los Angeles, California-based law firm ofIrell & Manella, which specializes in "hightechnology/multimedia/intellectual property law," held a seminarin Menlo Park, California on Building Multimedia Alliances andMaking Them Work.  (Call them at 310/277-1010 for futureseminars.) Partners Roger Steinberg, Lois J.  Scali, and TheodoreE.  Guth, used a hypothetical situation to demonstrate the fourmajor recurring issues that groups face when negotiating analliance, whether formulating a single project or a new business:exclusivity, termination, compensation, and control.  "Timing" isa fifth and separate issue."Exclusivity" refers to the issue of deciding who may work forothers.  For example, take a record company entering into analliance with a multimedia developer.  To what extent can themultimedia developer produce competitive products for otherrecord companies? On the other side, can the record company useother multimedia developers? Another aspect of this issue,especially seen here in the Silicon Valley and other hightechnology centers, is the issue of time.  How much of the timeand staff will each devote to the venture? Creative mediaproducers often will have many projects going at the same time.Software developers, who devote significant thought and effort toany given project, will commonly work on only one project at atime.  A software development executive may have several teamsworking on several projects, but rarely will the hands-onsoftware folk work on several projects at the same time.Another view of exclusivity is commitment.  If the principals ofa new start-up are not willing to be essentially exclusive to thestart-up, potential financial backers will flee.  They will tellyou, "Why should I put money into something of yours that you arenot committed to?" It appears that many members of the creativemedia production community don't understand this concept, sincethey have the experience of successfully raising funds forindividual projects.  This cultural conflict of focus can kill adeal, as well, especially one that is attempting to raise venturecapital.  Because the market size in the multimedia universe issubstantially smaller, the risk is greater and the potentialreturn on investment more difficult to project.With "termination" comes all the attending issues of dividing therevenue streams, equity, and derivative values.  Who owns theintellectual property, especially the new derivative product? Ifthere is a split-up, how do the parties divide the residualrevenues? What are the circumstances by which one person can walkand start another business? Sometimes things don't work outbecause constraints keep one partner from unexpectedopportunities.  For example, What if Disney offers your creativepartner an unbelievably rich opportunity? How could she say,"No?" More to the point, why should she say, "No?""Compensation" covers the whole set of issues of who puts in themoney; how do they get recovery; how are the risks distributed;and what are the relative values of intellectual property,contacts, and abilities? When it is difficult to projectrevenues, as happens with multimedia content products,negotiating the revenue split becomes a problem.  Once you choosethe method of dividing income (which may have the initial revenuegoing to pay back the investor), then control of costs becomes anissue.  A project may generate subsequent value for themultimedia developer's business that the partners feel shouldbenefit all partners.  As Steinberg says, "If the alliance is ajoint venture, there is always spill-over from the good willcreated by the joint venture to the individual companies.  Forexample, a multimedia developer getting more independent workbased on the joint venture, could pay royalty to the jointventure or other partners."When determining relative values contributed by the founders of anew venture, it is relatively unimportant who came up with theinitial idea.  You have to ask what team you need to make theventure fly, and recruit the missing members through equity andother incentives.  To work out all of these issues, the proposedteam members need to engage in much dialog.  Theodore Guthobserves, "You often have to make a lot of these decisions beforeyou know the result."When the joint venture is between existing companies, morecomplex solutions are proposed.  "Complex solutions have theirown costs," Guth adds.  "Most end up with a 50-50 solution."  Oneof the most difficult problems, however, is that, "models andlanguage between software and entertainment [companies] are verydifferent.  You have to listen to their language in theircontext.  However," notes Guth, "these complex models helpminimize the risk.  The complexity rises as you deal with largercompanies."An important reality check before initiating one of theseprojects is the budget.  Ask the partners, "Do you realize howmany units you have to sell to provide a break-even?" Gooddistribution is a necessity, because it is critical to thesuccess of the venture.  When the average price of a title drops,the margins are hit hard.  If neither partner brings distributionto the venture, then the venture has to establish a channel --which can be very expensive and difficult to accomplish."Control" is the big bugaboo!  No matter how well the people getalong, there needs to be a designated method for tie-breaking.Sometimes, it is a definition of who makes what kinds ofdecisions.  Sometimes, it is a designated outside board memberwho sits in as arbitrator.  If the team members' visions are incompetition, then there will be conflict.  In multimedia, "youare making decisions with people that you don't have twenty yearsof experience with," points out Ms.  Scali.  "Don't get tooquickly to a form, business model, relationships, etc., beforeforming the corporation."This is especially true when bargaining with larger partners,such as between a small multimedia development group and a largerecord producer.  According to the attorneys from Irell &Manella, "The general perception when a break up occurs isnegative to the small company, regardless of reason.  Bargainingpower for the little company declines over time as you approachthe crisis point of effectiveness."  This is an important point -- don't believe you are irreplaceable.The issue of "timing" is a general issue for all alliances, jointventures, and business development.  Who do you bring in, at whatpoint, and at what cost? As the project advances, the variableschange values.  For example, a major challenge that often causesalliances problems over time is that people often forget thatalliances need to be maintained.  As Guth puts it, "Like amarriage, there is a lot of work that goes into maintaining analliance.  What are the pressures your champion faces within theorganization?" He strongly recommends periodically reflecting onwhat's happening with your alliance partner.  Check your contractregularly to see how it applies as your business and the alliancedevelop and change over time.As a profound example, consider the recent events at Kaleida (asreported in last month's Multimedia Monitor).  Calliope Media'sCEO Jay Haifitz told me in response to the impending shut down,"The announcement came as a complete shock.  Some people likesurprises, and I'm not one of them.  This was not a goodsurprise."  In fact, Calliope Media was quite embarrassed by it.When the announcement came, the company was at Comdexdemonstrating the first consumer title to be based on ScriptX."We were in a booth beating a drum very loudly," Haifitz recalls.The attorneys from Irell & Manella point out, "The tension youhave between the two models, Hollywood versus Silicon Valley, isabsolutely real.  You need to ask the right questions and use thesame language."  They continue, "You can satisfy missing needswith additional alliances.  There has to be a fundamental buyinginto a common vision to make it work.  Otherwise, it could end upwith one person being the company and the other being aconsultant."As a real world example of how difficult these issues really are,consider a recent business deal I was trying to put together witha highly talented group of movie makers who moved to the SiliconValley.  They had outlined a series of projects that had littlecohesion, while expressing the desire to build a digital studiowith long-term value goals.  I saw this as an opportunity tomarry several technologies and create a "21st centuryentertainment company" that could produce digital interactive andlinear product for multiple distribution channels with inter-channel leverage.  Several of their planned productions could bedovetailed with a little planning.  They agreed, and we startedworking together.  I began to pull the technical and businessteams together.  Suddenly, the deal hit a major road bump,because of a cultural conflict.In this case, the cultural conflict was essentially a question ofcontrol.  These movie makers had left Hollywood to gain controlover the creative process and feared the possible control that aCEO and board of directors would have over them.  By using acreative organizational structure, I thought we had solved thisissue, only to have it resurface when they sought legal adviceabout the structure -- without me.  The legal advice theyreceived caused them to collapse the structure and, hence, thedeal.Attorneys will give you advice based upon the information thatyou give them.  If they do not have all the information -- whichthey never do -- their advice will reflect this knowledge gap.Lawyers rarely ask about the underlying issues.  This isespecially true during a preliminary information meeting, sincethe attorney is trying to win you as a client at this point.When you seek legal counsel about setting up a partnership or newcorporate structure, all parties should be present.  You shouldhave separate counsel, as well, to represent your own interests.Remember, if the deal is killed, then there are no interests toprotect.During the formative period, conflicts between partners or teammembers will occur.  One of the parties -- preferably the team'sleader -- should have the training or ability to negotiate andsettle conflicts by raising the actual issues out of the muck andmire of the specific circumstances.  (I recommend the classicGetting To Yes by Roger Fisher, published by Houghton Mifflin, ifthis technique if it is new to you.) People make the business --and multimedia requires many kinds of people.  The process isvery difficult -- but, potentially, very rewarding.Next month:  Harrison Rose looks at the new and updatedmultimedia and Web development tools presented at MacWorld.Harrison M.  Rose is a leading analyst and independent consultantin the interactive content industries of multimedia and theInternet.  As the Senior Contributing Editor -- West Coast forMultimedia Monitor, Rose writes a regular column on issuesimportant to the multimedia developer and new media producer.Formerly, he was Editor-in-Chief of Converge -- The MultimediaDeveloper's Resource.  Rose may be reached at PO Box 70758,Sunnyvale CA 94086, 408/245-0470, e-mail:  ConvergeNL@aol.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 19963DO Reports Second Quarter ResultsThe 3DO Company reported that for the second quarter ended 30September 1995, it had a net loss of $8.8 million, or ($0.34) pershare, against a loss of $12.8 million, or ($0.55) per share, forthe same period one year ago.  Revenue in the quarter rose 42percent to $7.1 million from $5 million last year.  Publishingrevenues rose more than fivefold in the second quarter to $2.7million -- up from $500,000 in the second quarter of last year.Meanwhile, royalties and pressing fees roses to $2.8 million from$2.3 million.``We're feeling pretty good these days,'' said Trip Hawkins (3DOchairman and chief executive officer).  "... The big increase inrevenues should continue in the current quarter.'' Hawkins saidhe expects 3DO to turn a profit in its fourth fiscal quarterending March 1996, but does not expect a full year profit beforefiscal 1997, which begins in April (600 Galveston Drive, RedwoodCity CA 94063-4746, 415/261-2792).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Study Shows Apple's Worldwide Market Share is UpAccording to Dataquest Inc.'s preliminary results for the thirdcalendar quarter of 1995, Apple Computer Inc.'s worldwide marketshare rose to 9.0 percent -- up from 7.4 percent in the secondcalendar quarter of 1995.  Compaq, with a worldwide market shareof 10.5 percent, still holds the lead.  Dataquest cited healthyUS sales and Apple's continued strength in the education andconsumer markets as factors influencing the company's increasedmarket share."These findings illustrate the vitality of the Macintosh platformaround the world," said Michael Spindler (president of Apple)."Clearly, our strategic focus on key customer segments isincreasing customer acceptance, and helping us achieve ourdesired goal of overall increased market share" (Apple, LynneKeast, One Infinite Loop, Cupertino CA 95014, 408/974-5431;Dataquest, 408/437-8000).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Hall Dickler Forecasts Says Internet Lawsuits InevitableIn its annual ADLAW Forecast, Hall Dickler Kent Friedman & Woodoffers some predictions for advertisers and the Internet in 1996:Calling cyberspace "a virtual free for all," Doug Wood (HallDickler executive partner) said that "reckless abandon will causea plethora of lawsuits in 1996."  In the rush to create a Webpresence, more and more agencies and advertisers will be facedwith lawsuits over copyright and trademark infringement, privacyrights, and union talent claims, predicts Hall Dickler."Agencies and advertisers are simply not exercising their usualrestraint," said Wood.  "Many are ignoring third-party rights asthey enter cyberspace."Wood also predicted that 1996 will see the first major libel caseagainst an advertiser or an advertising agency for its billboardor "chat" locations.  "Unlike Prodigy and Compuserve, which bothhad novel defenses as publishers and common carriers in recentcases, those same defenses will fail in an action against anadvertiser or agency," said Wood.The Hall Dickler forecast also suggests that as the Web explodes,the big online services will make major attempts to control morepages and domains in order to prevent opening competition toindependent server providers.  "Antitrust lawsuits andinvestigations will spring up in reaction to brutal competitionand business failures by independents," according the report (9093rd Avenue, New York NY 10022-4731, 212/339-5400).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996IDC/LINK Says International Market Hot for Home PCsIn its Global New Media Consumer Survey, IDC/LINK said that bythe end of 1995, consumer PC shipments to Europe, Asia, andPacific Rim were expected to outpace shipments to the US by 34percent ($22 billion versus $16 billion).  By the year 2000,consumers in international markets are forecast to spend morethan $48 billion on home PCs, exceeding by 78 percent USestimated expenditures of $27 billion, according to the report.The Global New Media Consumer Survey also notes that 20.4 millionhouseholds in the United States, Europe, and Asia-Pacific Rimowned multiple PCs in 1995 -- a figure IDC/LINK expects will morethan double to 50 million households by the year 2000.Additionally, repeat buyers are more likely to purchase the samebrand as their current PC.The Global New Media Consumer Survey was based on primaryresearch gathered through telephone and in-home interviews withmore than 15,000 households in the United States, France,Germany, United Kingdom, Australia, China, Hong Kong, India,Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and Taiwan (Suite 1420, 2 ParkAvenue, New York NY 10016, 212/726-0900).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Consumer CD-ROM Titles in Print Up 93 Percent in 1995, SaysInfoTechAccording to its year-end survey of the CD-ROM industry, InfoTechreports that consumer CD-ROM titles in print grew from 2,032 in1994 to 3,919 in 1995 -- an increase of 93 percent.  However,retail shelf space increased just 24 percent over 1994.  With themajority of US retailers stocking just slightly more than 250titles, few of thousands of titles in print get any significantUS retail distribution.  According to InfoTech president JulieSchwerin, it is the "established publishers with a track recordof hit titles and captive distribution arms" that attain thebreadth of distribution necessary for success.The average shelf life of consumer CD-ROM titles has decreasedfrom 130 in 1994 to 102 in 1995; the shelf life of titles in thehighly competitive games category can be considerably shorter."A new title must sell-through strongly immediately at launch,"said Schwerin.  "If not, there are 15 other titles waiting totake its place."  This strong competition also has contributed toa 21 percent decline in retail weighted average selling pricesfor consumer titles.Nevertheless, publishers remain "enthusiastic," according toInfoTech, which predicts an increase of 42 percent in the numberof titles in print during 1996 (against a 20 to 25 percent growthrate in the retail channel).  "As the industry consolidates andproduct lines are rationalized, we expect the rate of growth intitles in print to slow to around 30 percent in 1997," saidSchwerin (Box 150, Skyline Drive, Woodstock VT 05091, 802/763-2097, fax 802/763-2098).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996Zona Says Consumer Potential of Internet Over-HypedIn its new study entitled Internet vs.  Intranet:  Markets,Opportunities, and Trends, Zona Research Inc.  says the goldenopportunity for Internet technologies lies not in consumer-oriented commerce across the 'Net, but in applying Internettechnologies within organizations:  "The Intranet.""Based on our surveys and analysis of Internet domaindistribution, online service customers, and other availablesurveys, we conclude that the prospects for commercial consumeruse of the Internet are vastly overstated," said Stephen Auditore(president, Zona).  In fact, Zona estimates that there are lessthan six million commercial online service subscribers who evenpossess the connectivity underlying technology to use the WorldWide Web.  "The notion of tens of millions of consumers jumpingonline, exercising their purchase prerogative, is grossly over-hyped," Auditore said."The real market potential for Intranet technology -- servers,browsers, indexers, retrieval and authoring systems, and otherrelated technologies," said Auditore, "will exceed $400 millionfor 1995."  With more than 15 million users who have aninfrastructure in place allowing them to use the World Wide Web,organizations and enterprises will be able to more easilyquantify the benefits associated with using Internet technologiesfor internal communication and productivity enhancements, Zonacontends.  Internet vs.  Intranet:  Markets, Opportunities andTrends is 170+ plus pages and is priced at $895 (Suite 102A, 497Seaport Court, Redwood City CA 94063, 415/568-5700, fax 415/306-2420, e-mail:  info@xbg.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996STOCK MARKET REPORTCOMPANY          SYMBOL    11/27/95   12/26/95    Month     Year3DO              O THDO    10.250     9.875      -0.375    -2.250ACTV             O IATV     3.500     3.750      +0.250    -1.250A&T              O AATI    13.250    13.875      +0.625    -1.625Apple Cmp        O AAPL    40.000    32.000      -8.000    -8.500C Cube           O CUBE    84.500    63.000     -21.500   +45.250Capitol MM       O CDIM     5.625     4.500      -1.125    +0.375Dataware         O DWTI    11.000     8.500      -2.500    -2.750Davidson         O DAVD    23.875    20.250      -3.625    -5.250Dig Equip        N DEC     53.375    64.000     +10.625   +31.625Educ Cmp         N ECC      9.875    10.250      +0.375    -0.625Electronic Arts  O ERTS    33.000    24.625      -8.375    +6.250Flt Safety       O FSI     51.375    50.750      -0.625   +11.500Futuremedia      O FMDAY    1.500     1.250      -0.250    -0.875Gametek          O GAME     2.000     1.625      -0.375    -1.750General Magic*   O GMGC    10.375    11.000      +0.625    -6.250Geoworks         O GWRX    16.250    18.500      +2.250   +12.000Graphix Zone     O GZON     6.500     5.875      -0.625    +1.875Hitachi          N HIT    100.500   100.375      -0.125   +10.625Hypermedia       O HYPR     5.000     3.750      -1.250    -1.750IBM Corp         N IBM     96.750    92.125      -4.625   +20.000Image Enter      O DISK     6.375     7.750      +1.375    +0.125Inds Trg Cp      O ITCC     9.750     8.875      -0.875    +1.750Integrated Sys*  O INTS    38.250    38.000      -0.250   +16.750Intel            O INTC    62.125    59.500      -2.625   +24.750IVI Publishing   O IVIP    11.250    13.000      +1.750    +2.250Jostens Inc.     N JOS     24.125    24.750      +0.625    +6.375Macromedia       O MACR    43.000    46.750      +3.750   +33.188MecklerMedia     O MECK    13.750    13.750        --     +10.750Microsoft        O MSFT    88.875    90.500     +1.625    +29.375MicroTouch       O MTSI    15.125    12.250     -2.875    -26.2503M Corp          N MMM     64.750    63.625     -1.125    +11.250Netscape*        O NSCP   113.500   144.000    +30.500    +85.750Natl Ed Cp       N NEC      8.000     8.125     +0.125     +4.250NTN              A NTN      4.500     4.375     -0.125     -1.750Oracle*          O ORCL    46.375    44.000     -2.375     +0.875Philips NV       N PHG     38.125    36.375     -1.750     +4.750Pioneer          N PIO     16.750    18.625     +1.875     -3.250Quixote          O QUIX     8.375     7.875     -0.500     -2.375Reflectone       O RFTN    14.000    13.750     -0.250     +4.000Sanctuary Wds    O SWMCF    4.500     3.250     -1.250     +0.125Sandy Corp       A SDY     12.250    11.750     -0.500     +4.750Sierra Online    N SIER    28.750    28.500     -0.250     -3.000Sony Corp        N SNE     52.250    58.375     +6.125     +8.750Tandy Corp       N TAN     46.625    40.750     -5.875     -4.750Vid Jukebox      O JUKE     2.250     1.000     -1.250     -1.000(N) = New York Stock Exchange(A) = American Stock Exchange(O) = Over-the-Counter/NASDAQFor companies that are marked with an asterisk (*), the figurethat appears under "Yearly Change" indicates variance sinceinitial public offering and may represent less than a 12-monthcycle.Is your multimedia-intensive, publicly-traded company listed inour stock market report? Call our offices today:  703/241-1799.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996January5 - 8:  1996 International Winter Consumer Electronics Show, LasVegas NV.  Electronic Industries Association, 703/907-7600.9 - 12:  Macworld/San Francisco, San Francisco CA.  Mitch HallAssociates, 617/551-9800, fax 617/440-0357.14 - 16:  ISA Second Annual State of the Industry StrategicBusiness Meeting, Miami FL.  Interactive Services Association,301/495-4955, fax 301/495-4959.14 - 18:  PTC 96 -- The Information Infrastructure:  Users,Resources, and Strategies, Honolulu HI.  PacificTelecommunications Council, 808/941-3789, fax 808/944-4874.16 - 19:  HealthInfo West, San Diego CA.  Managed Health CareInstitute, 617/270-6038.17 - 19:  MPEG and Video CD, Los Angeles CA.  UCLA Extension,310/825-3344, fax 310/206-2815.17 - 19:  Universal Service 96, Washington DC.  BRP, 202/842-3022x317 or 800/822-MEET.17 - 20:  Medicine Meets Virtual Reality:  Health Care in theInformation Age, San Diego CA.  UCSD School of Medicine andAligned Management Associates, 619/751-8841, fax 619/751-8842.18 - 19:  Online Strategies for Book Publishers, New York NY.AIC Conferences, 212/952-1899 or 800/409-4242, fax 212/248-7374.18 - 20:  Technology, Reading & Learning Difficulties, SanFrancisco CA.  Educational Computer Conferences, 510/222-1249 or800/255-2218.21 - 23:  1996 Videomaker Expo, Burbank CA.  Videomaker Expo,916/891-8410, fax 916/891-8443.22 - 23:  Multimedia Market West, Beverly Hills CA.  KPMG PeatMarwick and Red Herring, 415/865-2277 x211.22 - 23:  Inter.Promo, San Francisco CA.  Institute forInternational Research, 800/999-3123, fax 800/959-9644.22 - 23:  System Design for Testability, Monterey CA.  UCCE,818/995-6335, fax 818/995-2932.23 - 24:  The Digital Frontier:  Opportunities for Entrepreneurs,Evanston IL.  Northwestern University, 312/409-3700.24 - 25:  2nd Interactive Television International Summit,London, England.  IIR Limited, +44 171 915 5055.25 - 26:  Online Law, San Francisco CA.  Glasser LegalWorks,201/890-0008, fax 201/890-0042.29 - 30:  Digital Publishing Symposium, New York NY.  Institutefor International Research, 800/999-3123 or 212/661-8740, fax800/9959-9644.29 - 30:  Business-to-Business Marketing on the Internet, SanFrancisco CA.  Institute for International Research, 800/999-3123or 212/661-8740, fax 800/9959-9644.29 January - 1 February:  ComNet Conference & Expo, WashingtonDC.  Mitch Hall Associates, 617/551-9800 or 800/945-3313, fax617/440-0357.30:  In-Home Networks Workshop, Dallas TX.  Parks Associates,214/490-1113.30 January - 1 February:  SoftExpo 96, Santa Clara CA.  SoftwarePublisher, 800/803-9488 or 303/745-5711, fax 303/745-5712.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996February5 - 6:  Vertical Software Marketing 96, Santa Clara CA.  UnitedCommunications Group, 800/929-4824 x684, fax 301/816-8945.6 - 7:  1996 Communications Business & Finance Conference, NewYork NY.  BRP, 202/842-3022 x317 or 800/822-MEET.9 - 12:  MILIA 96, Cannes, France.  Reed Midem Organisation Inc.,212/689-4220, fax 212/689-4348.12 - 13:  Video Conferencing, Atlanta GA.  Institute forInternational Research, 800/999-3123 or 212/661-8740, fax800/9959-9644.12 - 15:  1996 Western Communications Forum, Dallas TX.International Engineering Consortium, 312/938-3500, fax 312/938-8787.12 - 15:  8th Annual Networks Expo Boston, Boston MA.  BlenheimGroup USA Inc., 800/829-3976 x9346.13 - 15:  Virtual Government Conference, Tysons Corner VA.  AFCEAInternational and Spago & Associates, 703/631-6200, fax 703/818-9177.19 - 21:  EMail World, Web World, & Internet Expo, San Jose CA.DCI, 508/470-3880, fax 508/470-0526.21 - 22:  Marketing Financial Products & Services on theInternet, Chicago IL.  International Business Communications,508/481-6400, fax 508/481-7911.20 - 22:  Computers in Libraries, Oxford, England.  LearnedInformation, +44/1865 730275, fax +44/1865 736354.21 - 23:  Orlando Multimedia 96, Kissimmee FL.  Society forApplied Learning Technology, 540/347-0055 or 800/457-6812.22 - 23:  Interactive Advertising Strategies for Agencies, NewYork NY.  Center for Business Intelligence, 800/767-9499 or617/270-6200, fax 617/270-6216.21 - 24:  Interactive Newspapers 96, San Francisco CA.  TheKelsey Group, 609/921-7200, fax 609/921-2112.22 - 23:  ATM 96, Orlando FL.  ICM Conferences Inc., 312/540-3859, fax 312/540-3015.26 - 27:  BISC 96 -- Barbados Information Services Conference,Barbados, West Indies.  BIDC, 212/867-6420, fax 212/682-5496.26 - 28:  Consumer Online Services III, New York NY.  JupiterCommunications, 800/488-4345, fax 212/780-6075.28 February - 1 March:  Profiting from Your Internet MarketingInvestment, New York NY.  Strategic Research Institute, 800/599-4950.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996March2 - 6:  Software Publishers Association 1996 Spring Symposium,San Francisco CA.  SPA, 202/452-1600 x339, fax 202/785-3649.4 - 6:  13th Annual Midwest Education and Technology Conference,Saint Louis MO.  Cooperating School Districts, 314/692-1250.4 - 7:  Intermedia World 96, San Francisco CA.  Reed ExhibitionCompanies, 203/840-5634, fax (c/o ARI) 214/466-4611.8 - 17:  South by Southwest Music & Media Conference, Austin TX.SXSW, 512/467-7979, fax 512/451-0754.10 - 12:  Mastering Multimedia:  Using Computer Technology forNursing Education, Atlanta GA.  FITNE, 614/592-2511.11:  Multimedia Now:  Publisher Strategies for Competing &Winning, New York NY.  Simba Information, 203/834-0033 x124, fax203/834-177111 - 13:  16th Annual Microcomputers in Education Conference,Tempe AZ.  Arizona State University, 602/965-7363, fax 602/965-8887.13 - 16:  SITE 96 -- Society for Information Technology andTeacher Education, Phoenix AZ.  Association for the Advancementof Computing in Education, 804/973-3987, fax 804/978-7449.14 - 17:  CeBIT Hannover 96, Hannover, Germany.  Hannover FairsUSA Inc., 609/987-1202, fax 609/987-0092.16 - 19:  Age of Interactive Entertainment, Palm Springs CA.Institute for International Research, 212/661-3500 or 800/345-8016, fax 212/661-6677 or 800/999-3123.17 - 20:  International Conference on Technology and Education --ICTE New Orleans 96, New Orleans LA.  ICTE/USA, 817/534-1220, fax817/534-0096.17 - 20:  Interactive Entertainment Congress 96, Palm Springs CA.Institute for International Research, 800/999-3123 or 212/661-8740, fax 800/9959-9644.20 - 21:  Kids & Interactive Media Conference, Santa Monica CA.World Research Group, 800/647-7600, fax 212/421-7325.25 - 27:  Internet & Electronic Commerce Conference and Expo, NewYork NY.  Expocon Management Associates Inc., 203/256-4700 x100,fax 203/256-4730.27 - 29:  Establishing a Web Presence, Los Angeles CA.  UCLAExtension, 310/825-3344, fax 310/206-2815.28 - 29:  Intelligent Set-Top Boxes, San Francisco CA.  Institutefor International Research, 800/999-3123 or 212/661-8740, fax800/9959-9644.31 March - 2 April:  58th Annual Conference of the InternationalTechnology Education Association, Phoenix AZ.  ITEA, 703/860-2100, fax 703/860-0353.Back to Headline List CopyrightMULTIMEDIA MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996And Furthermore ...o    1 - 3 April:  New Technologies for Directory Publishers,Washington DC.  The Kelsey Group, 609/921-7200, fax 609/921-2112.o    4 - 7 April:  AsiaComm 96, Bangkok, Thailand.  ReedExhibition Companies, 203/840-5402, fax 203/840-9337.o    9 - 11 April:  Online Marketplace 96, Chicago IL.  JupiterCommunications, 212/780-6060, fax 212/780-6075.o    14 - 17 April:  High Tech Direct 2000, New Orleans LA.  CMPPublications, 800/711-4832, fax 516/733-6721.o    22 - 25 April:  Fiesta Informacion 96, San Antonio TX.AFCEA, 210/524-2871, fax 210/524-2802.o    24 - 26 April:  Computers in Healthcare Education Symposium,Philadelphia PA.  Health Sciences Libraries Consortium, 215/222-1532.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-6IA059-000323-B025-139http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec40.html 205.156.212.5 19970114222639 text/html 267090HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:22:41 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:52 GMTContent-length: 266902Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec40.html Sample Issue Copyright NETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNet January 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WHAT'S INSIDE Fancy Passes Are Probably Just Passing Fancies (1036 words) LETTERS Letters: Generation X.500 (179 words) Letters: The Net Dimension (75 words) Letters: Dream A Wireless Dream (333 words) Letters: Tape Rewind (191 words) Letters: Correction (30 words) THE H REPORT -- NEWS, TRENDS AND ANALYSIS It's Quiet Out There... (167 words) ATM Forum To Downsize (145 words) Auto Network Goes Virtual (126 words) NT Shares Room With A SystemView (203 words) Statshot: Internet A Hit With IS Managers (84 words) BuzzNet (47 words) Quick Bits: It's A TV! Poof! It's A Phone! (56 words) Quick Bits: The Wrist Risk Of The '90s? (105 words) THE H REPORT: CONTEXT -- BACKGROUND NEWS ANALYSIS Which Operating System For Your 'Intranet' (1140 words) THE H REPORT -- INTERNET Cisco Acquisition Deals Blow To IPv6 (199 words) The Internet Hit List (221 words) V-ONE Chisels Commerce Drawbridge In Internet Firewalls (191 words) COLUMNISTS The Networkologist: Salary Survey Shows Satisfaction (667 words) FreeWire: A New Year And Some New Challenges (1463 words) Corporate View: Businet: A Call To Arms Within The Internet (1018 words) SNEAK PREVIEWS Novell XTD: Message To The Wise (338 words) NetWare 4.1 Climbs To New Heights With SMP (545 words) Lotus Notes 4 Throws Down Messaging Gauntlet (981 words) Single Object Store Remains In Notes 4 (62 words) FEATURES The Riches Of Switches -- 12 Affordable, Fast, High-Qualilty Ethernet Switches Under $250 Per Port (3295 words) Putting Ethernet Switches To The Test (233 words) Classic Bridges vs. Switches (150 words) Middleware -- Driving Applications On the Network (4037 words) CENTERFOLD The Redeeming Qualities Of Val-Pak's Network (466 words) REVIEWS Serving Up HTML Documents On The Web (3613 words) Web Servers: A Status Update (403 words) How We Tested: Hardware And Operating Systems (547 words) Network Analyzers Race To Capture Fast Ethernet But Need To Rev Their Engines (1957 words) How We Tested Fast Ethernet Analyzers (343 words) 20 V.34 PC (Politically Correct) Card Modems Can't Change The Weather (2020 words) Whatever Happened To IBM and US Robotics? (157 words) Online Services And The Internet: The Network Manager's Friend Or Foe? (2058 words) Online Services Pricing And Payment Options (87 words) Other Internet Access Options Are In The Wings (223 words) COLUMNISTS On The Edge: ATM: Ready Or Not? Here It Comes! (1693 words) WORKSHOPS Middleware & Cross-Platform Development: To DB2 From The Desktop: Too Many Ways (1888 words) COLUMNISTS Net Results: The Sweet Music Of Network Management (1382 words) E-Mail & Messaging: Adding Interactive Services To Your Web Server (3378 words) E-Mail & Messaging: Sample File: DIRSEARCH.CMD (100 words) E-Mail & Messaging: ISINDEX Replacement (30 words) BUYER'S GUIDE Fast Networking: Appearing In The NIC Of Time (1555 words) Check List: Making Networking Pay Off (48 words) And The Winner Will Be (195 words) PRODUCT UPDATE Product Update (537 words) COLUMNISTS The Last Byte: ISDN Blues: And The Internet Beat Goes On (572 words) CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Fancy Passes Are Probably Just Passing FanciesBy:Fritz NelsonThe first time I saw Magic Johnson play basketball, I was compelledto run to the nearest playground. On that chilly winter day,I discovered the wonders of the no-look pass by drilling theball into the frozen face of an unsuspecting friend.While surprise passes on the playground can make you a legend,either by basket or broken nose, surprise passes in the magazineworld are a constant source of trouble and amusement.For instance, Cisco and NBase submitted products that didn'tqualify for Rob Kohlhepp's cover story on low-cost switches thismonth "The Riches of Switches").  I suppose our product requestletter, which we sent to more than 50 vendors, wasn't explicitabout the price requirement.  Maybe we should have said, "Yourproduct must list for $250 per port or less, and we really meanit."Unfortunately, we did a great deal of switch testing beforewe discovered the little anomaly, using, I think, that famous10th RMON group that reports price per port (RFC $99.99). Ciscooffered a new, adequately priced configuration, so we includedthe company.But I never can tell whether vendors do this on purpose or not.Last year's review of SNMP-manageable UPSes yielded a handfulof UPSes without SNMP capabilities. Perhaps some vendors missedthat requirement in our letter. I can never remember the rule Am I supposed to state the requirement three times, or four?More likely, some vendors didn't support SNMP-they probablydidn't know what it was.No matter. The philosophy, it seems, is just send it, and hopewe don't get our noses bent out of shape.Readers dribble the ball off their feet also.  Some just dribbledown their chin.  This month, one of you sent the followingmessage to Judy Biener, who creates our E-mail Poll "Olde LangSyne and All That Jazz"):  "Judy, There's a dinner in it for youif I win the IBM 360CE Notebookmy treat, anywhere between NYC andNew Hampshire."  As if.Judy's response: "That's a little cheap for a laptop. I'd expectat least dinner and a show." You go girl.Something Up Our SleevesSuch slight-of-hand only takes you so far. Magic Johnson's realtalent, for example, wasn't his wizardry with the ball, buthow effortless he made it seem (and please, old geezers, noletters about Bob Cousy and Earl Monroe). The hard work iswhat lurked somewhere up his sleeve. Art Wittmann and DaveMolta lurk up Network Computing's sleeve. Their voices maybe subtle to some of you, heard only through occasional featurestories or product reviews, but they've firmly guided us withtheir unique real-world perspectives for the past five years.We unleash them this month with their first columns.Art, always the fearless pioneer, will use "On the Edge" toexplore new trends and technology. His column will alternatewith Bill Alderson and Scott Haughdahl's currently running"On the Wire" missives. This month, Art begins on familiarground, with some insights on the latest ATM developments ("ATM Ready or Not? Here It Comes!" page 149), inspired by recentvisits with Cisco and Bay Networks-two vendors who, he says,enjoy getting not-so-subtle digs on one another during hisvisits.Dave's "Net Results" column will alternate with Bruce Robertson's"In the Middle" reports, which is both fitting and ironic.Where Dave has been far more involved behind the scenes, Brucehas had an overt presence since Network Computing began lifefive years ago. But Bruce will be fading away this month ashe begins a new job with The Meta Group, a consulting firmbased in Reston, Va. Although he will continue to write his"In the Middle" column, I will miss his abundant middlewaremetaphors, his insights, his shot-blocking talent, his friendship.He also leaves us with two final masterpieces: "Driving Applicationson the Network," page 68, and "To DB2 From the Desktop: TooMany Ways," page 152.Dave Molta's masterpiece ("The Sweet Music of Network Management,"page 159) kicks off a column that will uncover network managementfrom the inside, exploring how technical managers can workwithin organizations to make a real impact on the bottom line.Dave's impact includes having season tickets to SyracuseUniversity's men's basketball games.  At center court.  Row J.(Want his number?)  Recently, Bruce Boardman was in the SyracuseUniversity lab on a Saturday afternoon, working on his bottomline-turning in this month's review of Fast Ethernet Analyzers"Network Analyzers Race to Capture Fast Ethernet But Need To RevTheir Engines")-when Dave strolled in dangling tickets to thatday's game.  But Bruce turned Dave down so he could finish hisFast Ethernet analyzer testing.  Now that's certainly dedication.Yet, between you and me, I'm just a little bit worried aboutBruce. Dave tells me that when Bruce does go to games, Brucetends to talk about filtering and decoding referee signals.Once he suggested to coach Jim Boeheim that he put a Snifferin the other team's huddle during timeouts. I'm not one topry or, ahem, probe, but I'd suggest Bruce try a little moresocial interaction.Playing Well With OthersMaybe he should take a queue from this month's workshop, "AddingInteractive Services to Your Web Server".  It offers an in-depthexploration of building feedback into your Web server-animportant element, given that much of today's content is, in thewords of Tim Haight, executive editor, about as interactive as aBuckingham Palace guard.The workshop's writer, our former colleague, Eric Hall, who'shad his share of run-ins with a palace guard or two, used severalWeb server products in his testing, but stuck mostly with hisfavorite: O'Reilly Software's WebSite. Meanwhile Syracuse University'sScott Campbell and Josh Linder, and our own Rob Kohlhepp weretesting Web Servers (see "Serving Up HTML Documents on theWeb"), where WebSite did extremely well.Sometimes these things just come together, like a perfect alleyoop pass, or an IBM ThinkPad and a scrumptious meal in NewHampshire.Oh, were you expecting someone else in this space?Fritz Nelson can be reached at fnelson@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Letters: Generation X.500I am still shaking my head in amazement. How can any journalistworth his salt write an article on directory services (BruceRobertson's "Too Many Directories and Too Many Applications,"November 1, 1995, page 119), and fail to include even one referenceto the ISO X.500 directory service standard? Moreover, howcan he have the gall to state, "There is no agreed-upon directorystandard," when an agreed-upon international directory standardis exactly what X.500 is?I understand that there's an obsession today with proprietaryvendor directory standards, but to write about directory servicewithout acknowledging that the problem is being solved in theinternational standards arena strikes me as incompetent journalism.Karen GoertzelManager, International ProgramsSecure Systems and Services OperationWang Federalgoertzek@wangfed.comBruce Robertson replies:X.500 hasn't penetrated corporate application developers outsidethe X.400 e-mail space much. It's not an oversight, just aquestion of focus. If I had included X.500, the overall pointsof the article would not have changed. X.500 is yet anotherdirectory.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Letters: The Net DimensionThanks very much to Patricia Schnaidt for an excellent article,"The Four Dimensions of Net Management," (November 15, 1995,page 31). I couldn't agree with her words more. To quote Schnaidt,"The problem isn't managing any one box-it's managing all ofthem." You might agree IT organizations always lean towardone or the other, sometimes more than one.Joseph Michael EdelenSupervisor,Information TechnologiesSharp (SMT)je@sharpwa.comBack to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Letters: Dream A Wireless DreamI really enjoyed Bill Frezza's piece on the wireless data debacle("Bewildered in the Wireless Market," November 1, 1995, page35). I concur that the writing's on the wall if the astrolabedoesn't start pointing to the right star soon.What of commercial digital cellular? In Europe, GSM and DCS1800 (and soon PCS-1900 in the U.S. and Canada) digital datais "going potty" and then some. People are using PC Cards intheir handheld Psion Series 3a's and others a-plenty. MorePC Card makers are releasing faster, cheaper models for moretypes of handsets. The race is on among vendors to offer customerscompatible software, and it is not through another door inthe wireless data room, but a window in the ceiling-the skylight.No wonder the dedicated packet mobile data offerings have foundit tough-going. The GSM standard, for example, is well underwayin adding a General Digital Packet Data (GDPD) to carry thedata packets so as not to flood voice channels. Tariffing willbe per-second billing on the whole, though some providers maybundle data packet traffic as a USP. Where the existing offeringswill end up is clear: Where they are is where they'll stay.Just because a couple of RD-LAP and Mobitex protocols are heretoday, let's not get confused. Gates will get Teledesic towork with it, too, if the satcomm bubble holds out long enough.Recall CP/M and M/PM. Nothing wrong with them. They just timedout before the market rebooted into another command environment.RD-LAP and Mobitex will have places in wireless history, aswill AMPS, TACS, NMT, C-450, POCSAG and GWBASIC. Let's comparelike with like in the wireless time-continuum. When we realizedthat the radio spectrum was as good for data as it had alwaysbeen for voice, we were guilty of jumping the gun and becomingtoo Asimovian in our dreams of what could be done.Paul QuigleyChairmanSynergisprofessor@cix.compulink.co.ukBack to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Letters: Tape RewindWhile we appreciate Exabyte's EXB-10h and EXB-210 8-mm tapelibraries having been included in Eric Carr's October 1, 1995,autoloader roundup review ("As Storage Needs Grow, Tape AutoloadersHelp Take Away the Pain," page 100), we also want to clearup some incorrect information.Regarding the EXB-10h, several factual errors appeared. TheEXB-10h has neither a bar-code option nor dual-drive capability.In addition, the product identified in the photo on page 102as being an EXB-10h is in fact an EXB-210. And, while the EXB10h and the EXB-210 are stated to be original and second-generationproducts, respectively, they are actually third-generationproducts featuring more robust and reliable designs. As a clarification,the starting price of the EXB-210 is $9,800.It may seem odd for us to wish to point out that the EXB-10hactually has less features than you attributed to it. However,we feel it's important to note that Exabyte offers a familyof tape libraries built to fit a variety of needs within arange of market segments.Mark W. CanrightSenior Vice President, Worldwide Sales and MarketingExabyte Corp.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Letters: CorrectionOur October 1, 1995, Product Update should have stated thatBrooktrout Technology's QuadraFax v2.0 is an integrated faxand voice processing platform that sends and receives faxes.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1It's Quiet Out There...By:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldToo quiet! While Internet security breaches haven't made headlinesrecently, Carnegie Mellon University's CERT Coordination Centerrecently said it is receiving daily reports of "widespreadattacks against Internet sites."CERT spotlighted several trends in a recent advisory: The useof protocol analyzers whose presence on a network is disguisedwith Trojan horse software; exploiting the rpc.updated or loadmodulevulnerabilities to gain root access; using automated toolsto scan sites for NFS and NIS vulnerabilities, and launchingIP spoofing attacks.Additional information about these trends, plus informationand tools to combat them, can be accessed at ftp://info.cert.orgpub/cert_advisories/CA-95:18.README. CERT advisories and bulletinsare posted on the USENET newsgroup comp.security.announce. To be added to the mailing list for CERTadvisories and bulletins, send your e-mail address to certadvisory-request@cert.org. If you see activity indicating anattack in progress, CERT urges you to contact other sites involvedand the service providers, as well as the CERT CoordinationCenter.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1ATM Forum To DownsizeBy:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldThe ATM Forum is about to get a trim, with Chair and PresidentSteve Walters wielding the scissors. Faced with an increasingthreat to desktop ATM by 100-Mbps Ethernet and the uncontrolledgrowth of the Forum, Walters advocates curtailing or cuttingsome of its working groups and forming a management committeeto screen the formation of new ones. Today, about 750 peopleattend the organization's bimonthly week-long meetings, eachof which costs $90,000. Walters says he isn't trying to targetparticular working groups. However, he says it's importantto ATM's desktop positioning to find out quickly whether LANemulation will scale, and to come up with an alternative ifit won't. He also wants to avoid potential overlaps, like thosethat now exist between the Forum's PNNI specification and thework of the Internet Engineering Task Force.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Auto Network Goes VirtualBy:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldEconomics prompted the top three U.S. automakers to restructurethe industry's plans for an exclusive Internet, complete witha network exchange point (See Online News on Network ComputingOnline at http://www.techweb.cmp). The proposal, known as theAutomotive Network eXchange, now calls for traffic betweenthe auto industry and its partners to be mixed with that ofthe public Internet over backbone links. Last November it wasn'tyet clear whether access links would remain pristine or govirtual, according to Chrysler's Fred Hakim. Plans remain inplace to seek better performance, reliability and securityover the Internet through certification of suppliers by an"ANX authority." Hakim says the group hopes to have an RFPavailable in the second quarter.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1NT Shares Room With A SystemViewBy:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldIBM-make that the "new IBM"-tells us to expect a SystemViewmanagement console on Microsoft's NT to ship this year. LynnWilczak, IBM SystemView marketing director also expects betatests to begin early this year on at least one point productthat takes a piece of SystemView-NetView Distribution Managerand couples it with NT. Wilczak says the marriage is one usershave urged. They've also indicated a need for storage managementon NT and NetView on NT (delivered in early fall through acooperative agreement of IBM and Digital Equipment). In earlyDecember, IBM was also expected to announce an object-orientedperformance management architecture for client/server computingon SystemView for AIX. The goal is to measure, centralize andautomate performance management tasks over LANs and WANs toaddress client/server computing. Key to the architecture aresoftware probes that can be deployed on any device, with managementtraffic controlled by user-defined thresholds. Beta testingof the probes was expected to begin last month with managementapplication testing this month. Since May, IBM has announcedSystemView for AIX (shipping), OS/2 (expected to ship by latelast October), MVS (expected by last December) and the AS/400(expected by mid-96)Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Statshot: Internet A Hit With IS ManagersBy:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldA recent Dataquest study shows that IS managers in medium-sizeto large organizations in the U.S. have enthusiastically embracedInternet use. More than 60 percent of the 100 IS decision-makerssurveyed said all their departments had Internet access. Morethan 80 percent considered the Internet a reliable source ofinformation. When asked how they preferred to receive the kindsof information listed below, they chose Internet delivery bythe large percentages shown. More info: (508) 871-6630.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1BuzzNetBy:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldMicrosoft Network. A somewhat inflated name for a very largeWorld Wide Web site.Bermuda Triangle. A subnetwork of the Internet where packetsgo during increasingly frequent periods of router flapping.M.P.O.A. Many Proprietary Objectives for ATM.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Quick Bits: It's A TV! Poof! It's A Phone!By:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldNorthern Telecom must not think cable-telco competition is sofar-fetched. It just freely lent a DMS-500 central office switchto CableLabs. CableLabs' Bob Cruickshank will test local serviceover hybrid fiber/coax first, then interexchange services,to provide one source to hotels for cable, TV, PC and Internetaccess.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Quick Bits: The Wrist Risk Of The '90s?By:Timothy Haight and Christine Hudgins-BonafieldDo you work at a keyboard, travel extensively, feel stressedand forget to eat? Do you come in from the cold and hit thatPC? Are you a woman facing mid-life hormonal changes? All thesefactors-not just ergonomically incorrect furniture-can contributeto repetitive stress injuries. In 15 years, RSI is up from14 to 60 percent of all occupational illnesses. The best preventionbook we've found is Joan Stigliani's The Computer User's SurvivalGuide, O'Reilly & Associates, $21.95.If there is something we ought to know, we welcome proposalsfor articles. Please e-mail us at H-REPORT@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Which Operating System For Your 'Intranet'By:Christine Hudgins-BonafieldIt's enough to make a marketeer drool. By the year 2000, ForresterResearch estimates that the public network server hardwaremarket will hit $2.5 billion, but that's small change. The"intranet" market of corporate networks based on Internet technologyis expected to be five to 10 times larger. With that much atstake, it's little wonder that Jamie Zartman, Meta Group programdirector, compares server manufacturers to 2,000 supertankersmaking a mid-course correction. Just about every operatingsystem from IBM's mainframe-based MVS to Microsoft's NT isbeing repositioned as an Internet server platform. It's tooearly for the prognosticators to single out winners, but thevictor is clear in one large market segment-Internet serviceproviders (ISPs)Among ISPs, Unix rules, and it's worth examining why some ofthe most experienced TCP/IP users refuse even to contemplategiving up the OS. Of course, as Michael O'Dell, UUNET Technologiesvice president of research and development, puts it, Unix "isthe devil you know versus the one you don't." Still, the issueis much larger and has relevance for large intranet buildersas well as those shopping for an ISP.For ISPs, Unix is a natural because the openness of its variantslike Berkeley Software Design Inc. (BSDI) and LINUX-allowseasy access for kernel performance tweaking as well as securityenhancements. Many ISPs also insist that only Unix providesthe scalability they need. Among the many variations of Unix,Sun Microsystems SunOS, is the leader. Experts estimate that50 to 75 percent of today's ISP-based servers are Sun-based.Of course, even within a given provider network, the particularpurpose of a server-whether it's domain name services, e-mail,news feeds, shell account access, PPP/SLIP access, router/applicationsor Web hosting-can lead to differences in approach. Some ISPsmake it a policy to ban the use of any off-the-shelf OS runningstored programs on a transit network, since that network isso vulnerable to security breaches. Instead, those applicationsrun behind a firewall along with the administrative network.While Unix is the OS of choice, the box isn't always a workstation.Some ISPs run e-mail services on Unix-based Macintoshes. IntelPCs are also used extensively.Web hosting is expected to be provided on a variety of platforms,of course. Many ISPs are serving NT because of its growingbase on corporate networks. Beta testing of Microsoft's ownInternet Information Server on NT began in late November, withshipments expected this quarter. Where demon performance isneeded, Silicon Graphics servers have often been the firstchoice, although some ISPs grouse about SGI's lack of softwareportability, skimpy management capabilities and high price.Nevertheless, SprintLink, one of the world's largest backboneproviders, relies extensively on SGI servers. Hewlett-Packard,with its reputation for price-performance, lays claim to morethan half of America Online's servers.Lessons for Users What are some of the lessons ISP relianceon Unix brings to users building large intranets? A fundamentalone is that Unix's performance edge comes at the price of hiringa highly sophisticated staff. UUNET's O'Dell is among thosebringing on more Intel Pentium platforms running a varietyof Unix OSes, especially BSDI.UUNET's Intel boxes are from Digital Equipment Corp. While suchboxes often let ISPs reduce costs as they ramp up, what O'Delllikes most about BSDI is its openness. "We can whack on theseboxes and tune them to squeeze out every drop of performance."The downside, however, is that their keyboards and monitorsmake their operation in a central location klugey at best andhave so far ruled out their use in lights-out centers.What should users conclude about an ISP relying extensivelyon Unix PCs? On the upside, Dave Crocker, principal with BrandenburgConsulting, says ISPs that depend instead exclusively on Unixworkstations may overburden their machines, rather than quicklybringing new Unix-based PCs online. One way for users to checkout such a situation is to see if the ISP will offer a perport guarantee, such as no more than 10 users per port. Thedownside for PCs is the fact that some lack parity checking,he says. "One reason people go for the workstation is thatit's constructively mindless. The buyer has to be more informedand intelligent to get a PC platform that is good." Analystsagree that some large ISPs have this knowledge, while manysmaller ones can vary dramatically in their skill levels.Getting TCP/IP Techies Another feature to pay attention to ina server OS-especially for a Web server-is the accompanyingTCP/IP implementation in the server's Unix kernel. Differentkernels support varying numbers of TCP/IP Control Blocks (TCBs).Internet Architecture Board member and Network Computing columnistRobert Moskowitz warns that because the Netscape browser retrievesobjects in parallel, rather than sequentially, it can tie upa larger number of TCBs. Each TCB must then wait a given intervaltwo minutes in many cases-to clear errors and once again beusable. Moskowitz believes that the popularization of Netscapemeans that more and more TCBs are used to download numeroussmall objects on a home page, elongating the user's waitingperiod and causing more timeouts.Unless Netscape and other browser vendors address the problemusing new technologies like persistent connections, Moskowitzsays it will be up to Web providers to tune existing kernels,pick those supporting the most TCBs and impress on designersthe importance of using maps versus individual objects.Does It Scale? ISPs also like Unix's scalability. Sun PresidentEd Zander says NT "like everything else Microsoft does, istechnically very average, and they hope to get it to marketbased on sheer economics, volume and market size. NT doesn'tscale well." Nigel Ball, director of marketing for HP's GeneralSystems Division, also boasts that NT "might scale on two-CPUIntel systems, but we have 12-way RISC scaling-orders of magnitudebetter than NT."Analysts say NT's chief asset will be the many inexpensive applicationsdeveloped for it as an Internet server. A Microsoft officialalso emphasizes NT's ease of deployment, management and applicationsupport. He also calls the argument that NT doesn't scale "ared herring" because "99 percent of the market needs four processorsor less, and the eighth-largest Internet site in the countryis a two or four-processor NT server" at Microsoft "that scalesquite well."Cisco Technical Lead, Tony Li, has his own assessment of theserver's future: "the ISPs will continue to suffer scalingproblems as they try to cope with exponential growth. The serverthat lets them roll their own, fix their own problems, andprovide stable, cost-effective performance will win. I expectsome flavor of BSD just based on the programming environment.Hardwarewise, it's probably still a Pentium/Intel architecture."Christine Hudgins-Bonafield can be reached at cbonafield@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Cisco Acquisition Deals Blow To IPv6By:Christine Hudgins-BonafieldCisco Systems fed the fire of doubt surrounding IPv6 when itannounced this past fall that it is buying address translationfirewall leader Network Translation Inc. (NTI). Peter Long,a marketing manager for Cisco, speculates-without seeing thecode-that NTI's integration into the Cisco OS will occur bythe second half of 1996. Long admits that if IP address translationlike NTI's is made widely available by Cisco, it will delayIPv6. That isn't necessarily bad, he says, since it gives everyonemore time to think about next generation technology. Long saysCisco will show an IPv6 prototype this month and provide productsupport when the standard is formalized, perhaps by year'send. The key technology question raised by Cisco's effort tomix the stateful technology of NTI with stateless router technologyis whether Cisco is working on its own next generation router.An NTI source says that the only way to integrate the productsis to change the nature of routing. That's already happening,he says, as basic packet pushing is moved off the router ontoswitches. So, will we see a new stateful "router" from Cisco,replete with security and address translation features?Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1The Internet Hit ListBy:Christine Hudgins-BonafieldHad problems traversing the Internet lately? Want to know ifyou are among those inefficient addresses ("Users Cut Off asInternet Nears Routing Limit," November 1, 1995, page 24) beingexorcised in transit across SprintLink? Here's a clue: Youobtained your address directly from the InterNIC and you have32 or fewer Class C allocations in block 206 or higher. (Thefirst three numbers in your address are the block.) Originally,SprintLink began filtering at 64 or fewer Class C allocationsin block 206, but cut back to 32 last autumn. For block 207or higher, SprintLink is still filtering at 64 Class C allocationsor fewer. Because so many service providers use upstream providers,like SprintLink, traffic between two parties can be droppedeven though neither party uses SprintLink for Internet Access.Also, some small ISPs may be using "inefficient addresses"to maintain independence from upstream providers. If you thinkyou may be on the "hit list," check with your ISP and any upstreamproviders. The InterNIC advises users to read ftp://rs.interNIC.netpolicy/interNIC/interNIC-IP-1.txt, and to use the InterNIConly as an address provider of last resort. Our own caveatis that as address space declines and router congestion becomesmore of an issue, the bar at which today's addresses are filteredcan only be raised.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1V-ONE Chisels Commerce Drawbridge In Internet FirewallsBy:Christine Hudgins-BonafieldSecurity startup V-ONE, Rockville, Md., is being heralded bysecurity experts as a shining example of Internet innovationperhaps as much as a year ahead of the pack. The company, whichis reportedly going public early this year, was expected tointroduce its SmartGate technology in mid-December. Insteadof simply erecting a barrier to Internet access, SmartGateis intended to provide controlled access. Using a separatekey for each network session, SmartGate promises to regulatehow far authenticated individuals (not machines) can drillinto a Web server or even through nested firewalls. GeneralElectric Information Systems and Computer Systems Corp. areamong those planning to use the product. Other V-ONE securityproducts are used by several military intelligence agenciesand the Securities and Exchange Commission. Forrester Researchanalyst Iang Jeon says SmartGate represents the next wave forthe Internet: beefed-up authentication. And CSC's Matt Mancusosays he is especially "enamored" of SmartGate's ability toauthenticate end users through software or smartcards, insteadof through their machines. Jeon is also impressed with theproduct's promised use with any TCP/IP application and thecrytographic background of V-ONE's employees.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1The Networkologist: Salary Survey Shows SatisfactionBy:Patricia SchnaidtWith client/server applications no longer the dreamy stuff ofmagazine headlines, but rather the gritty reality of IS shops,it's no wonder that the people who can build reliable networksare in hot demand. Network Computing's first survey of ourreaders' job satisfaction and salary tells the story of theaverage network professional: a 39-year-old male making $51,840a year, satisfied with his work, enjoying the challenge ofhis demanding job but nevertheless feeling overworked. Let'sdig a little deeper and get at what's behind "the average"network professional.In 1995, the mean salary, including bonuses and incentives,was $54,810, and the median salary was $51,360. In 1994, thesame group's mean salary was $51,980 and the median was $47,520.That's a 5.2 percent increase in average compensation. Thenetwork professionals we surveyed were 88 percent male and12 percent female.Challenged and BusyThe vast majority of network and IS professionals like theirjobs: 27 percent reported being very satisfied and 58 percentreported being moderately satisfied, while only 15 percentreported being not very or not at all satisfied. Challenge,not wages, fuels most of the job satisfaction, while conversely,wages, not challenge, fuels most of the job dissatisfaction.Of those who expressed satisfaction with their jobs, 37 percentsaid that the challenge of their work contributes the mostto their satisfaction, 24 percent said that exposure to newtechnologies is what they like best, and 7 percent said thatthe most satisfying aspect of their work is their company'sprogressiveness in IT. Only 6 percent cite compensation.So what makes network professionals unhappy? For all those surveyed,topping the list at 18 percent is salary. On the heels of underpayis overwork at 16 percent. Eleven percent identified the company'slack of progressiveness in IT, 8 percent said that the organizationoffered little potential for career advancement, and 6 percentsaid it was a lack of professional development.With the plethora of new technologies, ever-expanding enterprisenetworks and client/server application deployment, it's nosurprise that network professionals barely have time to answertheir beepers. Forty-five percent said they were very challengedby their work; 47 percent said they were moderately challenged.A scant 9 percent said they were not very or not at all challenged.What disturbs network professionals' evenings, weekends anddaylight hours is keeping up with changing technology (at 38percent), keeping up with the organization's demand for ISprojects and deployments right behind it (at 36 percent), alack of organizational funding for IT projects (at 24 percent),a management that doesn't understand the role of MIS (at 23percent), and users' demand for services (at 19 percent). Sixpercent said that the available technology didn't meet businessrequirements.While network professionals name the challenge of their workas one of its greatest appeals, 60 percent said that they wereconsistently overworked, while only 36 percent said they hadthe right amount of work and a scant 5 percent said that theydidn't have enough work to keep them busy. No surprise. Networkprofessionals are stressed out and they say that their jobrelated stress is rising: 90 percent said that their jobs werevery or moderately stressful. Maybe CFOs should offer stressreducing massages and consider distributing multivitamins withnetwork professionals' paychecks.What are network professionals doing all day? Topping the todo list is network management and problem solving, followedby assisting users, planning and strategy, deploying networks,managing personnel and working with division managers to implementsystems.But Wait, There's MoreCheck out our very extensive salary and job satisfaction surveyon Network Computing Online at http://techweb.cmp.com/nwc.A quick word on the methodology: In September, we mailed questionnairesto 1,500 network professionals, randomly sampled from our subscriberlist, and 586 completed the survey. Toppmeyer Research, anindependent research firm, mounted the survey and compiledthe data.Patricia Schnaidt can be reached at pschnaidt@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1FreeWire: A New Year And Some New ChallengesBy:Bill FrezzaAs you have probably read, Network Computing is expanding to20 issues this year-a testament to the growth of the industry.This provides a wonderful opportunity to delve more deeplyinto favorite subjects as well as explore new ones. I intendto do both, continuing my coverage of the struggling wirelessdata industry while branching out into what I am convincedwill be the decade's most significant trend in computing andtelecommunications-Public Network Computing.Fellow columnist Timothy Haight, in the August 1, 1995, issue,identified Public Network Computing as the fifth wave in theevolution of the computer industry. The first three waves havebecome the stuff of history-mainframes, minicomputers and PCs.Mark Stahlman, former analyst at Alex Brown & Sons and formercolumnist for this magazine, is generally credited with identifyingthe fourth wave-network computing-forecasting the dynamic growthof workstations as they broke from the PC model and the LANas it became the essential nervous system of corporate America.Public Network Computing-the extension of distributed computingoutside the enterprise conjoined with networks of other publicand private entities-is ready to take center stage in the livesof the people who read this magazine. Public Network Computingwill be as different from today's telecommunications and computingenvironments as PCs and servers were to dumb terminals andminicomputers.The first thing you'll notice is that the rigid demarcationbetween public and private facilities will blur as IS managersreach across town and across continents with new network configurationand control capabilities. As this happens, the transport elementsof the public infrastructure will be forced to unbundle, afterwhich they will fragment, commoditize and then take off ona new round of exponential growth. Simultaneously, a new drivingfactor and large element of uncertainty will be introducedinto the mix, namely the consumer. Long fenced off behind antiquatedlocal telephone networks, this PC- and credit card-equippedchange agent will charge onto the Public Network Computingscene just as corporations are trying to find new ways to reachboth customers and their employees.Creative DestructionSquatting in the middle of all this is the venerable PublicSwitched Telephone Network (PSTN). The PSTN is a highly tuned,monolithic, application-specific switching system that todayis tightly bundled with enormous quantities of generic transport.Its design principles evolved over the course of 100 years,the last 60 of which occurred in a rigid and protected market.Most important, the massive central office switches that controlcall processing, routing and billing-special purpose mainframes,really-are architected around underlying traffic models thathave barely changed in decades.Similarly, the business models that support the financing, deploymentand operation of the PSTN have been frozen by Public UtilityCommissions. Their main purpose is to protect and preservethe status quo while pandering to their political constituencies,namely the local Bell Operating Companies and their stockholders.Investment decisions are based on large upfront capital expendituresand guaranteed long-term cost recovery. This is accomplishedin highly mature markets with no competitive uncertainty, nosubstitution of services and no obsolescence that isn't carefullyplanned. This economic model has had an enormous impact onboth system architectures and corporate cultures.Truth be told, the PSTN is very, very good at what it was designedto do, just as mainframes did an admirable job of batch processingthe payroll. The fact that the phone network can do anythingelse at all, like support fax and circuit switched data, isa complete accident made possible because this other trafficwas disguised to mimic the parameters of a voice call. Thisis hideously inefficient, but if the computer industry hadwaited for the phone companies to figure out how to providedata services rather than go ahead and invent analog modemsthat are really voice-call spoofers, we would all still becomputing in splendid isolation.There is actually an important lesson here. The more the phonecompanies try to hold back the tide of Public Network Computing,forcing customers to live with bundled switching and transport,as well as tariff structures and business models that are hopelesslyout of date, the more surely phone companies will be renderedobsolete. Just watch the major Internet Service Providers (ISPs)like PSI, UUNet and Netcom frantically laying down track, buildingdepots and switching centers in every city and town. The trafficthat their local Points of Presence (POPs) are bleeding awayfrom the PSTN may not represent much volume today, but it couldaccount for most of tomorrow's growth.Oddly enough, the underlying transport the ISPs use is exactlythe same transport used by the phone companies-after all, aDS3 line is a DS3 line. The difference is that this transportis configured to provide application-independent services witha high degree of modularity and a presumption of distributedintelligence. None of the applications that the ISPs are chasingare mature, forecastable or readily characterizable. (Heck,many of them probably aren't even real.) But, flexibility allowsthem to bet on the aggregate. Both the ISPs and CompetitiveAccess Providers (CAPs), to a certain extent, are learningto optimize business against a moving target with no guaranteedrate of return, no decades-long cost recovery and every possibilitythat a substitute service can come along tomorrow and taketheir business away. Just think how fierce this makes boththeir system architectures and their management team.Now, imagine these two together in a competitive market. Inthe Darwinian struggle that looms ahead, the PSTN can be comparedwith the marsupials of Australia: highly evolved to fill aprotected environmental niche. The Internet is a wild predatorymammal, let loose by a massive wave of immigrants that havelittle knowledge or concern for the native flora and fauna.Take a wild guess which is going to kick butt when the lastbarriers to competition come down.Ah, but can't the PSTN always retreat to its lair and live offvoice traffic? Don't be so sure about that. Internet phoneis being scoffed at as an oddity by the phone companies, butyou can bet that at the very least it will massively destabilizethe international long distance tariff structures. Only anidiot is going to pay $35 an hour for international long distancea few years from now. Network arbitrage-the ability to useapplication-independent switching systems on top of commoditytransport to undercut application-specific bundled and tariffedservices-will become a big game in the age of Public NetworkComputing.Summing It UpSo, putting it all together, what are the top 10 defining technicaland business characteristics of Public Network Computing? 1)Competitive yet compatible application-independent switchingconnected with commodity transport; 2) Distributed intelligenceflexibly accommodating ever-changing traffic models; 3) Modulardeployment aimed at hot markets, unencumbered by social mandatesto guarantee "Universal Service"; 4) Incremental provisioningwith lower first-costs, shorter amortization periods and arate of capital equipment turnover closer to the PC industrythan the telecom industry; 5) Destabilizing network arbitragethat will do more to dissolve the Public Utility Commissions'cozy little club than any act of Congress; 6) A high rate ofnew market entry, and a correspondingly high rate of mergersand failures; 7) Massive trauma and angst as the local BellOperating Companies are forced to cut the dividend, break thebloated unions and toss out their old-boy, brain-dead managementas they struggle to reinvent themselves; 8) A mind-bogglingarray of choices for businesses and consumers; 9) A massiveincrease in aggregate telecommunications traffic; and 10) Virtualintegration of selected pieces of all of this under the controlof the enterprise. What a great time to be a Networkologist!So boot up, tune in and let's watch the game. (I forgot to mentionthat the advent of Public Network Computing will also providefull employment for cheeky commentators.) While I will continueto bring you FreeWire in each issue of Network Computing, Ihave also begun writing biweekly op-ed pieces on technology,culture and politics for our sister publication, CommunicationsWeek.In addition, CMP Interactive recently launched a Web servicecalled TechWeb Gurus in which I am participating. You can visitus at http://techweb. cmp.com/gurus/gurus.html and put in yourtwo cents. I've posted a wireless data directory online soyou can get phone numbers and Internet contact informationfor any company ever mentioned here. I will also be leadingan ongoing series of interactive debates and dialogue on issuescentral to the industry.So come on by. As the saying goes, I'll see you on the Net.Bill Frezza is the president of Wireless Computing Associates.He can be reached via e-mail at frezza@radiomail.net or onthe Web at techweb.cmp.com/gurus/ gurus.html.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Corporate View: Businet: A Call To Arms Within The InternetBy:Robert MoskowitzI have had the opportunity to view the Internet phenomenon fromboth inside and out. In the annals of computing, the Internethas no parallel for us to turn to for comparison or guideposts.However, like every major computing innovation, it is yet anotherdouble-edged sword.While many of you at the very least have dipped your toes inthe Internet by creating a Web server of generally availableinformation about your company, most of you are holding offon more involved usage of the Internet. Why are you holdingoff? Probably because you just don't see how it can meet thebusiness demands of performance, reliability, management andsecurity.Even the word "Internet" is a source of concern. For the Internetis, in truth, a collection of large sets of interconnectednetworks-each separately managed and operated under differentbusiness models. Further, for all practical purposes it seemsimpossible to accomplish anything meaningful over the Internetthat will give your company a competitive advantage that willnot require you to use a significant part of this inter-network.Seeing this from the business perspective, you wonder how canbusiness criteria be imposed on such an internetwork that lacksa central body to listen to the needs of business and to getits various units to adhere to these criteria?I am constantly hearing that since there is no central authority,the Internet is not ready for business use. Just recall yourworst nightmare of a leased-line circuit: your Regional BellOperating Company (RBOC) for local connection; a long-haulcarrier into another RBOC; perhaps a bypass carrier for sometariff avoidance; finally, the remote RBOC into the branchoffice. What did you do for managing this circuit? Now consideragain that on the Internet your packets are at the mercy ofthe provider's routing policies. That 10-mile "link" betweenyour office in north Boston to Harvard University may be routedthrough Washington, D.C., through five service providers. Towhom do you turn when performance is worse than a 56-Kbps directlink and no part of your visible path is less than T3?A Diamond in the RoughAs long as the business community continues to wring its collectivehands about the lack of control on the Internet, there willcontinue to be little or no control. If the business communitysidesteps the Internet, it will continue to be designed forits consuming public. Some corners will work well, but themain will be mediocre. It's time for us to visualize the Internetas a rough-hewn gem and play the role of the gem cutter.A four-phase approach can result in a "businet" that existswithin the Internet. The first and foremost process is to publisha set of business criteria for performance, reliability andmanagement. This criteria set will need to be a living documentto be tuned as we learn. The best source for this documentis each of our respective trade organizations, working as muchin concert as time will permit. Once these criteria are known,a certification process for the service providers is finallypossible, based preferably on ISO-9000.This certification must be administered by an organization trustedby the business community and preferably recognized by theservice providers and the various national governments. Ifnone of the current organizations can step up to the task,the business community can create such a company to look outfor their interests. With all of my involvement in the Internetoperation and standards efforts, I have not found any existingstructure for this certification. Thus, the selection or creationof an "Internet Quality Association" is the second phase.A one-time certification of conformance to a criteria set viaISO-9000 is obviously inadequate. The third phase is the creationof a service provider monitoring and reporting system run byour "IQA." This reporting should work much like the FAA's airlineperformance metrics. There's nothing like a quality mirrorto whip an industry into shape. Through this monitoring effort,the IQA could also function as a "court of last resort" forthe service providers and their customers to resolve complianceissues before real litigation is needed.Finally, security is needed. The fourth phase would be to standardizea set of security methodologies. The standards community isfinally making headway, but we businesspeople have to demandthese in products, from IP Security Protocol (IPSP) up throughMIME Object Security Standard (MOSS). They all play a roleand need to be available in every part of the world on allplatforms. Sophisticated two-way authentication for businessinteractions is also needed. These may be the best defensefrom spoofing attacks that have the security consensus tiedup in knots. Current efforts for secure Web usage are onlya small part of the overall picture.Ante UpAll of this will cost lots of money to get started. The valuereturned on this investment is the creation of the extendedenterprise for whatever enterprise is envisioned at any givenpoint in time. The funding model for this work may actuallybe more challenging than the actual implementation of a businessquality network within the Internet. The certification feesand security registry fees can be used to offset some costs,but they cannot be expected to foot the bill fully. Note thatsecurity registry fees amount to network membership fees. Governmentfunding has a place for any research efforts needed. The mostnoteworthy effort is the development of meaningful metricsfor a service provider. For the most part, we should not lookto any government for funding help any more. If we want torun it ourselves, we need to fund it ourselves.So do some soul searching. If you're interested in really creatingan extended enterprise, it's time to roll up your sleeves andget in there.Robert Moskowitz is a software systems specialist at ChryslerCorp., Detroit, Mich., and a member of the Internet ArchitectureBoard (IAB). He can be reached on MCI Mail at 385-8921.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Novell XTD: Message To The WiseBy:Barry GerberNovell's GroupWise division presents a new student to the classof client/server messaging systems-GroupWise XTD. Similar tothe current shipping version of GroupWise (v4.1), which doesnot have a client/server architecture, GroupWise XTD continuesto perform e-mail, calendaring, scheduling and connectivitytasks. Building upon these capabilities, XTD adds a noteworthyset of system administration and management tools, and an impressiveworkflow application development environment. It also has awell-integrated multifunction client that includes full documentmanagement capabilities and a brilliant front end for phoneconferences. Despite its heavy dependence on NetWare, XTD goesstraight to the head of the class.GroupWise XTD implements full client/server functionality. GroupWisev4.1 let clients write to the messaging database through aserver process. However, clients must read from the databasedirectly through a mapped drive.XTD runs on top of NetWare 3.x and 4.1 and supports TCP/IP clients,on-server rules, cross-directory synchronization and publicfolder replication. Novell promises XTD servers for WindowsNT Server and seven different Unix flavors, but has not yetdetermined when these implementations will be delivered. Inaddition, it is still deciding if XTD should support IPX/SPX.Still, XTD is heavily NetWare-oriented. Its messaging systemdirectory must be stored in a NetWare 4.1 NetWare DirectoryServices directory. You can learn about the health of the XTDserver and other components via reports generated through Novell'sNetWare Management System (NMS). Simple Network ManagementProtocol (SNMP) agents also will be available.Impressive Applications XTD has an impressive workflow applicationdevelopment environment, which uses a basic implementationof FileNet's WorkFlo product. Not only can you use the XTDdatabase or third-party databases to develop messaging-enabledapplications, but also you can use XTD's replication capabilitiesto distribute applications to other servers and users. Youcan also replicate database records so that everyone usingthe database can see new records as they are created. XTD'sworkflow development environment may give Lotus Notes a runfor the money.Barry Gerber can be reached atbgerber@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1NetWare 4.1 Climbs To New Heights With SMPBy:Jay MilneAs an application server, NetWare has been geared mostly towardworkgroup applications but not enterprisewide applicationsbecause of its single processor design-until NetWare 4.1 SMP.While I ran a beta version on a hefty Compaq ProLiant 4500with four Pentium 100s and 300 MB of RAM, I was unable to testmany of NetWare 4.1 SMP's capabilities because no applicationswere available. However, it promises to let current uniprocessorsystems that are running databases or other CPU-intensive applicationsscale and reach higher performance levels without a major architecturalchange.NT and some of the Intel-based Unix systems have implementedSMP for quite some time. While we don't think NetWare 4.1 SMPwill take any customers away from other SMP operating systems,it will breathe additional life into NetWare. Certainly itwill benefit those users who have run out of steam with NetWare'suniprocessor architecture.By the time NetWare 4.1 SMP is released, only a few SMP-enabledapplications will be on the market. Oracle plans to releaseOracle for NetWare SMP as NetWare SMP ships, and Sybase hasannounced plans to ship System 11 for NetWare SMP sometimein the first half of 1996. Novell should ship GroupWise forSMP early this year, but internal NetWare 4.1 facilities likeNDS and internal routing will not be SMP-enabled initially.Unfortunately, that decision will hamper the scalability ofa single NetWare server with a large number of users and alarge NDS tree.Price for the SMP add-on is set by OEMs. NetWare 4.1 SMP comeswith a license for up to four CPUs (additional CPU licensesin bundles of four cost extra). No pricing on additional CPUswas available at press time.Does Increased Scalability Move Mountains? NetWare 4.1 SMP issimilar to NetWare 4.1, except for a second kernel that handlesand executes SMP threads on all processors. You'll need a PlatformSpecific Module (PSM) file (the layer of software that interactswith the SMP hardware and NetWare) from your hardware vendorbecause of the different ways hardware vendors implement SMP.Having the latest NetWare 4.1 network card drivers is importantto maintain system stability. I got NetWare SMP up and runningwithin 30 minutes, and SERVER.EXE was updated to handle theSMP functions.If you're only using NetWare as a file and print server andrunning some utility NLMs, the SMP functionality won't do youmuch good. If your applications aren't multithreaded and haven'tbeen written to take advantage of SMP, NetWare SMP won't bemuch help. CPU-bound applications, such as database applications,will really benefit from SMP. While the operating system ofchoice for large, enterprise databases is still Unix, NetWare4.1 SMP and an SMP-enabled database will let users with existingdatabases scale without changing operating systems or hardwarearchitectures.Worrying that NetWare 4.1 SMP will break your existing NetWareapplications is a legitimate concern. But because the currentkernel hasn't been replaced and all of the non-SMP applicationscontinue to run on processor 0, these applications should runwell. We were successful in running several existing applications,but with any new operating system, make sure to do in-depthcompatibility tests.Jay Milne can be reached on the Internet at jmilne@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Lotus Notes 4 Throws Down Messaging GauntletBy:Barry GerberIf you liked Notes 3, you're going to love Notes 4. It retainsNotes 3's client/server messaging features, including the singleobject store. Notes 4 introduces better administrative andapplication development tools, an improved user interface,great support for mobile computing, more scalability and impressiveInternet integration (for more information on Notes 3, seethe feature story "Client/Server Electronic Messaging: Deliveringthe Enterprise," November 15, 1995, page 68)Notes 4 is due out at press time, which will give it a jumpon Microsoft Exchange Server. At this point, I find ExchangeServer easier and more intuitive to manage. I'm very partialto Exchange Server's tight integration with NT Server's securitysystem, which makes a lot of administrative and managementtasks more automatic.I installed a test release of Notes 4 over an existing Notes3 installation, using a Windows NT server and the Windows95,NT and 3.11 clients. A Macintosh client was also included.Although Lotus couldn't provide schedules at press time, Notes4 eventually will run on the same wide range of server andclient platforms as Notes 3.Notes 4 is totally compatible with Notes 3 clients and applications.I had no trouble accessing my Notes 4 server with a Notes 3client, or running applications built for a Notes 3 environmenton a Notes 4 client. This makes migration from Notes 3 to Notes4 a more civilized experience.The new BASIC-like LotusScript 3.0 is compatible with Microsoft'sVisual Basic and ODBC standards, and can be used to developmany applications that, under Notes 3, required the Notes API,a great deal of C programming and a vast amount of third-partyvendor development tools. I had no difficulty building littletest applications with LotusScript. Because LotusScript programsare embedded in the native Notes programming environment, youcan distribute them during standard Notes database replication.Knockout Admin AppsNotes 3 didn't have the most user-friendly administrative tools.My memory, endurance and patience were sorely tested everytime I had to search for the magic combination of menu optionsrequired to configure a server or its connections, or bringa new user into the world of Notes 3. Notes 4 changes thatwith a simple tree-view window for administering anything fromservers and local and wide area connections, to the masteraddress book database for a Notes organization. This holdsconfiguration information about users, groups, servers, serverconnections and address books, and you can delegate administrativerights for managing specific servers to any Notes user.To pick the object class I wanted to administer (People, Serverand so on), I just clicked on it in the left pane of the addressbook.  This transforms the address book into a tool kit foradministering the object class.  To add a new user to theorganizational address book, I clicked on "People" in the treeand the window is transformed into the one you see in the screencapture.  When I clicked on the Add Person button, the New Personform appeared and I filled it in to configure my new user.  Themaster address book interface is quite similar to theAdministrator program for Microsoft's Exchange Server, although Iprefer Exchange's tabbed property pages to Notes 4's all-at-onceforms.I never liked Notes 3's client user interface. Notes 4 menusand Lotus' Smarticons are better organized and labeled. Bothare context sensitive, changing as the task you're performingchanges. I especially like the second level of larger icons,like the ones for specific e-mail functions. The real UI improvementin Notes 4 comes with the incorporation of cc:Mail's drag-anddrop folder pane.Notes' already noteworthy remote access capabilities are greatlyimproved in Notes 4. Notes 3's ability to replicate databasesto portable PCs and keep these replicas in sync has made ita favorite of road warriors. I discovered that Notes 4 bringseven more goodies. Replication is easier with a new graphicallyoriented user interface, and field level (as opposed to fulldocument level) replication reduces replication times whenonly a small part of a document has changed. Encryption protectslocally stored databases.To save money and/or allow a single point of contact to an organization'sNotes system, Notes 4 supports what is called "pass-through."This mechanism lets a remote client access its home serverby connecting to any Notes 4 server in an organization andpassing through it and any other Notes 4 servers on the networkpath to its home server. Pass-through is also available toLAN-connected Notes users.Notes 4 will be a highly scalable client/server messaging system.According to Lotus, Notes 3 can handle approximately 200 usersper server and Notes 4 supports up to 1,000 users per server.Some of this increased scalability is because of performanceimprovements, such as field level database replication, whilesome is attributable to improvements in hardware and operatingsystems, like Notes 4's ability to run on higher-end computerswith multiple processors. Notes 4 has also been optimized for32-bit operating systems.Notes 4 addresses are stored in X.400 format. X.400 and SMTPmessage transfer agents will be available separately for Notes4 servers. The Notes API is fully supported in Notes 4, alongwith MAPI and the X.400-based Common Mail Calls API. MAPI supportgoes quite deep. I could access my Notes 4 mailbox with a betaExchange client for Windows 3.11. I did have to install themassive Notes and Exchange clients on my computer, but it worked.Notes 4 comes with its own integrated World Wide Web browserfor your surfing convenience. Notes 4 documents can includehypertext links not only to other Notes documents but to Webpages, so you can build applications that integrate data fromInternet sources.Barry Gerber can be reached at bgerber@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Single Object Store Remains In Notes 4One of Notes' real strengths exists in its support of an objectstore that holds structured RDBMS-like data, unstructured openended data and message routing information.  Although you give upsome performance by including all data in one store, you gaineasier administration, maintenance and especially applicationdevelopment.  Only Oracle's Oracle Office comes close to Notes inthis regard.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1The Riches Of Switches -- 12 Affordable, Fast, High-QualiltyEthernet Switches Under $250 Per PortBy:Robert J. KohlheppEthernet switches aren't literally a dime a dozen, but the suggestionfits. We set our threshold at $250 per port and found plentyof takers. Whether you're setting up a new workgroup or addinga little bandwidth to an existing one, there's probably anaffordable switch here for you. There may even be a couplethat could slip into the enterprise category-just because they'recheap doesn't mean they lack critical features. Within thispack you'll find everything from basic, no-frills switchesto those with VLAN support, protocol filtering, SNMP management,high-speed uplinks and RMON support.We tested the following 12 switches in our University of Wisconsinlabs: SMC EZ Switch-6x and TigerSwitch XLE; 3Com LinkSwitch1000; NetVantage NV7500 Ethernet Switch; Black Box EthernetSwitch LB9500A; Amber Wave Systems AmberSwitch; CrossComm EWS;Cisco Catalyst 2100 and Catalyst 1700; D-Link DES-604 fourport 10BASE-T Switching Hub; Matrox Piranha SwitchNIC-10/8;and FORE Systems ForeRunner ES-3810 Ethernet Workgroup Switch.Our first concern was performance, but we also found MAC addressand protocol filters very useful in taking control of our network.VLAN support is also beneficial since it helps segment thenetwork without further investment. Products that can managethese features over the network are optimal.In such a low-cost scenario, we thought we'd be hard pressedto differentiate between these products. We were wrong. 3Com'sLinkSwitch 1000 offers the best all-round bargain with greatthroughput, good management software and a redundant powersupply. SMC's TigerSwitch XLE offers excellent control overtraffic filtering, securing ports and VLAN setup. It also includesthe unique ability to forward defined packets between VLANs.Avoid the SMC EZ Switch-6x: It has serious performance problems.NetVantage NV7500 had the best entry price, without giving upfast uplinks or manageability. For NetWare-only workgroups,Matrox offers its Piranha SwitchNIC's eight 10BASE-T portsat an amazing $1,300-on a PCI NIC, no less. Look to Amber Wave,FORE and CrossComm for flexible, slotted systems. CrossComm'sEWS is a strong product with excellent management software.Finally, Cisco's Catalyst 2100, a remnant of Cisco's recentGrand Junction purchase, only lacks a graphical managementinterface, which should be coming early this year.3Com LinkSwitch 10003Com's LinkSwitch 1000 has almost everything you could need,including a redundant power supply option. It excelled in ourthroughput testing, successfully passing more packets thanany other switch. 3Com's management software runs on Windowsor almost any flavor of Unix. With a base price that comesin under $200 per port, including a 100BASE-Tx port, you can'tgo wrong, although the LinkSwitch would benefit from ATM supportand VLAN capability-both slated for 1996.Configuration, as usual, started at the console. Then, using3Com Transcend Workgroup Manager, we configured nearly everyaspect of the device. Using "port security," we could restricteach port to serve only statically defined MAC addresses, whichwe could enter manually or grab from the real-time displayof active addresses. Using secure learning, we were able toset the maximum number of addresses allowed on a port. Oncethose addresses are learned, no other station can talk on thatport until you reset the switch or change the configuration.Using the management software or a standard RMON browser (weused Cabletron's), you can get basic traffic statistics. Infuture firmware releases, the LinkSwitch will add more of thenine RMON groups. FORE and CrossComm offer all nine groups,but not in their base offerings.To help control heavy loads, the LinkSwitch can simulate collisions,using 3Com's Intelligent Flow Control technique, to lower packetloss. This slows the traffic from the workstations insteadof forcing the switch to drop packets to keep up. This helpedin the short burst situations we saw in our testing. You canalso control broadcast storms by setting limits on the percentageof broadcast traffic. When the broadcast traffic hits an upperlimit, it can be handled by an alarm (SNMP trap), port disableor blip (which disables the port and re-enables it in fiveseconds)Although the LinkSwitch supports only 500 addresses in the bridgetable, it is more than enough for any workgroup. The LinkSwitchwould benefit heavily from the workgroup VLAN definitions thatSMC's TigerSwitch has. In fact, the LinkSwitch offers onlybasic MAC address filtering. The hardware supports VLANs andthe next revision of software will exploit it.CrossComm EWSCrossComm's EWS is an excellent switch that resembles FORE'sflexible slotted configuration. Although it only supports fouraddresses per port, with 32 ports it can handle more than 100stations. It didn't do as well as 3Com's LinkSwitch on performance.But CrossComm adds IMS-a strong management application thatperformed well for us. It can also run under HP OpenView (3Com'sTranscend runs on others). IMS has an excellent graphical interfaceto switch statistics and configuration.You set the basic IP and SNMP community names using the console,and then you can configure the EWS remotely. CrossComm offersMAC address security on all ports, as well as static entriesin the bridge address table (BAT) for basic filtering. Like3Com and FORE offerings, the EWS offers secure learning, soit can learn the first four addresses talking on a port andlock out all others.The device is fully manageable using IMS, from configuring theMAC addresses that can talk on a port to viewing statisticsin graphical format. By clicking on a port, we could view theactive stations on a port and allow or deny them access. Likethe FORE box, we could also disable the transmitter or receiveron individual ports for troubleshooting.Since a switch sends traffic only to the target port, it isdifficult to use a protocol analyzer. The EWS, like Fore, Ciscoand Amber Wave products, allows "port mirroring," which definesan "analyzer port." Any port's traffic can be "mirrored" tothe analyzer port. Another solution is to buy a more expensiveversion of the switch that supports the full nine RMON groups.SMC TigerSwitch XLESMC has greatly improved its switch line with the TigerSwitchXLE, which now supports Fast Ethernet uplink ports (the XLdidn't). Although it just squeezes under our price ceiling,the features may be worth it. Flexibility in port configuration,bridge table management and excellent VLAN support make thisswitch a good choice for any environment. SMC covers a widerange of management platforms, but its Windows management software,EliteView, has a very difficult time with large networks.SMC offers a very flexible architecture that can secure addresseson a per-port basis, add packet filters to control trafficand "trunk" many ports to another TigerSwitch. With port security,you can allow only certain MAC addresses to use a port. Packetfilters can be used to grant or deny certain MAC addressesor protocols from being used on a port. And SMC's unique trunkingscheme connects up to eight ports to another TigerSwitch, aggregatingthroughput between them.Using workgroup definitions in conjunction with protocol andaddress filters yields VLANs or virtual workgroups. OrdinarilyVLANs are completely segregated networks and pass no trafficbetween them (without the help of an external router or bridge).But SMC went a step further by letting predefined traffic pass,based on protocol type, MAC addresses or other bit patterns.We were able to configure two individual NetWare workgroups.To give both groups access to our POP mail server (which isin one group), we added a filter to pass IP traffic betweenthe groups. No other switch we tested has this kind of flexibility.Configuring the TigerSwitch is quite simple through a commandline terminal session. Once the IP address is configured, allmanagement can take place from EliteView. However, EliteView,by default, tries to manage your whole network. You limit thescope of discovery by editing text files, which isn't a veryclean approach. Once our network discovery finished, the managementstation (a Pentium 60) ran quite slow, finding it difficultto manage all the data from our huge network (more than 150subnets). EliteView also had difficulty identifying our routers,which is crucial in the network discovery process. You maywant to step up to SMC's HP OpenView software component.Cisco Catalyst 2100As the Catalyst 1700's big brother, the 2100 offers a coupleextra features, not the least of which is multiple MAC addressesper port. Using a terminal (there is no graphical tool), theswitch is very configurable, offering VLAN support, multipleswitching methods (cut-through, store-and-forward and fragmentfree), and, unique to Cisco, multicast registration. This switchpushes the $250 per port limit and could use better managementsoftware, but it is flexible and has plenty of features.Supporting 2,048 addresses, or optionally 8,192, your networkshould never outgrow the bridge table-although it will outgrowthe management, which is simply a MIB definition. Cisco plansto integrate management in 1996. Using a terminal or telnetsession, we were able to set security to allow only certainaddresses on particular ports; and we could define VLANs, althoughCisco should implement some packet filters that would allowcertain packets to pass between them, like SMC has done.Cisco also lets you prevent unnecessary traffic on ports usingport configuration and multicast registration. Since multicastaddresses cannot be learned, they are usually flooded to allports. By configuring multicast registration through the terminal,you can define which ports receive which multicasts.FORE Systems ForeRunner ES-3810 Ethernet Workgroup SwitchFORE Systems is certainly no stranger to switching, and itsForeRunner is no disappointment. A flexible chassis designaccepts more than the Ethernet modules we tested, includingATM and an SNMP agent with all nine RMON groups. We receivednone of these modules in the unit we tested. Like CrossComm'sEWS, ForeRunner is limited to four addresses per port. Filteringand VLAN support are missing, and the network management modulewas absent in the unit we tested, making the ForeRunner priceyfor its features.The switch we tested consisted of the chassis and one 16-portswitch card. That starts at about $230 per port, but as youadd cards, the cost per port goes down quickly. Performanceranked right along with the rest, and six wire-speed streamswere not a problem. You can configure one port as an uplinkport, and it will serve as the outlet for packets of unknowndestination.Using the terminal configuration menu system, we could viewand change aspects such as full/half duplex, uplink port designationand port mirroring. For troubleshooting, the ForeRunner alsolets you shut off the transmit and receive portions of theport independently. For more features, FORE offers the inbandSNMP agent module for the chassis and still squeezes in underthe $250-per-port limit.Amber Wave Systems AmberSwitchFlexible configuration and cool design make this a fashionablehub-and it compares well with the products we tested in termsof its speed and its ability to grow (by filling the slottedchassis). Although the eight-port configuration is quite highat $250 per port, a full chassis drops to around $170 per port.This no-frills switch, using a unique Digital Signal Processor(DSP) design for controlling the bridge, leaves the door openfor adding new features, such as VLANs, using a simple softwareupdate. Management, currently only a MIB definition, shouldimprove with the pending introduction of Amber Wave's Windowsmanagement software. For now, lack of RMON, management software,VLAN support and fast uplinks makes the AmberSwitch high onpotential but mediocre on today's list.The terminal port let us view the current learned address tableand configure the bridging method on each port, including Amber's"Adaptive" method. The Adaptive method uses cut-through switching,but changes to store-and-forward switching if fragmented packetrates rise. Then, once error rates subside (a configurablethreshold), it reverts back to cut-through switching. Portmirroring will be included in the next revision, accordingto Amber Wave.The AmberSwitch grows by adding more eight-port card to itsfive-slot chassis. It can grow to a total of 32 ports; thefirst slot is taken up by the management agent. Soon, AmberWave will offer a two-port, 100BASE-Tx module as well. Thisworks well in the switched Ethernet market, but don't planon any ATM uplinks in this switch.Amber's switching engine uses a hierarchical approach to managingthe address table. Individual cards keep a copy of the table,and switch based on that table. When new addresses are seenon a port, that information is passed to a master DSP in thechassis, which maintains a master copy of the table. It insertsthe entry and replicates the table to all the cards. Usinga DSP is fast enough and lets AmberWave add more features withsimple software updates-and it costs less than a general-purposeCPU.Matrox Piranha SwitchNIC-10/8Matrox cleverly built this fast PCI card-based switch to increasebandwidth in existing NetWare workgroup servers. Although it'sa bit fickle about bus speed and offers no traffic filtering,the entry price of $165 per port makes this a very attractiveswitch for workgroups. In addition to being an eight-port workgroupswitch, it provides 80 Mbps throughput to the server. Likethe AmberSwitch, it lacks many of the crucial features-VLANsupport, filters, fast uplinks-that other products have.Although Matrox reports that the Piranha operates slower ona 30-MHz PCI bus (it prefers 33 MHz), in our testing, it stillperformed as well as the standalone switches without loadingthe server at all. Matrox's management application, GuardianManager, while only offering the most basic information, addsa nice graphical interface for browsing.Installation is quick, if you are familiar with NIC installationunder NetWare. We had TCP/IP and IPX/SPX working on the cardin a matter of minutes. However, with AppleTalk bound to theboard, we couldn't see the host server on the network. Aftera driver update from Matrox, AppleTalk worked to the serveras well.Guardian Manager, which runs under HP OpenView (for Windows),offers an excellent graphical look into the Piranha card. However,every time we tried to get the interface working, the initialqueries would crash our server. Matrox engineering found abug when using SNMP over TCP/IP, and sent a fix. ApparentlyMatrox had only tested IPX. Once up and running, we were ableto view the port statistics and address tables. Ports can beenabled or disabled, or switched to full duplex. All of thiscan be done at the NetWare console, using Matrox's consoleconfiguration utility.NetVantage NV7500At the top of the pack of small switches (eight ports and under),NetVantage offers a great switch with slots for fast uplinks.At $200 per port, it's a bit steep for the few features ithas, but at an entry price of $1,600, you can hardly go wrong.Unlike some of the others, NetVantage offers a graphical interfaceto the basic SNMP agent. However, configuration and maintenanceis very basic, with no support for advanced features, suchas RMON or filtering.With an agent that's identical to the Black Box switch, theNV7500 provides the same type of information and configuration.However, NetVantage offers a graphical interface to the basicMIB II statistics under HP OpenView, complete with a graphicalrepresentation of the hub. It would be advantageous to addthe ability to manipulate the static filter entries throughthe graphical interface, however.The basic model is just an eight-port Ethernet switch, but NetVantageships a 100BASE-Tx uplink port. Although its FDDI module isnot due until early next year, IP fragmentation is alreadybuilt in. ATM modules are planned for 1996 as well.Cisco Catalyst 1700Because of its meager one address per port, the Catalyst 1700is probably the most workgroup-oriented switch of the bunch.But if you use its uplink port, you can connect it to the enterprise.This switch, while short on management software (there areno graphical tools) and packet filtering features (there'sno VLAN support), offers not only private Ethernet, but twoFast Ethernet uplinks for connection to the server or campusbackbone at just under $160 per port. It's a solid, inexpensive,no-frills workgroup switch.Through a terminal menu system, we were able to configure theport security and view statistics about traffic on them. Youcan set the ports to bridge store-and-forward, fragment free,or, as 3Com calls it, fast forward (cut-through to most). Portmirroring is also available.The Catalyst 1700 is a fixed-configuration switch with two FastEthernet ports for servers. So, don't expect to upgrade thiswith any other fast ports, such as ATM or FDDI. You will needto move up to Cisco's Catalyst 2800 (which was not tested herebecause it exceeded our price point) to get that added functionality.Like the 2100, this switch will benefit from management underCiscoWorks.Black Box Ethernet Switch LB9500AKeeping up with the big switches doesn't seem to be a problemfor this very basic switch, although Black Box's $250 per portis high. Other than an optional redundant power supply, thereare no expansion slots for modules like high-speed ports. BasicSNMP is included, but Black Box would benefit from a graphicalmanagement tool like NetVantage's, rather than a simple MIBdefinition (which didn't compile anyway)Using a terminal to connect to the console, we were able toconfigure the IP address of the bare-bones SNMP agent. Beyondthat, there was little to configure. Configuring bridging allowsfor static address entries, which you can add manually or throughthe listing of currently active addresses. We were able tochange the size of the bridge address table. If it's feasiblefor your network, a smaller table means faster lookups.Adding a graphical interface to manage the hub would be a greatimprovement. As it stands, we were unable to compile the MIBunder HP OpenView or SunNet Manager. We even tried two different"corrected" versions of the MIB.D-Link DES-604 four-port 10BASE-T Switching HubWith only four ports, this switch needs the help of a hub tofeed a workgroup. Luckily, the ports are designed for thatno crossover cable is necessary. Management is nonexistent,but performance is better than most. The per port cost of $250is steep for the features, but for $1,000 you get a cheap entryinto switching. The DES-604 will simply switch Ethernet andblink LEDs; don't expect any management, filtering or fastuplinks.Using a method similar to 3Com's, the DES-604 minimizes lostpackets by "throttling" the input ports. This helps it achievea little better performance than the rest of the field, buta little more buffer space may help it catch up with 3Com.At more than 2,000 addresses per port, you'll need a new switchlong before the bridge table is full.SMC EZ Switch-6xEZ may describe the decision to bypass purchasing this switch.Complete lack of configuration options, terminal or otherwise,is only superseded in shortcomings by its absolutely poor performance.This switch was not only unable to keep up with the othersin two-stream buffering, it couldn't even hold one wire-speedstream. This is the Corvair of switches: "unsafe at any speed."At $200 per port, we can't see any market for a switch withsuch poor performance. Just pony up the additional $50 perport for the SMC TigerSwitch or 3Com LinkSwitch and get realperformance and loads of features to boot.Robert J. Kohlhepp can be reached at rkohlhepp@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Putting Ethernet Switches To The TestWe tested throughput using Alantec's PowerBits, which can blastany packet to any switch port and report where it ends up.We used it to test the switches for up to six sustained streams,and we tested the ability to buffer and flow control. The PowerBitswas only able to test Ethernet to Ethernet, so we couldn'ttest the faster uplinks some switches offered.Using the PowerBits, we streamed data from two switch portsto a single port for 10 seconds.That means we could have up to 20 Mbps headed for a 10-Mbpsoutlet. Most switches kept the output port at wirespeed (10Mbps), but 3Com and D-Link buffered enough to send more afterthe input stream halted. They use an effective buffering schemethat helps under short-term, heavy-load situations.The throughput testing was not quite complete, since our PowerBitsequipment was capable of only six streams of data (about 90,000packets per second at 64 bytes). This was just an exercisein finding out if the vendors were truthful about supportingwire speed on multiple ports.We blasted as many streams as possible, depending on the numberof ports available on each switch (only two on D-Link, forinstance) for a duration of 10 seconds. With the exceptionof the SMC EZ Switch-6x, all switches could handle wire-speedquite handily. Less expensive doesn't mean slow.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Classic Bridges vs. SwitchesAlthough externally these switches appear to operate as bridges,they handle ports and bridging tables differently. And theyoffer bridging methods other than store-and-forward to reducelatency. Traditionally, bridges were integral parts of thenetwork flow. They were expected to know every MAC address,keep track of paths to those devices and prevent traffic loopingin the network. That isn't quite true anymore.Workgroups or buildings are attached to the backbone throughthe switch, so there's really only one port that talks to restof the world-the uplink port. Since the switch knows addressesof all of the workstations connected to it, address tablesneed only be as large as the number of workstations connectedlocally. With classic bridges, packets destined for unknownaddresses are flooded on all ports. Switches know all of thestationson its local ports and only flood the uplink port.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Middleware -- Driving Applications On the NetworkBy:Bruce RobertsonMiddleware is impacting network applications significantly.Little, however, is understood about specific middleware productsand how they really work, mostly because a deployment and networkingperspective hasn't been used in evaluating middleware. Developersevaluate middleware from the top down. Often, an applicationdeveloper is like the car driver who doesn't really want toknow how the car operates or is maintained. They just wantto drive it. They really only touch the steering wheel andthe pedals. A thorough perspective requires understanding middlewarefrom the bottom up, from the inside out and over time. Experienceddrivers know that a car has to be maintained, that some carswork better on some roads than others and that an educateddriver is less likely to have accidents or breakdowns. Whilethe developer still does the network application driving, consultingwith a qualified network application mechanic will improvethe life of the application.From the Driver's Seat Programmers essentially define middlewareby its Applications Programming Interface (API).  They want toknow how to use it.  This top-down view yields a characterizationof products by how they are accessed without necessarilyspecifying what they actually do diagram "MiddlewareFunctionality The API Perspective").  Thinking that two cars arevery different because one is manual while the other is automaticmisses the point that underneath they might be mostly the same.Nevertheless, these top-down categories are commonly used: Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM) products Remote Procedure Call (RPC)-based products Data access products Distributed Transaction Processing (DTP) monitor products Object Request Broker (ORB) productsSome products, however, provide more than one API, and vendorsare increasingly working together to offer multiple productslayered together as a suite. Each product has chosen a setof services to offer underneath these APIs, and they are oftenremarkably related even if the APIs are different.MOM systems typically offer a very basic set of commands fornetwork communication-often as few as SEND and RECEIVE.  We'renot talking about "e-mail" messaging.  MOM products let programssend data to programs in real time (or slower), while e-mailinfrastructures are still primarily for store-and-forward textmessage exchanges between people.MOM is about as manual, yet as general purpose, as it can getfor the programmer. Application developers create applicationspecific functions or routines built on these basic messagingfunctions. As far as transports go, the interface is even simplerthan programming to a particular network transport API, likeTCP/IP sockets. Many message-oriented products exist, includingCovia Communications Integrator (CI), PeerLogic Pipes, MomentumXIPC/Message Express, IBM MQSeries, Digital DECmessageQ andNetWeave, but RDBMS vendors like Oracle and Sybase are gettinginto the fray as well with products like Oracle Mobile Agentsand EMS.RPC-based products are function oriented.  Developers definetheir own application-specific functions using an interfacedescription language (IDL), and then compile that function intothe client and server stub code that actually does thenetworking.  The application just makes normal function calls.Developers essentially create their own APIs.  Many RPC-basedproducts only generate function stubs for 3GL languages like C,but some support 4GL products like PowerBuilder.  While many 4GLtools can call C functions, it is easier if the functions aretool-specific.  When distributing existing host-based multiuserapplications, the RPC approach is very intuitive:  Each existingfunction can be split across the network as needed-just recompileto distribute a given function.  RPC-based products are fairlyautomatic compared with message-oriented solutions.RPC-based products come from many vendors, which includes DistributedComputing Environment (DCE) standard vendors such as the majorUnix players (IBM, Digital, Hewlett-Packard and so on, exceptSun), along with Gradient, Open Horizons and others. Sun'sONC RPC is implemented on many Unix platforms. NobleNet andNetWise offer third-party products.Data access products offer data-oriented APIs that reveal data intables.  Using a standard API (ODBC), applications get at remotedata using SQL.  However, most RDBMS vendors have proprietaryAPIs in addition to ODBC, since those let them directly exposeunique RDBMS functionality.  If the application only needs tohave its data distributed to, and shared from, database servers,data access works well.  Many tools already support this API, andsince no application specific programming is required on the backend, it empowers ad-hoc application development.Here, only the data can be on another node. With all the others,whole pieces of the overall application can be split acrossthe network to run on other nodes. While the more recent developmentof stored procedures provides some additional program executionacross the network, this is still limited to SQL data manipulation,and it's RDBMS-specific at that. Besides the big RDBMS vendorslike Oracle (SQL*Net), Sybase (Open Client/Open Server), Microsoft(DB-Library) and so on, third-party vendors like IBI, TechGnosis(recently purchased by Intersolv), Cross Access, NetWise (recentlyacquired by Microsoft), Neon Systems and many others offerRDBMS-independent data access products.DTP monitor products offer a middleware environment orientedtoward handling transactions over a network.  Transactionmonitors add BEGIN and END TRANSACTION semantics to the genericSEND and RECEIVE.  By using DTP services, the application doesn'thave to include logic to assure transaction integrity.DTP products are often built on top of message-oriented or RPCbased technology but add significant control and managementfunctionality. Most DTP vendors are working to implement newX/Open standard APIs, but today, most have proprietary APIs.DTP products interact with database resources via the X/A standardinterfaces supported by most RDBMS vendors. Products includeNovell Tuxedo, Transarc Encina, AT&T GIS Top End and IBM CICS.From the developer's viewpoint, this is a manual transmissionwith more gears, but the car has airbags to keep passengersas safe as possible.ORB products support network interaction between pieces of anapplication with yet another programmer API:  the object Once thedeveloper starts working in an object-oriented tool (a 3GL, likeC++ or a 4GL), the easiest middleware would directly network theobjects created in the tool.  An ORB just lets the developer ofan application containing many objects easily partition thoseobjects onto different network nodes.  This is similar to theRPC-based approach, except for object-oriented tools, notfunction-oriented tools.If the object-oriented developer does not use an ORB, the programmingjob will be complicated by having to create the links betweenobjects and the functions or other APIs offered by the othermiddleware solutions. The ORB world has many standards: theObject Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture(CORBA), along with de facto standards like Microsoft's OLE(which is waiting for Cairo before it gets distributed functionality)and OpenDOC. Much of CORBA currently defines developer APIs,although later versions are finally defining services to exposevia the APIs and even some interoperability options. ORBs areavailable from large system vendors (IBM SOM/DSOM, HP, Digital,NEC, AT&T GIS) and many third parties, including Iona (Orbix),Expersoft (PowerBroker), PostModern (ORBeline) and NeXT.Some development tools contain middleware components, such asFort , Dynasty, Seer and Antares Alliance Group (Huron ObjectStar).Tool products with built-in middleware can usually be adaptedto use external middleware solutions.Looking Under the HoodBeyond hiding things from developers (and thus controlling diversity),middleware takes care of things developers would normally haveto handle in the application. Middleware provides services,and can therefore reduce the effort, time and cost requiredto implement an application.Application-oriented network mechanics don't focus so much onwhat API a middleware product offers, but on the complex issuessurrounding the actual middleware services-specifically howthey impact the network and scale to the enterprise. Dependenciesand deficiencies often become apparent only during deployment,just like you might only realize your car is guzzling gasolineafter driving it for a while.Each middleware product can offer, or decline to offer, manyservices across the network, but even if programmers noticeand appreciate them, they still may only see the service asoptions in the API, instead of something to be deployed andmaintained. Take name services: Most data access middlewarehas a name service that lists the RDBMS servers users can access,and translates that name into an underlying network address(an IP address or a DNS host name, for example). That's usuallyenough for the programmer; the user will see names.The networker notices that a given RDBMS' implementation fornaming lookup and address resolution is completely static andbased on tables that have to be manually maintained at eachclient node. Only lately have RDBMS vendors offered a morecentralized and dynamic approach-one that is infinitely easierto deploy and manage over time. The networker might insiston using these more scalable implementations.Moreover, each product is a mix of APIs and services, each uniqueand possibly right for a particular application environment.Some products even support multiple APIs and services. NetWeaveand ISIS, for example, support both message-oriented and dataaccess approaches.Middleware products can also be layered on top of each another.Many DCE RPC-based products use DCE's other services (likedirectory and security). Open Horizons provides data accessover DCE, while Transarc Encina provides DTP services overDCE. The Orbix ORB runs on top of other middleware (ISIS).IBM has announced it will create a service provider API forSOM/DSOM, so other middleware products like PeerLogic Pipescan fit underneath.Middleware Transport ServicesMiddleware is where the application hits the network. Like differentcar models, different middleware products offer a variety ofways to get the basic transportation job done. The largestdifferences come in the model for interacting over the network,including one-to-one interaction using request/reply conversationsor events, and one-to-many interaction using broadcasts andpublish/subscribe. Underneath those basic interaction modelslurk interesting differences between products.All middleware supports communication in all directions, exceptdata access middleware where only clients can initiate conversationsand make requests. Data access interaction also typically placesthe largest burden on network bandwidth, since large resultsets can be requested ad hoc by end users.The typical request/reply model used by network transports,such as TCP/IP, characterizes most RPC and data access middleware Ask a question; wait for an answer. This synchronous blockingbehavior suits procedural applications, where things happenin a logical order, well controlled by a single code base usuallyrunning on the client. The middleware makes sure that the requestand reply are delivered. Often, the middleware does little,only passing the message directly down to TCP/IP or anotherstack for reliable connection-oriented delivery. Conversationsare set up, data is exchanged and the conversation is torndown. Such mechanics are most efficient if servers aren't overloadedand if the client only talks to one server at a time.Applications, however, are increasingly becoming event oriented.Effective event orientation means ditching the conversationalmodel, since events require a more dynamic and flexible modelwith lower overhead per interaction: non-blocking asynchronouscommunication. Applications can't stop working while waitingfor events. Instead, events just happen.Asynchronous communication is possible with multithreaded RPCs(DCE using DCE threads, for example) but has proven much easierwith message-oriented middleware. Many message-oriented solutionsimplement their asynchronous behavior by using the underlyingoperating system's threads support or deliver it internallyfor operating systems that aren't inherently multitasking (likeWindows 3.x). Messaging products like NetWeave and Covia CIoffer synchronous and asynchronous behavior.So, the great "RPC vs. message-oriented middleware" debate comesdown to this: RPCs and messages really aren't completely distinctoptions. They are different sets of services and APIs deliveredin typical packaging combinations. Most RPC implementationsare blocking and synchronous, and therefore not perfect fordistributed event-oriented applications.An event-oriented application working over an asynchronous middlewaremechanism can exploit the parallelism of a network of resourcesby sending off multiple requests to multiple servers up frontand accepting responses as they come back, rather than contactingone server and waiting to hear back from it before continuingto the next. User response time would improve since more thingsget done at once. This is particularly well oriented to integratingmultiple legacy systems into a single end-user application.Message-oriented solutions (and this would include ORBs, DTPproducts and any other systems built on message-oriented infrastructure)also typically offer connectionless services. Now, a messagedoesn't have to require any response at all, even within theunderlying network transport layers. This is lower overheadthan having the middleware's own non-blocking functionalityimplemented over connection-oriented transport protocols. Itdoes require more data per message to include connection-likeinformation, but since centralized resources no longer haveto keep up connections, they can be more heavily loaded. MOMproducts, like PeerLogic Pipes, offer reliable yet connectionlessservices over IP.When message-oriented interaction is combined with queuing,applications no longer have to be online at the same time (thesame benefit as with e-mail or voice mail). Clients and serverscan queue up messages for each other, and when an actual connectionis made, the messages are exchanged. Some MOM products workwith in-memory queues for performance, while others supportdisk-based queues for reliability. Some, like NetWeave, usea single queue (for best performance with least latency) whileothers, like IBM MQSeries, use two (for highest availabilityand reliability). This queued messaging lets applications functionwell for the mostly disconnected user over low-speed or wirelesslinks, as well as for very heavily loaded servers (where thequeue enables session concentration and batch-like processingtypical of mainframe systems)Most request/reply environments use point-to-point connections.One device talks to another. A growing number of middlewareproducts, however, are taking advantage of broadcast and multicastparadigms. In a stock trading application, for example, peopleon a trading floor might want to track the cost of a givenstock on their workstations. A server could send that dataout 50 separate times in 50 separate messages to 50 separatemachines, or the 50 workstations could poll the server separately.The most efficient way, however, is to broadcast it once andlet them all listen. Multicast is a special case of broadcastingto more than one, but not all, nodes on the network.These one-to-many approaches can provide interesting networkingimplications, specifically because most routed networks don'tsupport broadcasting between subnetworks. Multicast may onlybe supported on particular datalinks and network transports.Teknekron's Rendezvous Software Bus, for example, offers extensivebroadcast functionality, for example, letting Microsoft Excelusers publish parts of spreadsheets anonymously for other usersto subscribe to independently over the network along with abroadcast relay component to move messages across subnetworkboundaries.Middleware Transparency ServicesA key benefit of middleware is how it hides differences betweendeployment environments. Transparency must exist not only across,but between, lots of different platforms. Take network transparency.It's not just that the middleware API is simpler than the underlyingtransport API, it's that the middleware makes differences betweenmultiple transports transparent to the application, and makesfor more ongoing deployment and maintenance flexibility.Beyond transparency, middleware should offer network protocol,operating system, programming language and even API independence.Network independence, for example, means that two devices communicatingwith each other need not have a single network protocol incommon.Between operating system platforms, middleware normalizes dataformat differences. Some use a single platform-independentdata representation on the wire (like XDR in ONC RPC or ASN.1).Most let the "receiver make right" any differences, which meansthe middleware has to know from which machines messages arecoming, but it still results in less overhead per message whilekeeping servers pumping out natively formatted data at theirfastest clip.Moreover, middleware can hide real differences between differentdatabase systems (by supporting multiple vendor products likeIBI EDA/SQL does) or between different legacy application environments(by providing procedural access to existing business logicin CICS transactions, for example). All these resources looksimilar to the application running on the client, althoughsome programming may be required to integrate legacy transactions.Some applications will want full transparency from middlewareitself. In this case, programmers create their own meta-API.Applications also gain middleware independence by using threetier application designs that use different middleware betweendifferent tiers of the application. SAP AG's R3, for example,uses messaging between desktops and application servers, butuses data access between application servers and database servers.Middleware Directory ServicesDirectory services are a large differentiating factor betweenproducts offering similar APIs, transport and transparencyservices. Without some level of naming indirection, changingservice locations (server names or IP addresses, for example)on the fly will be difficult after the application is deployedto hundreds or thousands of desktops.Some middleware products offer no help. Others rely on underlyingnetwork transport-specific mechanisms (like DNS, NetWare SAPor NetBIOS) for name lookup and address translation. These,however, aren't consistent across all transports, nor are anyof them perfectly suited to the needs of applications tryingto name components dynamically. Still others offer their ownsimple name services or full enterprise scalable naming.Nowhere is this more pronounced than when comparing DCE RPCwith other RPC implementations. While most RPC products punton the naming service issues, DCE RPC is often implementedwith DCE's other services including directory services (celldirectory service) and security (Kerberos with DCE-specificintegration). Moreover, DCE's services are not simple namingservices, but complete authentication and data encryption servicesdelivered in a scalable way.Contrast this with PeerLogic's Pipes naming service. Since there'sno security service, Pipes provides only name/address translationservices. Authentication is the application developer's problem.However, its name service is well optimized for robust distributeddynamic name services. A service can announce itself via thedirectory and users can immediately tell that a new resourceis available. Applications can easily search the name spacefor services they need. While it's not infinitely extensible,the Pipes directory service offers some attribute fields thatcan be populated as required for application needs, allowingthe application developer to type and otherwise identify services.Middleware's use of external directory services can be platformspecific. Oracle, for example, now supports NDS in Oracle 7.2,but only when the server runs directly on the NetWare platform.If you need to run Oracle on Unix, you can't authenticate againstNDS.Directory services enhance their basic location transparencybenefits with associated services like transparent load balancingacross services. Some middleware products offer their own directoriesalong with other mechanisms for load balancing (Tuxedo andother DTP products). Reliable messaging products like ISISsupport load balancing. High availability and load balancinggo hand in hand with a good dynamic directory service.Middleware Security ServicesDirectories are better deployed in conjunction with securityservices designed to support a single system image. This is,for example, when a user logs in once to the network and nolonger individually logs in over and over again to each applicationor server.Security functionality should include authentication and privacy(encryption), data integrity and identification (perhaps usingdigital signature technology) and non-repudiation (return receipt).Not many middleware products do this internally, although DCEdoes provide directory and security services in addition tothe RPC transport to handle most of these needs. Only recentlyhas Novell announced that the Tuxedo transaction monitor willuse NDS for directory and security needs (a product calledTransactionLink), but only on the NetWare NLM platform version.While Kerberos (RFC 1510) seems like the external security systemof choice outside the NOS proprietary implementations, it hasonly recently (in V5) supported public-key encryption solutionslike RSA. A new standard API called Generic Security ServicesAPI (GSSAPI, defined in RFC 1508) should make it easier fornon-DCE middleware to use security services such as Kerberosor any other service that supports that API. Other applicationsthat do not use the DCE RPC mechanism may still directly authenticateusing Kerberos. Suite Software's SuiteDOME ORB uses messageoriented mechanisms across the wire, but supports Kerberos.Kerberos, however, isn't perfect. It doesn't, by itself, protectfrom password-guessing attacks. Nor does it support hardwarebased one-time passcode options like Security Dynamics SecurID.In contrast, Oracle's Secure Network Services now supportsfingerprint recognition in its SQL*Net data access middleware.Most middleware products offer no guarantee that authenticationwill be done securely. Instead, user names and passwords movebetween client/server in open text. Anyone with a network analyzercould compromise your security. Beyond authentication, dataencryption is usually not offered.Contrast this stark reality with the enhanced functionalityof some middleware products. DCE RPC-compatible applicationscan flip a switch to turn on data encryption. Microsoft SQLServer 6.0's new DCE RPC-based DB-Library supports both pernode and centralized enforcement. While SQL Server 6.0 usesthe NT domain services and not the DCE directory and securityservices, authentication is still secure if you choose eitherNamed Pipes or DCE RPC transport connections.Creating applications that access resources separately controlledby different security systems (DCE, RDBMS, NOS, mainframe andso on) can make things complex. The different systems mustbe separately integrated or gatewayed by the middleware orthe application. Otherwise, users must log in to those resourcesseparately. Oracle's SQL*Net/DCE provides single system logonusing DCE directory and security while running over the DCERPC transport. Open Horizon's Connection offers database accessthis way, but to more than just Oracle databases. Novell, incontrast, has not decided if its Net2000 security servicesbased on NDS will gateway to DCE or NT domain security. Sofar, it has only said it'll synchronize directories with thosesystems in the future.Most middleware products still expect the developer to makesecurity decisions and address those concerns outside the middleware.Moreover, security control may need to be focused at many levels the conversation, socket or transport level (Kerberos, Netscape'sSSL); the document or message level (SHTTP, secure e-mail solutionslike S/MIME and PEM); or even the transaction level (DTP products,EDI). A lot still has to be decided as networked applicationsmove from being deployed over relatively controlled privatenetworks into public networks where full security is a requirement.Middleware Fault Tolerance ServicesSome middleware is focused squarely on offering high availabilityand fault tolerant support for networked applications. Forexample, Tandem/ISIS offers fault tolerant message-orientedsolutions for reliable messaging, while Teknekron's similarpublish/subscribe mechanism does not.Beyond specifically nonstop systems lies middleware designedto assure transaction integrity despite failures, but withoutmaking the application do all the extra work. An update maynot be made, but at least the middleware makes sure that complextransactions are fully carried out, or completely backed out.DTP products offload clients from the two-phase commit processingthat data access products require, and let an event-orientedapplication get on with other tasks while complex transactionprocessing is taking place elsewhere. DTP products are usedmore often than data access middleware when high performanceand complete reliability are paramount. By depending on moremiddleware services, applications can be smaller.Distributed fault tolerant solutions require a naming or fulldirectory service to provide location transparency for serviceproviders. Client applications can't have hard-coded servicenames or network addresses. They will break when a serviceis moved to another machine. Some middleware solutions, suchas PeerLogic Pipes and ISIS, automatically start additionalservices on new machines if loads get too high on one server,or for fail-over if a server becomes unavailable.For multiple instances of a duplicated service, most middlewaresystems will provide some load balancing across them. However,mechanisms vary from nothing (in PeerLogic Pipes) to a DTPproduct's careful analysis of resource platform load.While some of these differences can seem subtle, if you're drivingthe applications on your network, it will pay to understandhow to exploit, deploy and maintain these middleware services.Not only will you gain a better understanding of how applicationsimpact your network, you'll be able to steer your applicationdevelopers down the right service roads.Bruce Robertson can be reached at brucer@metagroup.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1The Redeeming Qualities Of Val-Pak's NetworkBy:Maureen ZaprylukEveryone has received an envelope of coupons in the mail, offeringeverything from free pizzas to dry cleaner discounts. Behindthese money-saving offers is a high-volume, high-speed networkthat pumps out billions of coupons every year. "Twenty-fourhours a day, seven days a week, huge images are floated ontothe network," says Alan Robson, Val-Pak director of IS. ValPak Direct Marketing Systems, a cooperative, direct mail advertisingcompany based in Largo, Fla., has franchises across the U.S.and Canada. Churning out countless coupons requires two facilitiesin Largo-one for administration and one for production-whichare linked by redundant T1s to a graphics facility in Las Vegas.Val-Pak's network connects 750 system components on an AppleTalkand IP network. The underlying infrastructure is switched Ethernet,FDDI and 10BASE-T. Remote users can dial in via Shiva's LanRoverfrom home or on the road, into 3Com ONcore concentrators andCisco routers. An Internet Web site, (http://www.valpak.com),provides information about Val-Pak and posts test coupons formarket research. Val-Pak uses CE Software's QuickMail for internalcommunications. A project to install Windows NT servers andWindows95 on desktops is being evaluated, which also wouldprovide Netscape on Macs or PCs for e-mail and internal services."Our network goal is achieved when our customers are able totake access to information for granted," says Robson. To createa coupon, a sales rep takes an order from a vendor, then decideswhat materials are required, some of which may be images storedon graphics servers or need to be scanned into the system.The artist designs the ad using Quark on a Mac. The dummy adrests on SPARC or Apple Workgroup servers while a four-colorproof is printed. Then it is sent to the sales rep via modemor FedEx. The ad is then taken off the Rasterizing Image ProcessingServer (RIPS) and is transferred to a film plate for printing.Supporting this process are Sun SPARC 1000E servers that handle120 GB of graphics applications and photo research databases.Artists use a graphics application built around a Sybase databaserunning on a Sun SPARC. Apple Workgroup Servers contain multiple80 GB of files of various graphics and data: order numbers,reference files, past artwork, clip art, logos. Others includedare reference applications and Primac's Unidata business databaseapplication. Val-Pak plans to set up individual Web sites fordatabase access."Managing fluctuations in network data traffic is a challenge,"says Robson. "There are rush periods and low-volume periods.Production is cyclical. There are short windows to gauge usageor plan growth when traffic peaks at different times." ValPak is ready to integrate two RISC 6000 servers to store 30GB of business applications and data, which will supplementa Tandem system.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Serving Up HTML Documents On The WebBy:Scott S. Campbell, Robert J. Kohlhepp and Josh LinderThe World Wide Web is all the rage. It seems that around everyturn on the Internet, a company or organization has a Web presence.If now is your time to create a presence on the Web, the firstthing you'll have to do is find yourself a server. Whateveryour environment may be, we're sure that one of these serverswill suit you.To give you a snapshot of what's available, we've taken an indepth look at 14 Web servers that span the most popular operatingsystems and server platforms. We examined Macintosh OS, NetWare,Unix, Windows 3.1 and Windows NT solutions.Of the products we tested, the Macintosh-based ones are arguablythe quickest to install and configure, particularly with WebStaras delivered on Apple's Internet Server Solution. However,the well-designed installation routines of O'Reilly & Associates'WebSite are intuitive with clearly thought-out defaults, whichmake its installation almost as simple.In general, Web servers running on one of the Unix operatingsystems will be extremely stable and flexible, but these solutionstypically have higher costs associated with their products,platform and maintenance. Because of the maturity of Unix,many support tools used with Web servers are readily availableall over the Internet, including scripting, compilers for customapplications, and precompiled binaries.All products have a security angle. For example, one advantageMac solutions have over most Unix-based products is they don'tautomatically index their directories. Hence, users don't havethe opportunity to surf the server's underlying files and directorystructures. Of course, tradeoffs exist. Not indexing directoriesautomatically means a slight performance hit, which could bea problem for larger high-volume sites.If cost cutting is a priority, many Web server options are available.Solutions, such as NCSA's and W3C's HTTPd, are not only free,but also can run on an inexpensive server platform, such ason an Intel machine with Caldera's Linux. Although this solutionis far from maintenance free and will require an administratorwho is familiar with Unix maintenance and configuration, itdoes benefit from the features that make Unix a strong, scalablesolution. On the other hand, if you're looking for a turnkeysolution, Apple's Internet Server Solution with WebStar isone of the easiest solutions around.Striking a balance among setup, features, maintenance and otheritems was a challenge, but, in the end, Purveyor from ProcessSoftware emerged on top. Macintosh-based WebStar from StarNinefared well, as did WebSite from O'Reilly & Associates.Process Software Purveyor 1.1aProcess Software's Purveyor 1.1a is the leading contender inthe Windows NT Web server market. Combining easy installation,good documentation and strong utilities, Process Software'sflagship Internet product is leaps and bounds better than its1.0 release.Purveyor runs as a service under Windows NT, and like a numberof the other products in this review, it creates a programfolder with the configuration utilities to ease server management.Purveyor adds value to Windows NT with features that show itstight integration with Program Manager. The installation createsa Purveyor menu and adds seven buttons to the toolbar for completecontrol of the server and a Control Panel with service manipulationoptions.Purveyor's well-done documentation consists of three books:Guide to Server Security, Programmer's Guide and a beefy 209page User's Guide. The irony is that Process Software's utilitysoftware offering is so easy to use that the extensive documentationis superfluous. The software is compatible with the standardCERN HTTPd, so migration of HTML documents, image maps andCGI scripts is a breeze for Webmasters looking for a changeof server platform. Server configuration and management canbe done locally or remotely using Purveyor's Remote SystemManagement (RSM) atop a Web browser.For users who wish to run a Web server under Windows95, Processoffers Process Personal Web Server for Windows95. Like theNT version, this port is highly integrated with Microsoft'snewest mainstream OS. Look for NetWare and VMS products aswell as a secure version in an upcoming release.StarNine WebStar 1.2.1We were very pleased with the simplicity of setting up WebStar,as StarNine and Apple have chosen to supply this product preinstalled on Apple's Internet Server Solution. As soon as wetook the PowerMac 6150/50 workgroup server out of the box andpowered it up, we could start configuring WebStar and addingpages for our tests. It was that simple.Configuration is accomplished via an administration utility,which provides a simple interface for modifying server features.Although the provided documentation is a little thin, you canfind detailed technical information on configuring your serveron StarNine's corporate Web pages.Setting up our pages was very easy, and we were impressed thatwe didn't need to make any modifications to page links whosesources reside in the same directory. On some other serverplatforms, such as with GLACI-HTTPD, we routinely had to modifyour image links to reflect where the pages were physicallystored in the directory structure. Hence, if you are supportingmultiple small pages, you can keep all of the relative componentsin the same directory and let the server default to local namingvery simple, indeed.Although not as pervasive as with many of the Unix-based solutions,CGI support for WebStar is extensive in the third-party domain.A quick look at StarNine's Web pages provides many sourcesof CGI that are modules ready to plug into your WebStar server.Of course, should that list not cover your specific niche,you can easily use AppleScript to develop your own CGI application.StarNine intends to develop both MacHTTP and WebStar products.They consider MacHTTP to be an entry-level product with whichnew administrators can get started. Then as their needs forpower and flexibility grow, administrators can move to WebStar,which performs approximately four times faster.O'Reilly & Associates WebSite 1.0dThe first software product from the book publishing giant O'Reilly& Associates is solid, easy to learn and easy to implementin a wide variety of scenarios. Although designed for WindowsNT, WebSite runs equally well on Windows95, only requiring12 MB RAM, which is half the requirement of other NT-basedproducts.Since O'Reilly & Associates is primarily a publishing house,it came as no surprise that WebSite's documentation is of thehighest quality in our entire review. The 325-page BuildingYour Own Web Site includes information on every aspect of thesoftware, and it made implementing every feature simple-evenfor a person who has never touched CGI or image map tools.WebSite is as elegant as it is extremely feature-rich. The twofloppy-disk setup was straightforward and similar to GLACIHTTPD and the Mac servers, and it asked for minimal configurationinformation during its installation. Once installed, WebSitecan be conveniently launched as a service, a service with adesktop icon or as a desktop application. The strong configurationutility, which can be run by right-clicking on the server icon,is easy to use and has several security features.O'Reilly uses an image mapping technique that's different fromthe other products. WebSite stores the actual map coordinatesin the registry; most other products either internally runan image map applet or perform this action through CGI. Thisregistry-based solution offers a perceptible performance gain;however, it lacks CERN- or NCSA-standard .MAP files, consequentlyforcing the administrator to create and maintain all map files.Overall, WebSite is solid, but it lacks some of the more advancedfeatures of other products we reviewed. During our testing,1.0d was the latest shipping release, however, 1.1 should beavailable by the time you read this review. The new releasewill include features on par with Purveyor 1.1a and CompuServe'sInternetOffice Web Server.StarNine MacHTTP 2.2MacHTTP is Chuck Shotton's shareware Web server for the Mac,which was turned over to StarNine Technologies when Shottoncame onboard to develop WebStar. Touted by StarNine as themost widely used desktop Web server on the Internet, this packageis distributed as a "fat binary" to run natively on both the680x0 and PowerMac environments at a modest price.The product is delivered via a single "Stuffit" file that canbe FTPed from StarNine's corporate Web server. No system extensionsor additional configuration is required to run, in contrastto W3C and NCSA's HTTPd for the Unix platform, which requiresignificantly more tinkering.Configuration of MacHTTP is accomplished via a simple text filecontaining brief descriptions of server parameters along withtheir set values. One problem with this server management approachis that the administrator must take the server offline to modifythe configuration. This is handled well by configuration utilitiesprovided with several other solutions, including WebStar andWebSite, which allow configuration changes on the fly.Examining the contents of the configuration file may be somewhatconfusing to someone who has never managed a Web server beforeand, unfortunately, the electronic documentation that comeswith the package doesn't offer much comfort in the way of details.However, surfing through StarNine's Web pages reveals hefty,readable discussions about each of the configuration options.In this respect, StarNine's support is very similar to WebStar's,which gives MacHTTP a higher level of utility and ease of usethan a thinly supported product, such as GLACI-HTTPD.Third-party CGI support is available for MacHTTP and a listof sources is located on StarNine's Web server. Although itis not as extensive a list as that provided for WebStar, youcan still choose from several options. Of course, should younot be able to find the routine you want, you can always resortto AppleScript.Netscape CommunicationsCommerce Server 1.12By marketing a commercial server on the Unix platform in additionto its popular browser, Netscape has set the technology marketablaze. Priced quite a bit below Open Market's product, Netscape'sCommerce Server offers a few more features and a bit easierinstallation. For the security conscious, the Commerce Serveris one of only two products in this review that support SecureSockets Layer (SSL) secure Web service technology.Installation starts with a simple script, which then hands offto your choice of form-enabled Web browser. Using the extensiveonline documentation (a printed version is available from Netscape),we were able to have the server up and running in a few minutes.With the addition of a few configuration variables, we hadour CGIs, such as image maps, doing business on the back end.Don't be misled: Netscape's bundle does not offer any CGI utilities,so you're on your own for securing and installing these utilities.As with many Unix-based servers, the Commerce Server is fullycapable of being a drop-in replacement for an existing NCSAserver. Since we installed the NCSA's server prior to Netscape's,the Commerce server was very easy to install. With simple useof the configuration interface, we were able to tell the serverto look in our existing directories for server content andCGI script. Of course, with most Unix-based solutions, youmust do quite a bit of setup before a Web server can be installed.CompuServe InternetOffice Web Server 1.0When the largest online service company purchased Spry, oneof the promises was that CompuServe would have a cross-platformWeb server by the end of 1995. CompuServe is delivering, andit has servers that run on several platforms: Windows NT 3.51,SunOS 4.1.3, Solaris 2.3, BSDI, and HP/UX 9.3 and 9.4. Thisrange of platforms allows for an easy corporatewide implementationof Internet services.In its first incarnation, InternetOffice Web Server looks andfeels solid. The installation, based on InstallShield Wizard,is complete and sets up the majority of static options, renderingit unnecessary to change them in the future. It also sub-installsODBC drivers, as InternetOffice includes support for ODBC toact as the middleware for CGI and BGI scripts. Additionally,InternetOffice Web Server includes support for remote administrationthrough Windows95 clients, the Perl programming language andsupport for multiple IP addresses.CompuServe's offering ships with five utilities: two administrationtools, an uninstaller, a performance monitor and an event viewer.The standard administration tool has intuitive Start, Pauseand Stop buttons for manipulating the server, and all of theoptions can be set by clicking on tabs within the main window.Quarterdeck Corp. Web Server 1.0Quarterdeck's entry Web Server for the Windows 3.1 environmentis a pleasantly compact and user-friendly system. Shippingon just two diskettes, the product installs easily and operatesover Novell's LAN WorkPlace TCP/IP stack-a definite plus foranyone already comfortably immersed in a NetWare environment.One of Quarterdeck's strongest features is its server administrationutility, which is significantly more intuitive than eitherWebStar's or NetManage's Personal Web Server utility. It usesa clear and concise graphical interface to configure all componentsof the Web server, from server name and IP address to domain,group and user-specific access rights. Additional configurationallows for path aliasing of files and directories, in whichone identifier represents an entire path everywhere it is usedas well as utilities for page redirection, in which a singleidentifier refers to a data path on another Web server. Thepower in this feature is that the server can expand its capacityby adding machines, and seamlessly maintain one point of contactto the Internet.During testing, we were concerned with problems that resultedfrom repeated access to documents on the server, as connectionswere lost quite regularly. In attempting to resolve this problem,we were repeatedly confounded by busy signals on Quarterdeck'sdial-up support line at all times during the day. Quarterdeckis taking measures to examine its phone support usage in termsof length of call and product in question to increase availability.Open Market Systems Secure Web Server 1.1Open Market, like Netscape, eases installation by using a standardWeb browser to install and configure the server. Open Marketis the only product reviewed here that supports both SSL andSecure HTTP (S-HHTP) for encryption. Using a multithreadedprocess, instead of forking, Secure WebServer uses a littleless memory than most Unix-based forked servers. Like Netscape,if you stick to a supported platform, Open Market offers serviceto the basic product.Also like Netscape, installation starts with a simple scriptthat sets up the administrative server, then using a Web browser,other aspects, such as server name, content directory and serverlistening port, are configured. Through more advanced configurations,directories for CGIs and path aliasing may be added using simpleHTML forms. Unlike the other Unix Web servers, image maps arehandled internally to the server and must be defined in theCERN format, which is a bit different from the de facto NCSAformat.Open Market offers security for transferring sensitive dataover the Internet. Improving on Netscape, Open Market offersboth SHTTP and SSL. Although using both is somewhat redundant,it does offer flexibility in choosing a browser that supportseither protocol.Unlike most other Unix server implementations, Secure Web Serveris not a plug-in replacement for NCSA's HTTPd. If you are alreadyrunning an NCSA server, you may want to consider Netscape fora secure server replacement. Beware: Open Market's script claimsto assist in conversion, but we encountered less-than-successfulresults when attempting to convert our files.Ameritech Library Services NetPublisher 1.0Ameritech's NetPublisher provides a number of features aimedat a narrow variety of organizations and libraries. Providingcustom installations, it's positioned with features gearedtoward electronic publishing of library documents as well ascommunicating electronically with other libraries. Althoughaverage in most categories, Ameritech's price is far aboveany other product we tested.Ameritech's view of the Web as a vehicle for networking librariesaccounts for this product's focus on allowing easy implementationof a library system. Since this system is positioned as a "publishing"solution, rather than a "presentation" system, the server iscomplemented by NetPublisher Editor. Unlike anything else inour review, the Editor views Web sites as containing structureddocuments, similar in nature to how hard copy works. Additionally,NetPublisher is a Z39.50 server that simplifies Internet-basedSQL searches. Although Z39.50 isn't a feature requested bythe majority of Web users, it is one that is the frameworkfor linking libraries.NetManage Personal Web Server 4.6Personal Web Server by NetManage is delivered as one of approximately38 IP-based components in its product Chameleon for Windows3.1. Personal Web Server is well named. It's not well suitedto publish any significant number of home pages, but it doesprovide the basic services that users might want on platformsthey already have at their disposal.Once we had the Personal Web Server out of the box, we wereamazed at its serious lack of documentation. There was a fairamount of documentation supporting the other IP applicationsin the package, but very little regarding Web services. Everysource we turned to for technical information proceeded topoint us at simplistic examples in a self-explanatory air.For the novice Web administrator, it is clearly insufficient.Although Personal Web Server does function adequately, we couldn'tshake the feeling that it was somewhat of an afterthought inrespect to the entire Chameleon product. Fortunately, it didinclude several of the basic configuration features that wehave seen in other products that made it function on a parwith similar systems.GLACI GLACI-HTTPD 2.01NetWare is arguably one of the better platforms for file sharing,and it only makes sense that a file sharing operation suchas Web services would be implemented there. Although we anticipateda solid server with features and tools comparable to severalof the Windows NT and Unix-based products, GLACI-HTTPD fromthe Great Lakes Area Commercial Internet (GLACI) is a Web serverthat's still developing as a commercial product. Fortunately,the development team at GLACI is running full steam ahead.We came away from the tests of this product feeling that GLACIis putting a solid effort into providing a Web server solutionfor the NetWare platform. However, it still needs some workto develop into a mature product. For the NetWare-phile whoenjoys system tinkering and writing NLMs, or someone just interestedin very simple home page publishing, this product will fitthe bill adequately. If you need a little more guidance, staytuned to GLACI's Web site as more features and utilities areon the horizon.Although we did not test it, GLACI does have a secure versionof its Web server which combines the basic GLACI-HTTPD withthe SSL flavor of secure Web service. A fully functional demonstrationcopy of the product is easily available from GLACI's Web servervia FTP and is delivered in a single .ZIP file.NCSA HTTPd 1.5, W3C HTTPd 3.0Free and stable servers are available on the Internet if youare not concerned about data encryption or easy installation.W3C and NCSA offer Web servers precompiled for various platforms.Source code is available for almost any other platform.Installation and configuration are not for the Unix newbie,although the addition of CGI and other trinkets are just aseasy as any of the commercial versions. "Un-tar-ing" the NCSAdistribution reveals a precompiled HTTPd executable as wellas other helpers, such as image map and other utilities. W3Cdoes not include anything beyond the HTTPd. Normally, installationis actually quite simple. But, since our /usr/local/bin directoryis NFS mounted, we needed to install elsewhere.Configuration of these freeware servers mirrors their commercialcounterparts, but graphical administration is not an offering.Instead, a few configuration files will need to be edited.For the average installation, these files are quite simpleto work with and include many examples and defaults that indicatethe proper formats.Both products lack a secure mode, such as SSL or SHTTP. Therefore,they are quite inappropriate for online sales or other sensitivedata. They do make an excellent choice for internal informationservers or other general data distribution servers.Folio Corp. Infobase Web Server for Windows NT 1.0Folio's Infobase Web Server is an easy-to-configure WindowsNT product that has an advantage over competing products: Itallows Internet access to "Infobases," which are Folio VIEWS3.1 databases. However, this difference has made Folio's Infobasea niche product lacking in a number of key areas.The two-disk installation of Infobase Web Server was straightforwardand very similar to other Windows NT and Windows 3.1 productstested. Resource requirements are hefty for Windows NT 3.5,requiring a Pentium processor with 24 MB of RAM. Once the productwas installed, the configuration utilities were of little helpand paled in comparison to the bundled goodies and configurationutilities from Process, Netscape and StarNine. Although InfobaseWeb Server runs as a Windows NT Service, it conveniently placesan icon on the desktop for ease of stopping, or killing theserver.Folio is aimed strictly at organizations with users who requireaccess to existing FolioVIEWS Infobases. If an NT-based, Webto-database access is a requirement, although expensive, thismay be your product.Scott S. Campbell is a network systems analyst at Syracuse University.He can be reached at sscampbe@syr.edu. Josh Linder is a networkconsultant at Syracuse University. He can be reached at jslinder@syr.edu. Robert J. Kohlhepp can be reached at rkohlhepp@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Web Servers: A Status UpdateIf there is one thing we noticed during our review, it is thatthose companies that provided detailed explanations about configurationand usage, either in hard or soft copy, undoubtedly ended upwith products that were easier to install and administer. Havingdocumentation to back you up is essential in taking on anynew project, such as installing and maintaining a Web server.Those products that ignore this element, we feel, are destinedto no more than runner-up status.In the battle of complexity versus ease of use, there is noclear winner. It depends largely upon a potential administrator'sbackground and how they like to work. Many people might prefera system that is exceptionally easy to set up and maintainin exchange for a smaller third-party support structure andresides on a familiar computing platform. On the other hand,we imagine that there are equally as many people who like thechallenge of diving into a new project that will require developing a whole new set of technical skills on a system that ishighly customized. Either way, there are good solutions outthere.Overall, we found most of the Web servers we evaluated to allbe in a developmental phase. In one or more areas we foundweaknesses that were either addressed by other products orwere perhaps available now as add-ons, but they should be partof the product in the long run. One example is in server accesslogging and reporting. Without exception, every product createdstandardized log files sequentially detailing every transactionperformed by the server. Unfortunately, none of the productsincluded any utilities for scrutinizing that log file to extractuseful information. Three examples we can envision are: Reportingon the number of hits to the server from each client domain;reporting the number of hits on a given page hosted on theserver; and some kind of selected cross-reference of the previoustwo. Clearly, these are statistics that any commercial servicecould find immediately useful, let alone the curiosity of thecasual site administrator.The good news is that most of the vendors we spoke with areactively developing their product lines as this goes to print.Several of the companies have new servers on the horizon, andwe have every reason to believe that Web servers will sooncome of age as truly mature and robust products.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1How We Tested: Hardware And Operating SystemsOur testing of the listed products obviously required a diverseset of hardware platforms to support the various operatingsystems. Although we made no cross-platform performance tests,we thought we'd share the configurations we used for our evaluations.Macintosh OS System 7.5.1: We actually ran two different Macsfor the testing here. WebStar was delivered on an Apple WorkgroupServer 6150/66 with 24 MB of RAM. This machine was more thanadequate for the task and could probably be scaled back fora small Web site. For those who want to take WebStar to itslimits, Apple will be introducing a PCI-bus version of theInternet Server Solution this spring.For testing MacHTTP, we chose what would be considered a "middleof the road" solution by today's standards-a Quadra 950 with24 MB of RAM. Although faster than many of the Macintoshesstill in use in the population, and compared with the PowerMacintoshes today, it seemed like a fair compromise. It alsogave us a chance to test the "Fat Binary" claim and confirmthat MacHTTP will run on both platforms.NetWare 3.12/4.1: GLACI-HTTPD was tested on two separate platformsto confirm compatibility with both NetWare 3.12 and 4.1. Asa departure from our other platforms, we selected a generic486/33 MHz with 16 MB of RAM. We felt that there were probablymany sites with comparable equipment collected over the pastfew years, and that this was representative of most of thosesystems.For our tests under NetWare 4.1, we used a Dell Dimension XPSP90c with 32 MB of RAM. With its 90-MHz Pentium processor,there were plenty of CPU cycles to go around, between runningNetWare 4.1 andGLACI-HTTPD. Of course, we did not have additional modules running,such as NetWare NFS, ATPS or something else. Had that beenthe case, we probably would have needed to review the memoryrequirements a little more closely.Unix Environment: Our four Unix-based products were tested inSolaris. Netscape's Commerce Server, NCSA HTTPd, W3C HTTPd,and Open Market Systems Secure Web server, were tested underSolaris 2.4 on a SPARCstation IPC. Although this machine isnot fast, it had 48 MB of RAM and should prove to be an adequateplatform for smaller sites with few CGIs. For busier or morecomplex configurations, a Sun SPARC 20 class machine may bein order.Windows 3.1x: For our Windows 3.1-based products, we used aDell 450/ME with 16 MB of RAM. This machine was set up forbooting multiple discrete windows environments, and it waseasy to configure in several different circumstances. Althoughmany people are probably running both faster, more powerfulmachines, we felt that this was a decent example of what islikely a solid "middle-of-the-road" platform by today's standards.Windows NT Server 3.51: For the Windows NT environment, we utilizeda Dell PowerEdge XE590-2, a dual-Pentium processor machine,with 64 MB of RAM. This was a solid machine that gave us zippyperformance, not only while serving up Web pages but also whenswitching configurations between products. We don't actuallyconsider this as a recommended first server, but it may providethe kind of performance that a heavily used commercial sitemight require.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Network Analyzers Race To Capture Fast Ethernet But Need ToRev Their EnginesBy:Bruce BoardmanFast Ethernet is pulling away in the 100-Mbps network race,with infrastructure vendors turning out hubs, switches andNICs with abandon. While there's nothing in a Fast Ethernetpacket to decode that is any different from a 10 Mbps Ethernetpacket, those Fast Ethernet packets sure do go by awfully fast.We tested five analyzers for Fast Ethernet in our SyracuseUniversity lab. The software products included Novell's LANalyzer,Intel's LANDesk Traffic Analyst, The AG Group's EtherPeek andCinco's NetXRay. At the top end, we pulled the wrappers offNetwork General's hardware-based analyzer and ever-popularSniffer, now cruising at 100 Mbps.A direct comparison among these products, however, wouldn'texactly be fair. Their approaches, the market segments theytarget and even the platforms they run on differ greatly. Ourgoal was to get a sense of how today's offerings perform. Whilewe awarded Network General's Sniffer our Editor's Choice becauseit clearly stood above this crowd, this market is still emerging.Network General Fast Ethernet SnifferNothing could compare to the Sniffer. HP is focusing on VG AnyLAN(surprise, surprise). Azure and Comtest don't have productsyet. Wandel and Goltermann submitted a DA-30, but felt thatit was more of a development and benchmark tool. We agree.And the software-based products just can't keep up.However, in many respects, this new Sniffer is a little brotherto the 10-Mbps version. The interface, capture, decode andperformance are similar. And setting up offset filters anddecoding them is no different. But this new version has somegrowing to do.It's missing the ability to run the expert system while capturingpackets, for instance. When we tried to run the expert system,the Sniffer displayed a message saying that it was droppingback to classic, or normal mode. Network General says thisversion of the expert system, ported from the 10-Mbps product,can't run reliably online.All is not lost, however. You can run a captured trace offlinethrough the expert system, and the Sniffer replays the traceat a speed that won't overrun the processor. That's great,in theory, but in practice this meant taking lots of littlecapture snap shots, since the capture buffer without filtersfills rather quickly. Filtering cut down on the amount of traffic,but then we weren't always sure we would know enough abouta reported problem to start off troubleshooting with a filter.This whole process limits one of the Sniffer's most powerfultools.Also, historical statistical sampling is not part of this version,but Network General plans to add it, along with online expertprocessing to the v5.0 release due out around May of this year.This release is scheduled to be a major upgrade in performanceand feature set. Upgrades to release 5.0 will be free.The Sniffer's performance really stood out, only dropping acouple of packets when we blasted 64,524 packets per second(pps) on the wire-a high rate, despite only 45 percent utilization.In a less stressful test, measuring statistics only, we steppedutilization up to 100 percent just to see how accurately theSniffer measurements were, and at what point the user interfacelocked up. In this scenario the Sniffer accurately measuredutilization to about 98 percent of the 100 Mbps maximum withoutlocking up.Cinco NetXRayCinco's NetXRay is the '90's software analyzer. To be more precise,it's the Windows95 analyzer. And it's the only one runningon Windows95 as of this writing. We've made much of how wellNetXRay compares to Novell's LANalyzer (see "NetXRay ExploitsWin95 for Protocol Analysis," October 15, 1995, page 50), butwhile Novell hasn't changed much in the LANalyzer recently,Cinco has had two releases of NetXRay since November 1995.Cinco is trying harder and winning!Cinco certainly improved its IPX stack decode, adding NCP sinceour last review, but it left out burst mode capability, theprotocol more IPX networks are running.Windows95-enhanced NetXRay's usability by lending consistencyto the interface. It borrows from Novell LANalyzer's dashboardtheme, displaying packets per second, utilization and errorswith speedometer-like gauges. It also extends this approachto the capture display. These displays also offered the typicalWindows95 tab that showed us traditional tables of details.Windows95's multitasking also enhanced NetXRay's responsivenessunder load. When we looked only at statistics and ran up networkutilization, the interface continued to respond up to about35 percent-much higher than the other software analyzers. Wecould tell there was a load on the wire, but we didn't haveto reduce the load to see the results, move the cursor or openother processes.In our capture performance test, NetXRay turned in the bestresults of the Intel platform-based products. What is not shownin the performance graph on page 114 is that even though NetXRaydid not capture all packets at 25 percent utilization (36,232pps), at 20 percent utilization (29,068 pps) NetXRay captured95 percent of the controlled packets.AG Group EtherPeekEtherPeek is the best product that you shouldn't buyyet. Yes,it's a superior low-end analyzer. It's fast, well designed,decodes the heck out of Fast Ethernet and has the lowest pricein town. But hold onto your green if you're looking for a 100Mbps Fast Ethernet analyzer, because EtherPeek isn't as goodas it will be.EtherPeek's modular design is one of its best features. Youcan add functions to the analyzer engine by adding parameterfiles. For instance, the version we tested let us decode 100Mbps Ethernet by adding a hardware interface file for a FarallonFast EtherTX-10/100 card. But the modularity can also get inthe way of EtherPeek being a full-featured analyzer. For instance,EtherPeek has added the ability to capture traffic from a 100Mbps Fast Ethernet segment, but hasn't updated the analyzer'sability to calculate statistics. The statistical elements reportedand the format of the display was good up to 10 Mbps, but utilizationrates beyond that produced garbage. AG Group is aware of thediscrepancy and will correct it in its next major release,due out some time in the first quarter of this year.The decodes and filters are deep, flexible and customizable.EtherPeek comes with more than 450 pre-set offset filters thatyou can modify. The decodes use the usual color and indentationto distinguish stack and protocol information, and they weresurprisingly compact and easy to read.You can add decodes, like the filters and hardware interfacefiles by simply adding the appropriate file. The AG Group hasa unique policy of making upgrades and new decodes availablefor no charge on its Web site. Users can also create theirown decodes, using examples in EtherPeek's Decoder MechanismsDocument, which explains how to set up unique decodes.EtherPeek's intelligent threading, which is an expert-like abilityto trace upper-layer session traffic of AppleTalk, TFTP, SMTP,NFS, SNMP and NCP sessions, is a unique feature among the softwareanalyzers. The AG Group will add duplicate IP address monitoringto the next release.The failure to calculate statistical percentages didn't keepEtherPeek from performing well. We ran it on a 6150 Power Macintoshwith the Farallon TX 10/100 Ethernet NuBus card. We were surprisedhow responsive the interface remained into the upper 20 percentutilization rates. Given that the 6150 and the NuBus don'thave quite the horsepower or throughput the 90-MHz Pentiumand Intel 100-Mbps PCI card have, EtherPeek will likely providebetter performance on a faster platform.EtherPeek's capture performed well compared to others. It captured100 percent of the control packets transferred up to 9,434pps, representing six percent utilization. Eighty-eight percentof the packets were captured at 10,416 pps, representing sevenpercent utilization. Occasionally it captured all the packetsat this utilization rate. This put EtherPeek solidly behindNetXRay but well ahead of LANalyzer.Novell LANalyzer for WindowsThis veteran software analyzer is a proven troubleshooting tooldesigned to make network analysis easy. LANalyzer is the Chevyof analyzers. It is the most intuitive analyzer on the market.Its dashboard-like gauges and simple flat menus are easy tofigure out. Novell helps the neophyte get started with contextsensitive troubleshooting help, a tutorial and a book on baseliningand troubleshooting (see our review "Software Analyzers BringRight Features, Right Price," July 1, 1995, page 116)As a true software analyzer relying completely on the ODI stack,did LAN-alyzer have the guts to perform at 100-Mbps speeds?In last year's 10-Mbps tests, we were surprised how well itdid, but the 100-Mbps world was another story. When we ranutilization above the maximum in the 10-Mbps world, LANalyzerset off alarms. We found there was no way to increase the alarmthresholds beyond the 10-Mbps limits, and no way to turn alarmingoff. This was a little frustrating since utilization measurementsof 100-Mbps traffic were correct.Capture performance was poor considering that LANalyzer hadan unfair advantage with its limited filtering capability;since the LANalyzer cannot set pre-capture offset filters,it couldn't capture IP sessions as part of the performanceload, which is one important way we tested the other analyzers.But still, it only captured 100 percent of the packets at upto 4 percent utilization (6,408 pps), which was only betterthan Intel's Traffic Analyst.The performance results displaying utilization were mixed. Onthe positive side, LANalyzer correctly reported utilizationto about 70 percent. But the user interface began to becomesluggish at about 5 percent utilization and completely unusableat 10 percent. We had to remove the network load before mouseand screen updates returned. In our test environment, it reallywasn't a big deal, since we can just turn the load off. Butin a real environment it means having to yank the wire.Intel LANDesk Traffic AnalystThe Traffic Analyst has all of the components to be a good tool.The user interface is easy to understand and use. Statisticsand capture features are solid. Filtering is sophisticatedand flexible; in fact, the entire product is. But we can onlyrecommend it for very lightly used Fast Ethernet segments:Its performance at high speeds is practically unusable.The initial user interface displays statistical station utilizationtables and graphics that gave us a quick idea of how the networkwas doing. There are three unique thermometer-like gauges thatslide up and down with variations of packet rate, utilizationand errors. They also feature little pointers that indicatetraffic high water marks. The approach was good, but like EtherPeek,it did not scale to 100 Mbps.Traffic Analyst's statistical design is for traffic loads upto 10 Mbps. For example, Traffic Analyst topped out at 8,000pps-a significant rate in the 10-Mbps world, but completelyundersized for the 100-Mbps rates that can easily reach 20,000or 30,000 pps, and max out at over 114,000 pps.Utilization rates were much better, accurately displaying intothe 60 percent range before producing incorrect results. Theuser interface began to slow down during statistical measurementat 21 percent utilization.The user interface didn't do so well under the load of our offsetcapture filter, becoming sluggish as utilization approached10 percent. We scaled back traffic to a load range of 6,408pps-that of a heavily utilized 10-Mbps Ethernet network-butthe Traffic Analyst could not keep up. We had to run utilizationdown to 3 percent utilization (5,522 pps) to capture 100 percentof the packets. If you capture a packet with the Traffic Analyst,be thankful!Bruce Boardman can be reached at bboardman@nwc.comBack to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1How We Tested Fast Ethernet AnalyzersWe tested Fast Ethernet analyzers using a stressful offset capturefilter and increasing network traffic to find out just howwell each was able to deal with the loads imposed by 100-Mbpstraffic. We used Netcom Systems' X-1000 Fast Ethernet Testera development/test device that can deliver consistent utilizationloads well over the 148,810-pps Fast Ethernet maximum, withinter-packet delays as small as 40 nanoseconds. It is alsocapable of extremely detailed test scenarios for all kindsof Fast Ethernet devices. As a control, we used a Wandel andGoltermann DA-30 equipped to test and analyze 100-Mbps FastEthernet. It verified utilization rates and generated backgroundtraffic.The platforms the analyzers ran on varied. All of the Windowsbased analyzers ran on 90-MHz Pentium processors with 32 MBof memory and Intel Fast Ethernet PCI cards. EtherPeek, ouronly Mac-based analyzer, could not run with PCI due to someunresolved performance issues with Apple's Open Transport PCIAPI, which is holding up The AG Group's release of a PCI interfacefile (Apple is addressing these performance issues and by presstime will likely have them resolved). Network General deliversthe Sniffer on a 100-MHz Pentium processor with 32 MB of memoryand a specially designed Cogent PCI Fast Ethernet card, towhich Network General specifically tailors its code.For the most part, all the analyzers were able to correctlymeasure utilization to about the 85 percent range, but theiruser interfaces either froze or became unusable at much lowerutilization rates. The exception was the Sniffer, which remainedconsistently responsive in the 90 percent range and accuratelydisplayed utilization above 95 percent.An analyzer's primary job, however, is to capture packets. Sowe set each analyzer with a pre-capture offset filter to capturepackets between two IP addresses. To force each analyzer toexamine each packet, we loaded the wire with 64-byte broadcastpackets. We transmitted the broadcast packets at a steady rateand then transferred a controlled number of packets that metthe offset pre-capture filter.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.120 V.34 PC (Politically Correct) Card Modems Can't Change TheWeatherBy:Bruce BoardmanLooks and features don't account for much with these littlerectangle flat pieces of metal, but the performance packedinside sure does. Living just a bit longer than we care toadmit with 20 PCMCIA modems, or to be more politically correct,PC Card modems, we found a large spread in the way that theyperformed.Modems can't do much about the weather (I'm sure a napkin somewhereholds the beginnings of a "Barometer Jack"), but they had betterbe able to deal with it. Phone lines, like the weather, changefrom one connection to the next, and the better modems areable to deal with these changes. In setting up the environmentto test V.34 PC Card modems, we wanted to make the test asreal world as possible. Since we couldn't recreate sun spotsor hurricanes, we settled on most of the possible combinationsof phone connections in the good ole "U.S. of A."It is important to test modems over varying conditions, so testingover a single connection type, (that is, over a PBX), whileconsistent, does not fully expose the smarts or lack thereofwithin each modem. Of equally little value is testing thatbegins with a clean phone, to which gradual increments of noiseare added. While some modems may be able to withstand highererror rates, error correction alone does not a modem make.Modem manufactures have to balance speed, equalization, errorcorrection and compression variables, to mention a few, toblend the perfect modem (make that an "Olive Jack," shakennot stirred). The best test of this blending is of course howwell it works from the places that you call from, over thephone lines that you use. And so, that is what we have done.We ran a battery of tests that accurately measured how oftenand how fast each modem performed over varying phone line conditions,which represented more than 90 percent of the possible connectionsthat could be made in the continental U.S. The fastest modems,with the most robust features typically cost more, but highprice didn't always mean a modem would do well. In fact, notall of the expensive modems were fast or full featured.Our winner, Practical Peripherals' ProClass 288 V.34, turnedin a close second in performance and edged out the speed kings,Motorola's Marquis and 3Com's Etherlink III 3C562TP, with aprice that was hard to beat. Another worthy opponent, TravelCard's288P from Microcom, turned in almost the same performance asthe ProClass 288 V.34, but it lost out because of a higherprice point.At the bottom of the heap, the Toshiba NoteWorthy NW288CR, failedto complete successful connections during one test-unfortunately,this particular test totaled nearly a quarter of the possibleconnections (24 percent) in the continental U.S. While notat all failure prone, the Xircom PS-CEM28 consistently transferredat the slowest rates in both test suites.Bells and WhistlesOverall, the modems we tested share most of the same features,with a few good ones that merit special mention. Cellular capabilities,offered by the Apex Data V.34 Cellular Data Fax modem, EXPComputer ThinFAX 288C, Toshiba NoteWorthy NW288CR and SimpleTechnology 28.8 Communicator, all boast compatibility withleading cellular phone manufacturers, the likes of which includeNEC, Mitsubishi, GE and AT&T.Although not specifically covered in this review, four vendorsshipped us products that were actually combination V.34 modemand 10-Mbps Ethernet cards. These included ActionTec's ComNet28.8, Motorola's Marquis, 3Com's EtherLink III 3C562TP andXircom's PS-CEM28. Combo cards are a good way to save a slotand often cost less than purchasing these products separately.Finally, a couple of unique jacks were displayed by our participants.MultiTech Systems' MT2834LT has a detachable, very compact,hard plastic "Cool Jack" dongle. Besides being small, its secondRJ-11 jack provides the ability to plug in a telephone-a nicefeature when you're staying somewhere with only one phone line.The spring loaded retractable XJack on the Megahertz XJ2288is really cool and means you don't need a dongle. The XJ288also protects the modem from burning out with its digital lineguard, should the modem accidentally be plugged into a digitalphone jack.Less Is MoreMost PC Cards, because they run on laptops with limited batteries,claim to improve battery life by decreasing their power draw.The NewMedia V.34 Net Surfer, EXP Computer's ThinFAX 288C andAngia's SafeJack 288 displayed this trait and had the lowestoperating draw measured at 160 mA. When not in use, these cardscan also hibernate in an idle mode. Again, Angia's SafeJack288 gobbles up a mere 2 mA in idle mode. One last power mode,sleep mode, takes effect when your laptop is suspended. Whilea number of products could survive with power draws of 2 or3 mA, Xircom and NewMedia required no power at all.The power-hungry cards were lead by Zoom's V.34C, sucking up790 mA in operation mode-even more of a power drain than anyof the combo cards. The Xircom PS-CEM28 more than made up forits zero power draw in sleep mode by gobbling up a significant410 mA in idle mode-also more than any combo card or otherwise.Performance ResultsMotorola's Marquis and 3Com's EtherLink III LAN/Modem Card werethe best performers, hands down. Not only were they fast, butthey made 49 percent of all possible connections for the randomfile test, transferring at or more than 9,000 characters persecond (cps). This was coupled with a low 1 percent ratio offailure for both performance tests. This pair proved that theycould push the envelope to the edge.On the other side, the Xircom PS-CEM288 was consistently veryslow. For both the TSB-38 and the random file performance testing,all of the possible connections, which equal 90.5 percent ofthe possible connections in the continental U.S., transferredbelow 6,000 cps. Some of the transfers were even as slow as2,000 cps. Although a pokey performer, the PS-CEM288 is reliable,not dropping a single connection throughout our testing.There were a few leaders in the dubious category of failed connections.Apex Data's Mobile V.34 Plus Cellular Data/FAX had 14 percentof the possible connections failing when transferring the TSB38 file. MultiTech System's MT2834LT failed on 12 percent ofthe possible connections when transferring the random file.While these numbers are bad, the worst of all was Toshiba NoteWorthy'sNW288CR, which failed 19 percent of the possible connectionswhen transferring the TSB-38 file and 24 percent of the possibleconnections when transferring the random file.It is interesting to note that some of the modems support aDTE rate higher than 115.2 Kbps. While it might seem that higherrates, like the 300 Kbps boasted by both Microcom modems wouldprovide an advantage, it wasn't included in our testing. Primarily,this is because the V.42bis compression implemented by allof these V.34 modems will only compress to a maximum of 4:1.This means that a very compressible file will only see a fourtimes 28.8 Kbps, or 115.2 Kbps transfer rate. Although it ispossible to compress files with a better than 4:1 ratio usingproprietary compression algorithms, to squeeze a compressiblefile better than V.42bis sacrifices interoperability-it isusually only a option in environments where modem interoperabilityis not required.TIAAnd I don't mean Maria. The Telecommunications Industry Association(TIA) issues Telecommunications Systems Bulletins (TSBs) thatgive engineers something to do on their day off. Two of theseTSBs, numbers 37 and 38, are of particular relevance to theissue of testing modems in the real-world way that we describedabove.TSB-37A is a painstaking account of each synapse in the PublicSwitched Telephone Network (PSTN). It describes all of thepossible switched connections in the continental U.S. Boileddown, this consists of seven different local loops (phone companylingo for the phone line that goes from your place to theirlocal equipment), and 24 different network connections (phonecompany connections between phone company offices). This buildsa matrix of 168 different possible connections.So, if you think that each modem needed to be tested 168 times,you'd be wrong! (Sorry, couldn't resist.) Actually the likelihoodof getting one of the 168 connections is not random when lookingat the U.S. as a whole. The TSB-37A describes how often eachof the 168 possible connection is likely to occur.TSB-38, the next document in the TIA series, explains how (ingreat detail) these test should be performed. We turned tothe leaders in this field in order to accomplish this precision Telecom Analysis Systems (TAS) of Eatontown, N.J.With the TAS system we were able to selectively test and accuratelyrecord very specific tests. We configured the equipment totest all connections that had a likelihood of occurrence greaterthan .38 percent (yes that's less then one half of one percent).In this way, we were able to test 36 different connectionsrepresenting just under 91 percent of all possible connectionsin the continental U.S.What is important is that each of the possible connections testedindicates not only how a modem is going to perform, but howoften it does.The TestsWe transferred files in a single direction over each connectionwhile the modems were installed in a pair of Compaq Contura410CXs. We used two different files, one defined in the TSB38 and one randomly selected, both with text-like and similarcompression characteristics as measured with PKZIP. We setthe modems with error correction, compression and autobaudingto measure the performance of all of the balancing elements.Originally we had added the second file in response to a vendor'sconcern that modems with larger V.42bis dictionaries were givenan unfair advantage when testing using the TSB-38 files. Thevendor's contention was that a quirk of the TSB-38 file gaveunfairly boosted compression to those with larger dictionaries,and thereby boosted overall modem performance. He claimed thatsome modem vendors were adding to the dictionaries in orderto win magazine reviews. Imagine that! Our tests not only didnot substantiate this, but in every case, modems with big dictionariesperformed better on the random file, indicating that therewas no quirk in the TSB-38 file. Furthermore, our tests revealedthat as expected, modems with larger dictionaries were generallyfaster than those with smaller dictionaries.It is important to note that as a general rule, modems withlarger V.42bis dictionaries will tend to be faster on a compressiblefile and slower on uncompressible files when compared to modemswith smaller dictionaries. Also of note: TSB-38 dictates thatif a transfer fails to connect, or is unable to transfer databecause of errors, it is considered to have failed. Tough crowd.Understanding the GraphsEach of the file transfer performance graphs represent how fastor how often a modem is likely to connect. Each graph representsthe entire range of characters per second transferred by allthe modems tested. That overall range has been grouped intofour charts.For example, the TSB-38 file transfer performance graph hasthe group 8,000 cps and above. All of the modems that transferreddata at the rate of 8,000 cps or faster are listed in thatgraph. The bars next to the listed modems indicate the percentageof connections in which they averaged 8,000 cps or more.PriceThe combo cards tested were at a disadvantage due to their highercost. We did, however, award points in the features comparisonfor their LAN ability. Interestingly enough, the Microcom TravelCardFast tied with the Motorola Marquis at $599 for the highestprice, but it only offered modem functionality. Stop back fora visit in a few issues where we'll compare combo V.34/Ethernetcards for modem and LAN functionality in a head-to-head review.Bruce Boardman can be reached at bboardman@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Whatever Happened To IBM and US Robotics?There were two modems didn't make it into our final 20:  The USRobotics Courier Dual Standard V.34 PCMCIA and IBM's WaveRunner.Both were supplied in plenty of time but would not function withour TAS test equipment.  In USR's case we tried everything evenswapping cards with USR so that they successfully tested on nearidentical test equipment-all to no avail.  Sorry USR fans.  Wehope to test it in the future.  The WaveRunner was a slightlydifferent story.  Rather than a firmware-based chip set likeAT&T's or Rockwell's, IBM's other card uses a completely softwaredriven DSP design that required Windows or OS/2.  Our testsoftware was DOS-based, and while IBM said that a DOS windowshould have worked, it was not too happy when it did not.  Bypress time a Windows version of the test software will beavailable, which should allow us to test the WaveRunner next timearound.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Online Services And The Internet: The Network Manager's FriendOr Foe?By:Andy CovellYour users and your management have heard the hype or have beenbitten by the cyber bug, and they now know that they can'tlive without Internet access whether they're in the officeor on the road-and they need it now!So, how do you get your users on the Net without having to devotehalf your staff to set-up, troubleshooting and hand-holding?Online services may be just the answer, since they now offerreliable, well supported dial-up Internet access.We evaluated the Windows and Macintosh Internet access offeringsof the "big three" online services-America Online, CompuServeand Prodigy, as well as the Microsoft Network (for Windows95).If your organization already supports a corporate LAN or WANwith Internet connectivity, you may want to use an online servicefor mobile or remote personnel. If you lack Internet connectivityaltogether, you might consider an online service for in-housestaff. In either case, you can depend on online services foreasy Internet access that impose a minimal burden on your technicalsupport staff.A focus for many corporate users is nuts and bolts network accessto corporate information and computing resources, as well aseasy interaction with corporate network users, so we focusedattention not only on flashy Web browsers, but also on someof the more mundane but very important features of Internetaccess, such as telnet access, e-mail attachments and un-anonymousFTP. We also gathered information to gauge geographic dialup coverage and availability of faster V.34 and ISDN lines.None of the services we reviewed comes close to our idea ofan ideal service with regard to corporate Internet access:One which is easy to use; offers a full suite of bullet-proofaccess tools for both Windows and Macintosh clients; offersubiquitous high-speed access; enables seamless third-partysoftware options; and allows the corporation to easily pickup what are very reasonable usage fees. Yet, each has its ownhighlights, and given a specific situation, one or the othermay be just the ticket.CompuServe, our Editor's Choice, offers the best overall mixof features, coverage, flexibility and pricing, and did respectablygrade. The other services contain flaws that relegate themto a lower rung in our ranking. America Online, the only serviceto offer a Web browser for both Windows and Macintosh users,is a friendly service with a few problems-the largest of whichis its inflexible payment options. The Microsoft Network rateshigh on some features, but its newness translates into someshortcomings when it comes to things like accessibility andbilling options, and its inability to run on anything but Windows95machines keeps it from competing at the same level as CompuServewhen it comes to widespread deployment. Prodigy has some significanttechnical limitations, but the tools Prodigy offers are goodquality, and the service offers good pricing/payment options.CompuServeAmong the strengths of the CompuServe Information Manager interfacefor Windows (WinCIM) and Macintosh (MacCIM) are their easyto-use FTP, telnet and newsreader tools. The FTP is simpleand quite functional, as is the telnet application, which includesbuilt-in print and file capture. The newsreader worked well,offers an auto-decode capability and includes a nifty featurethat lets users search the postings of any selected newsgroupby keyword. Like the AOL and Prodigy newsreaders, the CompuServenewsreader offers a utility that lets you search for newsgroupsusing keywords.The WinCIM and MacCIM e-mail program is workable but somewhatlacking, since Internet addressing is not standard (requiringthat you insert Internet: prior to the address in the To: field)and attachments to and from the Internet are not supported.The new WinCIM 2.01 interface provides seamless access to proprietaryCompuServe services and the Internet. Just click the Web iconon the WinCIM toolbar to launch the Web browser, which is SpryMosaic. Then, from the Web browser, click on the WinCIM buttonto toggle back to the proprietary interface. Unfortunately,as it stands now, your users will be confused if they try tonavigate to the Web browser from the WinCIM "Explore Services"menu by clicking on "Internet" and then "World Wide Web." They'llend up reviewing instructions for loading the old Netlaunchersoftware (the WinCIM 2.01 software was not downloadable duringour review). Hopefully, this will be fixed by press time.The new WinCIM installation also solves the CompuServe/Windows95PPP conflict found in the previous PPP/Winsock setup by copyingthe CompuServe Winsock into CompuServe directories, leavingthe Microsoft Winsock in the WINDOWS directory.The lack of a Web browser for the Macintosh is clearly a drawback,but CompuServe gives Macintosh users instructions and a newconfiguration utility that makes it fairly easy for users toset up MacPPP and MacTCP and run with a third-party browser.For Windows users, the CompuServe PPP and Winsock support alsoprovides great flexibility so you can consider a wide rangeof Windows-based, third-party software solutions.CompuServe has a well-supported invoice billing arrangementa clear plus for decision-makers considering an online service.The corporate billing option, coupled with the provision ofsome reasonable pricing alternatives, puts CompuServe at thetop of the heap when it comes to this aspect of the onlineconnection.America OnlineThe America Online service is smooth and slick, and easy touse. In fact, it's the easiest to use of the packages we tried.It's no surprise that AOL is the first choice for millionsof consumers. While an easy-to-use, pretty package certainlymay have its place, the clear consumer orientation won't makeit for many corporate applications.The basic Internet tools that AOL provides are well done. TheFTP client is functional and includes text, GIF and JPEG viewers.The newsreader includes a function for searching for newsgroups,and it offers a File Grabber, which automatically downloadsand decodes threaded binary-encoded postings. The lack of atelnet interface is one drawback, but for corporations thatdon't have any terminal applications, it's not a problem.The AOL Web browser, while a little clunkier looking than themore conventional browsers of its competitors, still givesyou the basics. And it's fully integrated with the AOL interfaceon both the Windows and Macintosh platforms. Additionally,AOL offers Winsock for Windows users, making it possible toimplement other third-party TCP/IP clients.While most of this is good news for potential corporate customers,AOL pricing and payment options are not. AOL offers only onefee schedule and does not offer any sort of corporate accountwith invoice billing. The solution we were offered from thesales personnel, when we asked how to go about setting up accountsfor corporate users, was to put each account on an AmericanExpress card. It is unlikely that this will be a workable solutionfor organizations thinking of using an online service in anyserious way.Microsoft NetworkComparing Prodigy, CompuServe and America Online with the MicrosoftNetwork is really comparing various apples to an orange. Surethey all provide dial-up access to content, services and theInternet at comparable price points. But the MSN Explorer onlyruns on Windows95 machines, and the MSN interface, developedfrom the ground up as part of Windows95, is more tightly integratedwith the operating system. Also, MSN full Internet access doesnot run on much of the installed base of Intel desktops (a386 or 486 must have 6 MB minimum, with 8 MB as a more realisticminimum); a Macintosh version of the interface is still beingdeveloped.The Microsoft Network interface can be loaded from the Windows95installation disk(s), but the Internet access portions of thebasic package are limited. Once you log into MSN, you can viewnewsgroups or use Internet e-mail (using MS Exchange configuredfor MSN). For full Internet access, you must either downloadsoftware from the MSN, or purchase the Plus! package and loadfrom the installation CD. You also need to change the phonenumber you dial in your MSN Settings, and load some programsand files (for example, telnet.exe and ftp.exe) from the Windows95installation media. Of course all of this is automated, makingthe task a little time consuming, but not difficult.Access to the Microsoft Network can be carried out explicitly,by double-clicking on the MSN icon. Starting up any programthat requires Internet access will also automatically initiateMSN login. You can even create Internet shortcuts on your desktopthat will automatically connect to the Microsoft Network andnavigate to the resource specified. This is an experience thatdrives home the tight integration of the Windows95 operatingsystem with full-featured Internet access via the MicrosoftNetwork. The PPP support of MSN's full Internet access dialups, coupled with the Windows95 Winsock, give you plenty ofthird-party software options.The use of the Microsoft Exchange package for MSN e-mail providesa solid e-mail package. Binary attachments to and from theInternet are supported, and the e-mail program can be configuredto send and receive mail and other electronic correspondencefrom a variety of sources in addition to the Internet.The FTP and telnet programs, which are part of Windows95 andreside in the Windows directory, are not announced as partof the "Internet Center" within the Microsoft Network. To runthem you use the Run... command and just enter telnet or ftp,or create a shortcut, so you have an icon to click. The FTPprogram is a command-driven interface with no advanced features.The telnet is good, allowing for significant tailoring whenit comes to fonts, colors and the like, and it enables terminallogging as well as cut and paste.The new version of Microsoft's Web browser (Internet Explorer2.0) is feature-rich when compared to the browsers found onthe other services. For example, it includes support for severalnew HTML extensions, Secure Sockets Layer and built-in e-mail.A VRML plug-in should be available as you read this.ProdigyThe Prodigy service offers an easy-to-use, proprietary packagewith some good pricing options. While not up to the standardsset by CompuServe on many fronts, the service does have somefeatures that make it rather unique, and it will likely improvegreatly over the short term. Much of the Prodigy interfaceis being ported to the HTML environment, and a Mac versionof the Web browser is due out within 45 days of this writing.Look for good things to come with regard to Prodigy and theInternet.Prodigy lacks standalone FTP and telnet tools entirely. Telnetis just not possible, while FTP must be done via the Web browser.Although FTP via the Web works pretty well for anonymous FTP,it gets quite cumbersome with un-anonymous FTP, and it introducesa security hole in the process, since users must enter usernameand password as part of a pseudo-URL to gain access to a remotehost for FTP. If a user isn't careful, that information isretained in the URL history, and anyone with subsequent accessto browser can easily retrieve this sensitive information fromthe global history list.Prodigy's e-mail program is adequate, but not great. It offersstandard Internet addressing, provided an address does notexceed 40 characters (in which case a nickname must be createdfor the long Internet address). Attachments to and from Internetusers are not yet supported.The Prodigy newsreader works well, and it was the newsreaderwe ended up turning to most frequently. It has a very goodFAQ SEARCH feature, which enables you to easily retrieve anddisplay the FAQ from any newsgroup you read.The Prodigy Web browser has all the basic functions. Its noteworthyfeatures include the ability to send Internet e-mail from withinthe browser. Another good feature of the Prodigy Web interfaceis a Prodigy home page search link, which takes you to anotherProdigy Web page that links to a large number of Internet searchtools including: Yahoo, WAIS, Archie, Infoseek, Image Finder,People Search and the W3 search engines. This useful page exemplifiesthe move to HTML for all Prodigy information and help files.Andy Covell is manager of faculty computing services at theSyracuse University School of Management. He can be reachedat abcovell@som.syr.edu.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Online Services Pricing And Payment OptionsFor a network manager considering an online service for enduser Internet access, price and payment options are an importantconsideration. Paying exorbitant fees for employees who rackup the usage, or hassling with individual credit card paymentsor reimbursements is clearly something to avoid. CompuServe,with two pricing schemes and an established invoice billingoption, sets the standard. Prodigy, with a brand new invoicebilling option, is now a challenger in this category, whileAOL and MSN clearly have some catching up to do.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Other Internet Access Options Are In The WingsEach of the online services we reviewed has its limitations,and none may be up to the task for you. But never fear-thereare numerous alternatives. One is to sign on with a nationalInternet service provider like Performance Systems International(PSI) or Netcom. These outfits offer aggressive pricing andthey are out in front when it comes to support for technologieslike V.34 and ISDN. Telecommunications companies are also anoption, with MCI and its internetMCI Dial Access service leadingthe way. Even the Regional Bell Operating Companies will begetting into the act with Pacific Bell and Ameritech both announcingthat they will offer Internet dial-up access in 1996. Localand regional Internet access providers are another possibilityif your needs are contained within a smaller geographic area.These providers sometimes offer very attractive prices andservices. For those who like the support of an online servicebut don't like the way Internet access works in the onlineservice framework, both AOL and CompuServe are offering Internetonly packages that may cater to your needs quite nicely: TheGNN (AOL) and Spryte (CompuServe) services should be in fullswing by press time. We'll do our part to try to help you understandyour dial-up Internet access options with thorough reviewsof some of the services we've mentioned above.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1On The Edge: ATM: Ready Or Not? Here It Comes!By:Art WittmannI love new stuff. I would rather spend a month trying to geta new technology to work (even if it means putting the usercommunity through a little turmoil on the road to newer andbetter services) than buy an old proven technology and getit to work in a day. I like the challenge, and I almost universallylike the result.I started writing for Network Computing three months after itspremier issue hit my mailbox. The first couple of years, Ifreelanced and kept my full-time job at the University of Wisconsin'sComputer Aided Engineering Center (CAE), where I've workedfor more than a decade. The past few years, I've been withNetwork Computing full time, while still maintaining a parttime appointment at CAE. In that time, I've pushed, both uponyou and upon the staff at CAE, my lust for new technology (andtoys for that matter)I bought CD players when a basic one cost more than $800, andmade CAE move to NetWare 3.0 long before we ever should have.On the other hand, jumping on the latest technology bandwagonfor the better part of a decade has given me some perspectiveas well as a number of battle scars. And that is the perspectiveof this column, On the Edge: Looking at new technologies andtrends and trying to decide whether to jump in with both feetor sit on the side lines and watch for a while longer. Occasionallywe'll talk about industry players and their implementationof technology, and sometimes we'll just talk about the technologyitself. What could make a better first topic than ATM?On to ATMNot so long ago, some colleagues at the University of Wisconsinand I were trying to decide if converting our network to ATMin the next six months was the right move. We talked at somelength about the pros and cons of making the leap, but theguy who holds the purse strings kept coming back the centralquestion: "Is it ready?"We began the discussion as though this "problem" with ATM wassomething new. "Gee, the standards are evolving so slowly,what if we have to buy something and then throw it away ina year or so?"Yeah, right-like we've never faced that problem before! Maybeyou don't remember the battles over UTP Ethernet and all thenonstandard ports of that technology that shipped. If you haven'tbeen in the local area networking game that long, then maybeyou'll be a little more familiar with questions about FDDI.If you waited until FDDI's Station Management standard wasset in stone you wouldn't have bought any FDDI equipment until,ummm I guess they still aren't done with that standard, arethey?At some point, the standards bodies give themselves a life byenhancing technology that is more than mature enough to deploy.In the case of FDDI, more than a decade has been spent enhancingthe FDDI standard. Purgatory must be filled with people whohave the character to serve on such committees for their entirerun-and when you're sent there, you're forced to make conversationwith them. Ah, they could regale you with such stories-thearguments over the proper use of the DR bit in the SDR bytecould amuse you for years. (For those of you who have justreached for your FDDI standards manuals to look up the SRDbyte-stop. I made it up-and you should be ashamed of yourselves.)Is ATM like this? Of course it is. The ATM Forum will createsome less-than-useful features within ATM and we'd be foolishto believe otherwise. However, important and revolutionarywork is still to be done by these committees, so the questionof ATM's suitability for production networks is quite valid.Look Who's Talking NowTwo companies in particular claim that ATM is ready for primetime. Cisco Systems and Bay Networks have both recently releasedproducts with the claim that these are the right ones uponwhich to base your ATM infrastructure. In Cisco's case, we'retalking about the LightStream 1010, which was announced latelast November and will be delivered early this year. In Bay'scase, the product is the System 5000AH and its associated modules.Both products came with the promise of being the stuff fromwhich production networks are made. I talked to both companiesat some length about the products and each company went outof its way to tell me how these boxes were field upgradeableboth in terms of firmware and microcode. No small wonder, twoof the most critical ATM standards are just getting to thepoint of being deployable. These standards are Private Networkto Network Interface (PNNI) and Available Bit Rate (ABR). SupportingPNNI basically allows you to build extremely large ATM-basednetworks (like Internet-sized networks)Cisco calls PNNI the most complex and ambitious routing protocolever devised. Cisco also claims that the LS1010 is the firstbox in the world to support it. It's always good to be thefirst one to support a standard, because then your customerscan't ask you about compatibility with other customers. PNNIis indeed a beefy spec, requiring Cisco to use processors 15to 20 times more powerful than those found in the 7000 seriesto support it.ABR is supported on Cisco's box and will be supported througha microcode upgrade on Bay's box. ABR is basically a mechanismto allow bursty LAN-style traffic to run well on busy (congested)ATM networks. It's a tricky technology and depends upon rapidlyresponding to requests to slow down traffic flows. If an ATMdevice can't respond quickly, it'll probably miss the timewindow where a response would have done any good.This means it needs to be done in hardware near where ATM cellsare sent and received. This also means that if ABR isn't supportedon the switch you already own, you've got a new boat anchorwhen you decide to build a network that supports ABR. Thatgenerally includes any switch produced prior to this year.Now you can see why Bay and Cisco are pushing hard on the factthat the newer technology is very upgradeable-right down tothe microcode level.Let's Say You Buy NowIf you decide you want ATM now, and there are plenty of reasonswhy you might want it, just how much of your early 1996 investmentcan you expect to retain over the next two or three years?This is a really good question and one that you should askany ATM vendor you might be considering. You'll have to considera couple of purchases as short-term buys.Since ABR has to take place in hardware, any NIC or ATM edgedevice (such as an Ethernet to ATM switch) will either needa significant upgrade or need to be replaced. This is becauseABR would be done by the same hardware that does segmentationand reassembly of packets (so-called SAR chips). Chip vendorsare now working on developing new SAR chips that include ABR,but don't expect to see NICs and edge devices that use thenew chips until the end of the year.ABR is a particularly important specification, as it allowsATM networks to handle the bursty traffic that is commonlyseen in packet-based networks. Without the ability to slowdata sources at the ATM level, an ATM-based network may notperform well at all. Let's say your ATM switch starts gettingbusy and has to discard 3 percent of cells received. Most ofus have observed packet retry rates up to 3 percent, right?If you further imagine that your average packet is 512 bytesand gets broken down to 120 or so cells, the chance of onecell in every packet being discarded is fairly high. The usefulthroughput of your ATM network becomes small and goes downas the average size of your data packet goes up-not quite thesort of behavior to which we're accustomed.TCP/IP has its own throttling mechanisms, so as packets gettrashed, TCP/IP will back off. However, that may result ingetting less than optimal bandwidth use as well. Few otherprotocols have throttling mechanisms, and so ABR's is a highlyvaluable function. This is not to say that you can't builda functional network without it. You'll just build a betterone with it.Some vendors have come up with proprietary ways to handle thecell discard problem. Cisco, for example, has a technique calledearly packet discard. The technique essentially attempts todrop all cells from a single packet, thus considerably uppingthe chances for getting other packets through the switch intact.So Is Now the Time to Jump in and Buy?I think so. I'm urging the folks that I work with to replaceour routers with Ethernet and ATM switches this summer. Thebenefits of virtual LANs, greatly expanded bandwidth and manageabilityseem just too enticing. Replacing old routers with new routersis expensive and doesn't deliver the flexibility that we'lldemand from our network in the next three to four years.A couple of years ago, I wrote an article saying that 1997 wouldbe about the right time frame to consider buying ATM. I waswrong by about six months. Mid-1996 is a good time to startbuying and now is a good time to start planning. You're probablystill looking at a single-vendor solution, but that's OK. Mostof us chose a single-vendor solution anyway. Ask the hard questionsand make sure that vendor is doing the work to protect yourinvestment. Accept that you'll replace some of the stuff youbuy, but don't be afraid that you won't get a functional networkin the end. nArt Wittmann is a senior editor of Network Computing and associatedirector of the Computer Aided Engineering Center of the Universityof Wisconsin-Madison. He can be reached via the Internet atwittmann@engr.wisc.edu.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Middleware & Cross-Platform Development: To DB2 From The Desktop: Too Many WaysBy:Bruce RobertsonThere are many ways to get to DB2-too many ways. Sincethe mainframe is still by far the largest data repository inmost corporations, and DB2 is IBM's widely used RDBMS for themainframe, getting to DB2 has become the number one targetfor third-party middleware vendors. Not surprisingly, sincethose DB2 solutions usually involve purchasing additional softwarefor the mainframe, the price tag is often $10,000 or more,and sometimes more than $100,000. It will pay to choose wisely.Unfortunately, corporations usually approach the problem ofaccessing DB2 data by assuming they need DB2 data to look liketables in some ODBC-enabled desktop tool like Excel or Access,or even an in-house developed PowerBuilder application. Suchdata may indeed be in a row or a table in DB2 and may end upbeing in a table in Excel or Access, or on a screen in thePowerBuilder application. But getting between the two doesn'tmean that the DB2 table must be visible to any of these desktoptools.Traditional data access middleware does make DB2 tables directlyvisible to the desktop query tools. Other middleware (messageoriented, RPC-based, TP monitors and even some day Object RequestBrokers) can also bring data down to the desktop, but withoutletting the user see the tables in DB2 directly. 3270 screenscraping products, along with other GUI distribution optionslike Web forms to RDBMS links, can also get DB2 data down tothe desktop. Finally, replication solutions can copy the datadown to the desktop for local access.There are a lot of options. Which one is right for you dependson strengths and weaknesses of each access option and particularproduct when evaluated in the context of the real need of theorganization. Let's take a look at each DB2 data-to-desktopapproach.IBM DRDA for Direct Data Access to DB2There are many products that offer direct data access to DB2data. Some are specific to DB2; others also support accessto other nonrelational data sources like IMS or ADABAS on themainframe. For still others, DB2 is just another remote databaseon another platform their middleware supports. There are atleast some basic distinguishing technology solutions, however,that provide a road map for the many products.First, look to IBM. After all, it's IBM's database. And IBM'smainframe.Distributed Relational Data Architecture (DRDA) is IBM's middlewaretechnology for connecting its DB2 databases. DRDA productsgo beyond mainframe DB2 connectivity, accessing DB2/400, DB26000, SQL/DS and any other DRDA-enabled database. The mainframeDRDA server component is bundled with DB2 now, so there's noadditional mainframe software cost to stomach. IBM has evensubmitted DRDA to X/Open for consideration as a database networkingstandard.But, while IBM gives OS/2 desktops a native DRDA requester,Windows clients must connect via an intermediate OS/2 gatewaymachine running IBM's DDCS/2 software, depicted to the left.This intermediate gateway approach does not require APPC andLU 6.2 on each client, but the gateway itself can become abottleneck under significant transaction load or large resultdownloads. Moreover, OS/2 might not be a strategic OS choicefor your organization.The new option is to avoid the full gateway approach. Thirdparties like Wall Data and Rocket Software have taken advantageof DRDA's openness to create native Windows DRDA requesterssporting the ODBC interface. StarWave's StarSQL connects overDRDA's APPC network, but it can handle non-LU 6.2 clients viaMicrosoft SNA Server on NT or other SNA gateway products, asshown in the first figure below. Wall Data's RUMBA for DatabaseAccess supports APPC connections over TCP/IP to the mainframeusing IBM's new AnyNet technology.Proprietary Direct Data Access to DB2Outside of DRDA options, many vendors have proprietary DB2 connectivityproducts. Many, but not all, offer more functionality thanDB2 alone, particularly the stored procedures (including returneddata) that are not yet supported in DB2. To do this, theseproducts include an expensive separate host component. Withthe host component handling the processing, predefined queries(static SQL or DB2 plans) can be executed on the host for betterperformance along with lower host and network utilization.Third-party database gateways are typically more functionaland flexible than IBM's DDCS/2. The venerable Micro DecisionWareDatabase Gateway, for example, is being slowly reincarnatedby new owner Sybase. The Database Gateway's APPC/LU6.2 connectionto the mainframe consolidates connections from Sybase/MicrosoftDB-Library and ODBC clients, depicted in the middle figurebelow. Those clients (Windows, Mac, DOS, OS/2 and Unix) canconnect over IPX/SPX, TCP/IP, AppleTalk, VINES IP and NetBEUINetBIOS to the Database Gateway server (running on OS/2, WindowsNT or AIX). Not all client/protocol/gateway combinations supportall these options, but TCP/IP works on all. Since Sybase'sown dialect of SQL is used, DB2 ends up looking like a Sybasedatabase for direct data access. By writing separate CICS programsto query DB2 (and other) data or to execute existing CICS transactions,remote stored procedure calls from clients can be handled.Similar proprietary gateway connections are available from theusual middleware data access suspects: IBI EDA/SQL, TechGnosisSequeLink, IBM's new Data Joiner, Cross Access, Digital AccessWorks,Software AG Entire Access, NetWeave, Independence TechnologyDAL, XDB XDB-Link, Oracle and many others. Cross Access andEDA/SQL support host-based query governor options to keep DB2from being overcome by ad-hoc transactions rather than OLTPinteraction.There is a more direct approach, however. Neon Software's ShadowDirect supports direct TCP/IP access from desktop to mainframeDB2 data. The direct proprietary approach eliminates gatewayand APPC complications. Like Thomson Software's ODB/Server,but unlike most proprietary gateway solutions, Shadow Direct'shost component does not run in CICS and provides greater performancesince it is multithreaded, unlike CICS itself. Enhanced manageabilityis available while more control is offered through limits onCPU resources (by session and query), rows/query throttles,and timeouts for inactivity or long queries. Shadow Directeven generates System Management Facility data for monitoringand accounting use. The Neon solution can be seen in the bottomfigure to the left.Though Neon does not handle as many data sources as EDA/SQLand SequeLink, it does supply a unique automatic way to useDB2 plans from existing applications for higher performanceon OLTP activities along with optimized ODBC catalogs. Moreover,Neon provides programmatic links to stored procedures processedby its server, or to code running in other subsystems likeCICS or IMS.DB2 Procedural Access to DB2For many applications, letting users see DB2 directly opensup a big can of worms. Users can bog the mainframe down withpoorly designed ad-hoc queries. Shielding DB2 data behind newor old/reused functions or stored procedures is a better approach,since users can only execute queries predefined by IS personnel.Moreover, this can offload the mainframe better than many othermiddleware options. Future applications are more likely touse a three-tier architecture, where clients talk to an intermediateapplication server, and that server makes requests from DB2and other resources as necessary. This approach can be seenin the first figure on page 156. DB2 won't need to be seenas a table to applications anymore. In fact, applications won'tneed to see DB2 at all-they'll just see other applications.As noted, data access middleware products increasingly supportSQL-specific stored procedures or can call other CICS-codedtransactions along with their direct data access. More genericmiddleware products, in contrast, offer full programmatic accessto the mainframe with a wider variety of networking, API andprogramming tool options but offer no direct data access toDB2. Existing business rules and code can be reused by distributedapplications instead of the original terminal applicationsfor which they were written. Most message-oriented, RPC-basedand distributed transaction monitor products also allow themainframe to be a direct and equal partner in the distributedapplication development environment.DB2 Via 3270 ApplicationsA variety of products offer the ability to retrofit existingcharacter-based terminal applications (accessing DB2 data oranything else) by mapping 3270 structured fields into GUI screensor even fields in database tables. When an ODBC or other directlyenabled application asks for a record, the client-based subsystemactually calls up appropriate 3270 screens and captures dataoff them. No work or extra software license money is spenton the host side (where software gets expensive quickly), anddesktops don't need LAN access to the mainframe. Changes tothe original 3270 applications, however, break screen-scraperapplications. For most situations, screen scraping is onlyan interim solution to get a GUI face on an old application.DB2 Via the WebA major new category of database access uses Web forms. Usingproducts such as IBM DB2 WWW, IBM/Lotus InterNotes Web Publisher,Allaire Cold Fusion, Aspect Software dbWeb, ExperTelligenceWebBase and others, a Web form can trigger a DB2 query, althoughwork has to be done to map DB2 fields to fields on the formpresented to the user by the Web server, as depicted in themiddle figure below. The user, however, requires no new softwarefor DB2 access beyond the Web browser.This Web-specific, three-tier approach offers wide leveragevia Internet access and Web ubiquity, but current productssacrifice security or performance. The no client software approachis a return to the terminal emulation world in a sense, with3270 replaced by the new Web terminal over TCP/IP and the Internet.The quick deployment opportunity (no software to be deployedto all the clients) and leveraging of the Internet makes Webaccess to DB2 data an attractive alternative to consider. Youcan collect data from desktops you can't control. But the usercan't easily use that data in client-based applications. Webforms also don't offer all the control and functionality thata carefully constructed client application written in PowerBuildercan. Forms may not be able to offer local data validation,and Web browsers like Netscape still don't let a user tab fromfield to field while simultaneously scrolling the screen.E-mail accessible rules processors like BeyondMail can offeranother style of ubiquitous access. As with Web forms, however,developers will be unhappy with the user interface optionsand control. But it's a good alternative when wide access ismore important than performance.DB2 Access by ReplicationA final option for accessing DB2 data is to have a system thatmoves or copies that data out to the desktop or other LAN-basedRDBMS servers. Instead of accessing DB2 data where it is, replicationproducts bring the data to you, as shown in the last figurebelow. Local access can be much speedier and completely offloadsthe mainframe, which can be great for decision support or heavydata analysis applications. Data can also be simplified andclarified as it's copied. Sybase's recently shipped ReplicationServer for DB2 supports real-time data synchronization at thetransaction level. Oracle, IBM DataPropogator Relational, TrinsicInfoPump, Praxis OmniReplicator and others offer replication,and many support Lotus Notes.Unfortunately, data synchronization is a difficult task, andmost corporations aren't prepared to handle data updates backto the mainframe via replication. So, replication is oftenstuck into a read-only copy function.Bruce Robertson can be reached at brucer@metagroup.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1Net Results: The Sweet Music Of Network ManagementBy:Dave MoltaOnce every year my son's school holds a career day. You know,this is where mothers and fathers who are doctors or policeofficers or pilots come and tell the kids what it's like inthe real world. My basketball buddy Jim is an air traffic controllerand he brings in some airplane models that draw plenty of oohsand ahs from the kids. I considered bringing in a 10BASE-Thub, but decided that it just wouldn't have the same effect.Ah, the life of a network manager: plenty of guts, but notmuch glory.Welcome to my first Network Computing column. Some of you mayrecognize my name. After all, I've been writing reviews, featuresand workshops for several years now. Twenty years ago, I wentto college to study electrical engineering and somehow endedup with a degree in music. After I discovered that I was morelikely to end up a high school marching band director thanthe lead trombonist on the Tonight Show, I caught the waveof personal computers and networking and never looked back.Today, I manage the network at Syracuse University, one ofthe magazine's distributed lab sites, though I often feel likeit's managing me. "So what exactly do you do at your job?"my son asks. "Well, it's kind of complicated, Danny. Now gopractice your trumpet." He doesn't press the issue. He's happy,especially when daddy comes home with Orangemen season tickets.Here at Syracuse, we're in the third year of a fairly ambitiousmigration from mainframe to client/server-based systems. Theride's been fast and rough. Deploying new technology, managinga fast-changing systems environment and developing a culturethat views change as positive: These are the key challengeswe face, and I like to think that we're coming to grips withall three.On the technology front, we're building and rebuilding networkand systems infrastructure, doubling the number of Ethernetconnections each of the past three years to around 5,000 today,deploying wide-area links, ATM, wireless, database servers,Web technologies, you name it. We've phased out old systems,including a fairly large VAX/VMS complex and an IBM 3090 mainframeand replaced much of their functionality with Unix, NetWareand NT servers.Here's a shocker: Managing these changes hasn't been easy, neitherfor my technical staff nor for our internal customers. We'vehad to invent new ways of doing business, pushing expertiseand support out closer to where the real work of the organizationgets done, and retraining many of our staff in new technologies.This has all taken place during an era of significant budgetcuts, forcing tough choices on priorities. In our efforts toadapt, we've consolidated units, flattened our central computingorganization, embraced total quality management-and lived totell about it.I know what some of you are thinking: It's a university. Youcan afford to take chances on new technologies. People areaccustomed to frequent system changes and unexpected downtime.Don't we wish! We may be willing to bleed at the edge a bitmore than some, but make no mistake about it, we have a businessto run, or so I'm told on a daily basis.Call Me When It BreaksI once knew a technical engineer whom I'll call Bill. Bill wasa technical genius, a guru if you will. He was proud of thenetwork he had designed and built and he could fix any problemthat might arise. As I got to know Bill a little better, Ilearned that Bill's motto was, "Tell me when it's broke andI'll gladly fix it." You gotta love a guy with an attitudelike that, right?Wrong. I love people who design systems that don't develop problemsthat need fixing. I'm talking about systems that are well plannedand implemented, fault tolerant, rock solid. Is this too muchto ask? Probably. Is it a worthy goal to aim for? I think so.The problem is that we're not as good as we need to be at thisand I bet you're not either. Why? I'll offer the followingtriad: people, technology and resources.Like it or not, there's a shortage of qualified technical professionalswith knowledge of networking and client/server technologiesin today's market. A network administrator who had been withme less than two years left recently for a job that paid nearly$20,000 a year more than we did. One of our best client/serverproject leaders recently received a competitive offer to increaseher salary by $30,000. Can any of you relate to this? Findinggood people and holding on to them is a monumental task formost organizations trying to migrate to client/server technologies.How do you deal with this situation? One good strategy comesfrom Tom Landry, the former Dallas Cowboys coach. While otherteams were drafting players to fill holes in their team, Landrywould focus on selecting the best athlete available at thedraft. The point was to find a quality person you could trainto fill your needs. If you limit your search to people withspecific jobs skills, you'll either have to break the budgetor settle for mediocrity. The key is to find quality peoplewho can develop skills you'll need. In the long run, you builda better organization. The same principle holds true when youphase out old systems. I'll bet that you'll be better off inthe long run if you retrain that VM systems programmer to doUnix or NetWare or NT rather than look for someone new withthe specific skills you need.The Technology Tap DanceI'm tired of all those seminars stressing the importance ofaligning technology and business goals and meeting the customer'sneeds. I don't take issue with the fundamental assertions,but they're too simplistic. Sure, we have to remember the bottomline, but we also have to be realistic about what's possiblewith technology and what's not. We have to be selective inwhat we deploy, because the bottom line for most organizationsis making it work-every day. Try to be all things to all peopleand you're likely to find yourself in the midst of two angrymobs: your staff and your internal customers.Being a successful network manager is about making good technologydecisions. Over time, most managers realize they can't do italone. It requires teamwork, delegation of authority, communicationand organization of peoples' efforts. It also requires somegood instincts in selecting which vendors are blowing smokeand which ones are in it for the long haul. Most of us becametechnical managers on the basis of our technical skills ratherthan our managerial acumen. No wonder some of the brightestminds in my organization want no part of management.Hardly a day goes by when I don't think about all the greatthings my organization could do with a few more people, morecapital resources or a slightly larger operating budget. Don'tdelude yourself into believing that your budget is more sacredthan anyone else's. Yes, network computing is strategic tothe enterprise, but so are a lot of other things. Focus yourefforts first on getting the most out of what you've alreadygot. Once you've done that and there is still a need, you'vegot a more compelling case to make to management.On the other side of the fence are those "lucky" enough to bein high-growth organizations. I've been there, too, and itisn't all it's cracked up to be. Too often, the pace of growthis simply too fast to manage effectively. Lots of organizationsmake an all-too-quick transition from "on fire" to "burnt out."It comes down to making the right decisions about people andtechnology, and managing your resources effectively.My buddy Jim moved recently, so I don't know what they'll doon career day at Danny's school. I could tell the kids howexciting it is to decide between switching or routing for ournext backbone infrastructure. Or maybe I'll just dig out myold trombone.Dave Molta is director of network systems at Syracuse University.He can be reached at dmolta@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996  Vol. 7 No.1E-Mail & Messaging: Adding Interactive Services To Your Web ServerBy:Eric HallLook around the World Wide Web, and most of what you'll findtoday are online equivalents of printed propaganda. There mayalso be some downloadable files or imagesas well as the seeminglyrequisite overabundance of hypertext links to every imaginablecorner of the Internet. But, for the most part, Web serversare about as interactive as their paper-based counterparts.While getting to this level of highly-functional-yet-somewhatinteroperable online publishing can seem miraculous to many,it is far from where these systems need to be if they are everto be something more than an outlet for marketing's creativity.In order for the Web to become the next-generation platformfor distributed computing, it must go beyond read-only intothe world of interactive. Users should be able to add, editand delete data in real time, as security and application lockingallow.We'll outline some of the concepts and technologies to helpyou get there today. We'll also look at some basic examples,and provide pointers to other materials where appropriate andavailable. By no means can we cover everything. We will attemptto give you enough information so that you can get startedin the right direction."What kinds of applications can be called from the server, andwhere can they be found?" These are the two most common questionsasked at this point. Before we can answer these questions,we must first look at how the server and applications communicate.The Common Gateway Interface (CGI)Most, but not all, Web servers have two basic methods of handlingback-end data. They either read a file or communicate withother programs through the Common Gateway Interface (CGI).It's up to the application to figure out what to do with thatdata, and to return HTML to the server. This is an extremelysimplistic overview of the process, and there are many possibleexceptions and extensions.Examples of CGI can be seen on many servers today. Clickableimage maps such as those found on Network Computing's homepage http://techweb.cmp.com/nc/current use CGI. As you cansee in the figure "Clickable Image Maps," the client sendsan HTTP request containing the URL and XY coordinates to theserver, which passes the coordinates to a local application.The application executes an event that has been associatedwith those coordinates and returns HTML to the server for deliveryto the client. In the case of image maps, most of the timethis HTML data consists of an HTTP redirect command that instructsthe client to request another document from the servers.Another common use of CGI is for searching through files ordatabases (Yahoo and WebCrawler are good examples). A userconstructs a query that is sent to the server, which then spawnsan application that conducts the actual search and returnsthe "hits" in HTML form.So, to answer the question about the kinds of applications thatcan be called by the server: They include any application thatsupports CGI on the front end and can generate HTML responses.In fact, you can call almost any program you want, as longas it supports command-line operation.However, the unfortunate truth is that no two Web servers arealike. They have all been developed with specific audiencesin mind and "enhanced" to suit those markets. This means thatjust because something works with server brand X does not meanthat it will work with server brand Y. For example, there areconsiderable differences between the Netscape server's CGIinterface and the O'Reilly and Associates WebSite server'sCGI interface, even though they both use Windows NT's CMD.EXEcommand interpreter. The differences between the various Unixshells, Digital's DCL, DOS' COMMAND.COM, and all other platforms,can also impact what you want to do.CGI Detailed: GET Vs. POSTOne of the most common methods of implementing CGI is throughthe use of GETs and POSTs. In the "Clickable Image Map" figure,the client submitted a URL with a question mark and XY coordinatesappended to the end. This method of CGI call is known as aGET. Not only are GETs the oldest, but they are also the defaultand easiest to implement. Another form of call, known as POSThas become more popular, and is generally considered to bemuch more powerful. The differences between them are subtle,but significant.The GET method is named for what the client does. It asks theserver to GET the HTML document at HTTP://URL?Param. The serversees that the URL points to an executable, calls it and passesit the parameters.In contrast, the POST method is used when the client submitsa block of data to the server. The client is not necessarilyassuming that anything will be returned to it, although theconnection is still open. In most cases, the server's Webmasterhas configured things so that the client is given a thank youmessage, or response data is sent to the client.CGI ExamplesLet's walk through an example using O'Reilly and AssociatesWebSite server, since its use of Windows NT's CMD.EXE makesit easy to write simplistic demonstration scripts. WebSitecan also run on Windows 95, so it's easy to use on a personalsystem for learning purposes. Besides, you can evaluate itfree for 60 days. It's available at http://website.ora.com.Once the WebSite Manager is downloaded, use the administrativetool to locate the directory for DOS executables (C:\WEBSITE\CGIDOS is the default). Using NotePad or some other text editor,create a file called DIRSEARCH.CMD in that directory and carefullycopy the contents of the "Sample File: DIRSEARCH.CMD" figureand save the file. Using a Web client, connect to your serverand point to http:///DOS-CGI/DIRSEARCH.CMD. Assuming that your server is configuredto allow your client to access DOS-based CGI scripts, you shouldget an HTML page stating No Files Specified. Don't worry. Thisis what we want! Connect again and this time add ?command.comto the end. You should see a standard directory listing ofall the files named command.com. DIRSEARCH.CMD is a simpleNT batch file that scans your server's C: drive for any occurrenceof a specified file and returns the directory list to the user.If a file is not specified, then an error message is displayed.We'll extend this program later, but first we need to examineit in detail.Always Test the Data FirstThe first line in the box below is a parameter test to makesure that a user has supplied a filename. If "%1" is blank(that is, does not exist), then the batch file jumps to the:errlabel label, which returns an error message to the user.Any seasoned programmer will tell you that it's important totest your program inputs before acting on them, and it is evenmore crucial here for several reasons.Most important is an open issue regarding system security. Thereare known weaknesses with many operating systems that allowshell metacharacters to break your script or a called application,thereby exposing your system. It sounds far-fetched, but ithappens all the time. By adding keystroke traps to your script,however, you can go a long way toward preventing this fromhappening. Refer to the CERT archives for more informationon this subject. This weakness is not prevalent on all systems,but it is on many of them.Another good reason to test the parameters is for program control.As we'll show below, you can use this function to minimizeyour development. Finally, there's a programming reason totest the input: to make sure that the data is valid. If insteadof conducting a directory search, you queried a database, youwould want to make sure that all of the necessary informationhad been provided. Testing the data in a script is more efficientthan letting the called application fail. You would still haveto test for errors, so you might as well do it up front.Define Your MIME TypeThe use of MIME types to coordinate data exchange is now partof the HTTP specification, as of version 1.0. As you can see,both the :goodlabel and :errlabel sections begin with MIMEtype declarations echoed to STDOUT.For our purposes, we are simply declaring that the followingdata is HTML. The Web client interprets this and knows to readand apply whatever HTML formatting tags it sees in the data.If the MIME type had not been declared, then your browser mayor may not interpret the HTML tags.As you may have guessed, you can also send binaries or othernontext data back to the client. For example, if you wantedto return a GIF image, you would define the MIME content-typeas Image/GIF. The client would then receive and display theimage appropriately. Likewise, you could send application binariesby using the Application/Octet-stream MIME type, and so on.Note the echo statement that follows the MIME declaration.You must send a blank line after you send the content-type statement.The Rest of ItThe remaining code is fairly self explanatory.  There are,however, some things worth noting.  the < and > characters areproceeded by ^.  This is to prevent CMD.EXE from interpretingthem as redirection commands.  Also notice that the DIR C:\"%1"/sis the actual command that we are calling.  The remaining linesof code are used to prepare the environment and command line, aswell as generate HTML on its behalf.Image map servers and dynamic directory builders are two ofthe more common CGI-aware applications that you'll find. Additionally,there are a variety of third-party tools, such as databaserequesters and indexed searching agents, available on the Internet.If you wish to write your own, you can apply the same conceptswe've shown you to a compiled language.Adding Support for FormsIn its current form, DIRSEARCH.CMD must be given a parameteron the URL's command line. This is far from intuitive, andif you made your users work like this, you'd have very littletraffic on your site. Most users prefer to enter informationon a form, and so do administrators, since the level of controlincreases tremendously.The easiest way to build a form is through the use of the This is a searchable index. Enter search keywords:  HTML tag. This simple tag has the delightful affect of puttingan edit box widget on your page. When a user enters text intothe edit box and presses the enter key, the text is appendedto the URL (with the question mark), and the page is reloaded.At this point, a valid search string exists, and the scriptwill process accordingly.For our example, change the line in the figure " EACH.CMD" thatreads ^No Files Specified^ to Enter a filename tosearch for:  ^.  Now point your Web browser to/BIN/CGI-DOS/DIR SEARCH, and you will be greeted with an editbox.  Type in COMMAND.COM and press enter, and the same scriptwill now branch through the :goodlabel section, and return adirectory listing.Don't be confused by the name ISINDEX, it's an unfortunatemoniker for such a flexible gizmo.  This tag does notautomatically make your documents searchable; some other tool(such as DIR, in our case) must do the searching if that's whatyou want.  The This is a searchable index. Enter search keywords:  simply provides an edit box whose contentsare appended to the current URL.Just as the This is a searchable index. Enter search keywords:  tag is poorly named, so is it poorlytreated by most browsers.  Many of them prepend the edit box withan inane comment about the document being searchable, which isjust plain wrong.  In order for us to have an attractive formthat doesn't confuse people, we'll have to use "real" forms.Creating Real HTML FormsForm creation with HTML is a fairly simple task, and as we'veshown, passing data with CGI is also straightforward. Whenyou combine these two components' simplicity and strength,tremendous results can develop.In order to illustrate this, we need to modify our sample code.Edit DIRSEARCH.CMD once again, and replace the This is a searchable index. Enter search keywords:  tag with the code shown in the figure "ISINDEX Replacement".Save these changes, and reload our now familiar URL.  Now,instead of seeing an This is a searchable index. Enter search keywords:  input field, you should see a realHTML form.  When you enter a file name into the edit box andclick on the "submit" button, the script will process thedirectory search and return the list of matching files.Let's examine this syntax in detail.  The line that contains the  HTML tag does what you might guess:  It notifies theclient that the following text contains form elements, until aclosing  tag is encountered.There are additional keywords that can be used with the  tag, which provide greater amounts of control. One of theseis the Action= statement, which tells the browser where tosend the form contents. By default, the destination is a URLbut it could be any CGI application available to the user.For companies that have several distributed Web servers, butonly one or two CGI servers, this is a great way to split theload. Also of importance is the Method= keyword, which allowsyou to specify that the query data is to be submitted usingthe GET or POST methods as described earlier.Widget LingoAnother keyword, the  tag, has many options, but itbasically applies to almost every type of form widget available.This includes edit boxes, radio buttons, check boxes and commandbuttons.  The only types of widgets not controlled by  arelist boxes (either drop-down or scrollable) and large, multi linetext boxes, both of which have their own specific tags.In our example, the first occurrence reads  .  This syntax will create an edit box with theresource name of Filename.  The Name= command associates a namewith the control data.  After successfully running a query, lookat the client's URL command line.  Notice that where it used tohave ?command.com, it now has ?filename=command.com.  One finalthing to remember about the Name= option is that it does notapply to command buttons (you'll see why in a moment)Notice that we did not explicitly declare the edit box as such.That's because the default of  widget is an edit box.  Ifwe chose to do so, we would declare it using the Type=Textattribute.  Other valid Type= declarations include Passwordfields (like edit boxes, only keystrokes are echoed asasterisks), CheckBox, Radio, Submit and Reset.Additionally, we could preload a string into the edit box byusing the Value= statement. This can also be used with passwordfields, as well as checkboxes, radio buttons and command buttons,although its usage varies widely among them.The default width (in theory, at least) of an edit box is 20characters, and the height is one. You can define differentsizes using the Size= directive. When setting the width, useSize=W. When setting the height, use Size=W,H. Note that settingthe width does not restrict input to that amount of characters,but instead defines the width of the box itself.One problem with the GET method is that text is appended tothe URL as entered. If you let the user enter as much as theywant, you run the risk of script or called application failuredue to overflown buffers. The Maxlength= attribute is usefulfor limiting the maximum number of characters that an editbox will accept, thereby limiting your system's exposure.Altogether, our listic  example could (andprobably should) read as .  Note the use of quote marks around thetextual values; this is an HTML requirement that needs to befollowed for maximum compatibility.Command ButtonsCommand buttons are not nearly as complex as the edit boxes;there are only two possible types.  Our example uses theType="Submit" variety, which builds the parameter list andappends it to the URL specified by the   tag.The other type of command button is Type="Reset", which clearsthe form and resets all of the widgets to their original state.The only optional attribute that can be set for command buttonsis Value=.  In this case, the Value= attribute defines the textthat appears on the button's face.  It does not change thebutton's behavior.  For our example, we could change  to  , and addanother button that cleared the editbox by using .And Then SomeYou should experiment with the different types of widgets andtheir optional parameters. Together they provide a fairly comprehensiveset of tools for getting user input into your CGI scripts andapplications. A good starting place is http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu SDG/Software/Mosaic/Docs/fill-out-forms/ overview.html, andby searching Yahoo's (http://www.yahoo.com) database for "HTMLand Forms."Anyone familiar with other types of graphical forms-based toolswill tell you that these gizmos, while handy, are hardly sufficient.New extensions have been added to the HTML drafts that addresssome concerns, but not all. Vendors are stepping up with productsthat address these concerns, however, so you should be ableto find something that suits your need.On the back end, Lotus Development and Netscape have both promisedto ship HTML filters for their respective groupware products,allowing you to leverage in-form value testing, mathematicalfunctions and the like. How these extensions will be handledby generic clients is anybody's guess. But it is a step inthe right direction.As for the clients, Netscape Navigator 2.0 and Oracle's PowerBrowserclients both promise to offer event-driven scripting languageextensions that will allow Webmasters to embed extended controlsinto the forms directly. Although these clients will performthe functions as directed, it means more work for the administrators,since you may have to support multiple proprietary extensions.Again, it's a step that will drive further standards-baseddevelopment.GET vs. POST RevisitedWe have been using the GET method to pass data down to ourscript.  The POST method, which offers more capabilities,deserves some attention as well.  To see a quick demonstration,the line in DIRSEARCH.CMD to read , and reload the form again.This won't the behavior of your script, but you may receive asecurity notice from your client.Remember, we've been using O'Reilly's WebSite. It's CGI interfaceto CMD.EXE is relatively consistent between POST and GET. However,there is one significant difference. WebSite manager generatesa unique temporary file that contains the data provided duringthe post operation. You can sniff through this output fileon a programmatic basis if needed, allowing your script tobranch according to content. This is extremely handy if youhave to allow users to submit large strings of text or binaryobjects.Beyond Simple CGIGET and POST both offer value, depending on your objectives.However, in this implementation they are also both limitedin that they rely on NT's CMD.EXE, a character-based commandinterpreter, as well as require that scripts and applicationssupport the use of STDIN and STDOUT. This precludes the useof Windows-based applications as CGI-callable services.A handful of vendors are working together to develop WIN-CGIto circumvent this problem. Implemented as a CGI-aware library,you can extend any application for which you have the sourcecode, recompiling it to read and write CGI instead of the moretraditional I/O interfaces. Such efforts aren't new. Many sourcesare available for CGI libraries for various servers and operatingsystems. Contact your Web server vendor for leads.Now that you understand some of the concepts behind CGI programming,you should be able to develop applications that communicatebetween the Web and any data system. Remember to follow thespecifications, and do a lot of testing, and you'll come outahead.Eric Hall is an independent networking consultant, currentlyworking in Europe. He can be reached at ehall@nwc.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1E-Mail & Messaging: Sample File: DIRSEARCH.CMDIF "%1=="" goto errlabel:goodlabelecho Content-type: text/htmlecho.echo ^ ^echo ^ All occurances of %1^^echo ^ echo ^ All occurances of %1^echo ^ dir c:\"%1" /secho ^ echo ^ echo ^ goto exitlabel:errlabelecho Content-type: text/htmlecho.echo ^ ^ echo ^ No files specified!^^^echo ^ echo ^ No files specified^echo ^ echo ^ goto exitlabel:exitlabelBack to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1E-Mail & Messaging: ISINDEX Replacementecho ^ echo Enter A File Name to search for:echo ^ echo ^ echo ^ Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1Fast Networking: Appearing In The NIC Of TimeBy:Art WittmannIt's amazing that it took this long, but it's finally here,and at a price almost anyone can afford. It's fast networking100 Mbps or faster to be exact, and it's about time. Ethernetand Token-Ring have been around roughly as long as the IBMPC and its derivatives, and they just don't cut it as a backbonetechnology anymore.Ten years ago, if anyone told me that processors would increasein power by 500 times and we'd still use the same networking,I would have laughed. Yet, that's exactly what happened. Wewent from the .2 MIPS of the 8088 to the 100 MIPS of the Pentium,and Ethernet and Token-Ring have been with us all the way.It's time for a change. Every desktop computer sporting a 486or better can saturate a 4-Mbps or 10-Mbps pipe, and most newerservers and power workstations can do a fairly good job ona 100-Mbps pipe. More important, we now have applications thatcan actually take advantage of that speed. Multimedia, databases,graphically intensive you-name-it all can suck up lots of bandwidth.End stations need either fast connections or exclusive accessto their own Ethernet or Token-Ring segments. Servers needhigh-speed connections, as their clients can and do pull somuch data from them quickly.The products are new, and with anything new in our industry,caution is the key word. The package may say 100 Mbps, butyour actual performance could be only slightly better thanit was with your old network. Let's look at some of the importantconsiderations.Even considering fast networking for ISA-based computers makesalmost no sense. In practice, most ISA systems, whether serversor workstations, are cooking along pretty well if they filla Token-Ring or Ethernet pipe. Their chances of taking advantageof more bandwidth are slim. On the other hand, if the technologyyou choose is a shared medium, like Fast Ethernet or FDDI,then upgrading an ISA system may make some sense. Fast Ethernetin such a system makes more sense than FDDI, since an FDDIcard will probably cost as much as or more than your ISA systemis worth. And, please, don't even talk about ATM on ISA, atleast not yet.EISA, PCI and most of the RISC workstation buses can take significantadvantage of fast networking, and here is where it will shine.We've found EISA systems that can move more than 70 Mbps throughan FDDI card, as well as PCI and SBus systems that can movemore than 90 Mbps. The resultant workload on your processoris likely to be significantly different, however, dependingon the bus you pick. Due to much higher throughput rates andlow latency, we found that bus mastering PCI cards are likelyto impact the system bus 70 percent to 90 percent less thanEISA cards.Your mileage may vary depending on the quality of the driversinvolved. As a general rule, buses like PCI are more suitedto processors like the Pentium and P6, and we should mentionthe Alpha, PowerPC and MIPS 4000 processors as well. Video,fast networking and SCSI cards all will leave more of the CPU'stime for your application on PCI vs. EISA, ISA or MCA.An interesting rule of thumb says that any given processor canmove about the same number of megabits of data as its MIPSrating. So, if you want a processor that can move at 100 Mbpsor faster, you'd better have a 100-MIPS processor. In practice,this turns out to be a fairly good rule of thumb. While generallyyou'll get better performance running a performance benchmark,real-life numbers usually will follow the rule. So, don't expectyour old 25-MHz 486 to take full advantage of these technologies.It takes a pretty speedy chip to really shine through.Even with a fast processor, it takes a good OS/driver and protocolimplementation to get the most out of a high-speed NIC. TCPIP is a good example of a protocol that will turn in good numbers.Novell's IPX, with its burst mode, will do well. However, itsolder SPX-I protocol is too slow to be helped much by a fastNIC. SPX-II is much better, but it isn't used much in practice.AppleTalk isn't too bad, since several packets can be sentbefore an acknowledgment is required, but it is limited to512-byte packets, which slows it down significantly. What slowsAppleTalk down even more is the OS to which it's tied.Which Type of Fast Networking?Fast networking is a good catchall phrase, but we shouldn'tindiscriminately combine all of the technologies included inthis Buyer's Guide. Here's a quick look at the pros and consof the five major players.FDDI is the granddaddy of the fast networking topologies. FDDIis an acronym for Fiber Distributed Data Interconnect, andit was designed as a high-availability shared media system.With its token-ring architecture, small rings can deliver upto 98 percent of the 100 Mbps for data, and even the largestrings will deliver upward of 90 percent of the available 100Mbps. Furthermore, developing a fault-tolerant backbone isfairly easy because of FDDI's dual-ring architecture.FDDI has also been standardized for Category 5 twisted-paircabling. Building fiber-based backbones with servers and routersconnected to concentrators via copper wiring is a method forbuilding larger networks today. The down side to FDDI is itsprice. It is expensive, and it isn't likely to get much cheaperin the near future. It is, however, well tested and well accepted.If FDDI is the old man of the pack, ATM is the young whiz kidwho thinks he has all the answers. Unlike FDDI, ATM is purelya switched medium, allowing only an ATM switch and end stationto share the bandwidth of any one physical port. In our guide,that means every station will get unfettered access to fullduplex 100 Mbps or 155 Mbps. As ATM matures, it also promisesto deliver mechanisms for negotiating point-to-point connectionswith an assured quality of service. So, if you've got an applicationthat needs to continuously transfer 40 Mbps to some stationacross the network, your application can make a request forsuch a connection and the bandwidth will be reserved for you.The technology is not mature, and buying ATM now is living onthe bleeding edge. ATM is still expensive, but the prices aredropping quickly. ATM will no doubt dominate backbone technologiesin a few years, but whether or not it's worth the investmentto bring it to the desktop is a tough question.Fibre Channel is the speed demon's dream. Its present top speedis 800 Mbps. Only a few applications really need this kindof speed. Distributed parallel processing is one. Medical imagingmay be another. The animation folks in Hollywood have lookedat it, too. If your applications really need speed, and you'veinvested in the very best hardware, Fibre Channel may be agood choice. However, don't think about it for your serverson a backbone, at least not yet. No major vendors currentlyare shipping Fibre Channel boards for routers, so getting fromFibre Channel to anything else can be difficult.100VG-AnyLAN is a specification that Hewlett-Packard championedas a rival to Fast Ethernet. IBM is supposed to be in HP'scamp, too-as VG-AnyLAN will support either Token-Ring or Ethernetstyle frames-but IBM's interests seem to be elsewhere. In manyrespects, 100VG-AnyLAN is technically superior to Fast Ethernet.Mechanisms are built into the specification to allow the trafficto be prioritized. That's important if you want to supportvoice or video data. The problem is that other than HP, thereare very few proponents of 100VG-AnyLAN.AnyLAN's claim to fame is its ability to run over four pairsof Category 3 twisted-pair wiring (plain ol' phone cable).Thus, it requires no new wiring if you have four pairs of wire.Unfortunately, the Fast Ethernet crowd figured out how to dothat, too, making AnyLAN a little less attractive.With the likes of Bay Networks, Intel and 3Com behind Fast Ethernet,you'll find quality cards and healthy competition for yourbusiness. One good thing about Fast Ethernet is that the connectorand pin-out are the same as for Ethernet. Many manufacturersmake 10/100 cards that will automatically sense the type ofport to which they are connected. Once installed, you onlyneed to install the back-end hardware. The card and driverwill automatically take advantage of the higher speed whenit senses the presence of a Fast Ethernet hub.If you've got Category 5 wiring (the more expensive data-gradestuff) in place, 100BASE-TX is the type of Fast Ethernet youwant. If you've got lots of Category 3 cable pulled, the emerging100BASE-TP4 standard will take advantage of it. How well TP4will work in practice has caused some concern. From everythingwe've seen, it should work fine up to 100 meters.Art Wittmann is a senior editor at Network Computing and associatedirector of the Computer Aided Engineering Center of the Universityof Wisconsin-Madison. He can be reached via the Internet atawittmann@engr.wisc.edu.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1Check List: Making Networking Pay Off- Proper Cabling-(Fiber, Category 5 UTP, STP)- Workstations with high-speed buses (EISA or PCI)- Workstations with high-performance CPUs (486DX-66 or better)- Operating Systems capable of handling fast networking (Windows95,NT, NetWare, Unix)- Applications that demand the speedBack to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1And The Winner Will BeWhile all of the technologies included here have technical merit,not all will take the marketplace by storm. And, while it shouldn'tbe the sole criterion, reasonable market presence is importantfor any technology you plan to deploy widely.The only real lightweight in this group is HP's 100VG-AnyLAN.It's been positioned against Fast Ethernet, which has builtup what seems to be an insurmountable momentum.Fibre Channel will be successful, but only in certain marketniches such as distributed parallel processing and high-endscientific computing. Its other home will be in the onlinestorage market, where Fibre Channel's arbitrated loop architecturewill be popular.FDDI has a few good years left, but it will lose favor as ATMbecomes standardized, stable and cheap. Within three years,new backbones installed on anything other than ATM will beunlikely.Fast Ethernet is a great desktop technology. It's only slightlymore expensive than regular Ethernet, and 10/100 cards makeit easy to deploy. While waiting for ATM to become a viablestandard, choose Fast Ethernet for desktop and for in-buildingruns from wiring closet to router. It's a great value.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1Product UpdateBy:Pam FruthINTERNETPerformance Tech Instant Internet 3.0Improved. Just add new features and stir. Performance Technologyhas enhanced its combination hardware/software Instant Internet3.0 to provide Internet access for up to 50 simultaneous userson a NetWare or Performance Technology POWERLan network. Versions1.0 and 2.0 supported digital, T1 and leased-line connectionsbut required external routers. The new version adds a builtin 64-KB ISDN connection but still requires external routersif you need a dedicated T1. This standalone gateway runs ona Performance Technology multitasking kernel whose sole functionis to handle Internet access requests, while client softwareincludes a 32-bit WinSock DLL. A new set of administrativetools includes comprehensive access control and logging featuresso you can surf specific Web sites and download files via FTPon a configurable per user/group basis. You can also manageInstant Internet 3.0 with SNMP tools such as HP OpenView.Available: Now$4,195 (single Ethernet unit, ISDN version)Performance Technology(210) 979-2000fax (210) 979-2002http://www.perftech.comNETWORK MANAGEMENTFast Track Open Agent For NTNew. For the road to better NT management via SNMP, considerFast Track. This vendor's new product, Open Agent for NT, servesas an SNMP agent for Windows NT servers and workstations, andoffers features that augment the SNMP agent from Microsoft'sNT package. Besides providing access to raw data statistics,Open Agent for NT lets you retrieve information on hardware,like CPU type and physical RAM, and on the network operatingsystem such as the NT version, revision and any installed servicepacks. To evaluate IP routing and addressing dilemmas, youcan set up a remote ping so that an SNMP management stationcan notify an NT server to ping an IP device. If you want toknow when users log in with the wrong password or when theylog out, Open Agent can install traps that point out theseinstances, as well as filter which types of traps will be forwardedto the management system. This product works with several SNMPmanagement consoles, such as HP OpenView and IBM NetView.Available: Now$495 per serverFast Track(301) 990-1500; fax (301) 977-5491http://www.ftinc.comREMOTE ACCESSAirSoft PowerburstNew. AirSoft's Powerburst can revitalize the way you networkwhen you're out of the office. This remote node acceleratorsoftware for NetWare can dramatically reduce network accesstime without making any changes to current configurations,according to AirSoft. Powerburst is a combination of Windowsbased client software running on a remote workstation, andagent software on a dedicated PC that interacts with a NetWarefile server. The client and agent implement AirSoft's cachingalgorithms to do away with unnecessary file system calls. ThePowerburst Agent can support up to 64 concurrent users, anddoes not sacrifice security (it never writes to the file server).Powerburst works with remote node servers from several majorvendors.Available: Now$995 (agent for up to 64 simultaneous users), $645 (client licensesin a five-user pack)AirSoft(408) 777-7500; fax (408) 777-7527http://www.airsoft.comWritten by Pam Fruth (pfruth@nwc.com)Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORK COMPUTING via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996 Vol. 7 No.1The Last Byte: ISDN Blues: And The Internet Beat Goes OnBy:Timothy HaightLongtime readers of Network Computing may be familiarwith my guru, a former Silicon Valley executive turned psychicadviser, who now lives on the San Francisco Peninsula's skyline,with one eye watching the Valley and the other on the deep,blue sea. I visit him now and again when it all becomes toomuch, as I did last week...When I got there, he was playing his djembe, an African goatskindrum. Before I could say more than two words, he handed mea beaded gourd he called a shekere and began telling me howto shake it."Start with a simple downward stroke on the downbeat pulse,"he said. "Hold it gently with your upper hand around the neck,and use the fingers on your lower hand to move it up and down.Like this""But I came here to talk!" I said."You need this more," he said. "Now. And-one, and-two, and-three.Get it?"I more or less got it, and he went back to playing his drum.After a few minutes I said, "ISDN is still driving me nuts.""ISDN drives you nuts every year. Don't break your rhythm. Loosenup your shoulders. Relax your upper arms. Don't forget to breathe.""But it isn't ISDN really. It's the Internet. I got this ISDNline so I could surf the Internet faster, but all the serversI want to go to are so jammed up that the throughput is nofaster than with my old modem.""Don't stop playing," he said. "I need that 4/4 pulse, so Ican do the 3/4 and we can get 6/8. Oh, yes. Why don't you goto other servers?""I don't want to go to other servers! The popular sites arejammed because that's where people want to go!""Now look what that did to your muscle tension. Let those shouldersgo! Listen to the beat. I wish we had someone here to playthe bell. Try accessing the servers after midnight.""I know all the tricks," I said. "I guess what really bugs meis I feel so helpless. I'm used to this kind of stuff on myLAN. Sometimes you're CPU-bound. Sometimes it's bandwidth.Or disk. So you open up the bottleneck. But on the Internet,who do you call?"My guru stopped playing. After a while, he said, "I don't know."He started playing again. "The marketplace will work it out.""I don't know if it will," I said. "Maybe as long as most peoplehave modems, the information providers will optimize theirservers for slow access. They can blame the slow speeds onthe modems, and most people won't know the difference.""Well, maybe those things are what happens when a medium getsa mass audience.""Well, maybe it sucks!""Will you keep playing! The thing is to keep in sync with it,not to fight it. The Internet is evolving. Maybe next weekit'll be different.""Maybe it'll be worse!""OK, write a column about it. Maybe that will make you feelbetter. In the meantime, could you try this pattern? One-andtwo, one-and-two, one-and-two. Push down, lift with the fingers,down hard, then skip a beat. And don't hold that shekere sotight, OK?"Timothy Haight can be reached at thaight@nwc.com.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-7IA059-000323-B025-167http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec95.html 205.156.212.5 19970114222738 text/html 21406HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:25:26 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:14 GMTContent-length: 21219Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec95.html Sample Issue Copyright NETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SURF THE SILICON WITH DIGITAL SEMICONDUCTOR: NEW WEB SITE OPENS (302 words) AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD (1039 words) DIGITAL UNVEILS INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS FOR AD INSERTION AND NEAR VIDEO-ON-DEMAND APPLICATIONS (863 words) CABLE INDUSTRY NETWORK COMPETENCY CENTER CREATED (614 words) CopyrightNETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996SURF THE SILICON WITH DIGITALSEMICONDUCTOR: NEW WEB SITE OPENSInternet explorers can now check the latest information aboutthe world's fastest microprocessors and Alpha's push into theWindows market through Digital Equipment Corporation's newDigital Semiconductor InfoCenter on the World Wide Web.The new Web site also enables system and board manufacturers,end users, industry and financial analysts, the media, andother interested parties to learn about DigitalSemiconductor's industry-leading PCI-based networking andbridge chips, PCI multimedia chips, and the forthcomingStrongARM low-power, high- performance chip family now beingdeveloped.A broad range of information is offered, including a completeproduct catalog, new product news, history, literatureordering information, sales contacts, and more.Supported by an AlphaServer multiprocessor system in PaloAlto, the Digital Semiconductor InfoCenter is accessibledirectly at URL: http://www.digital.com/info/semiconductorIt also can be accessed from the InfoCenter menu on DigitalEquipment's home page, at URL: http://www.digital.comDigital Semiconductor joins seven other Digital Equipmentbusinesses that have active World Wide Web sites."We are continually providing information about newdevelopments and offerings and maintaining up-to-date productcatalogs and sales contacts for Web site visitors," saidJackie Davis, Digital Semiconductor's World Wide WebInfoCenter manager. "The Web is a valuable resource, becauseit's a quick and easy way to make contacts and distributeinformation, and it's always open."Digital Semiconductor, a Digital Equipment Corporationbusiness headquartered in Hudson, Massachusetts, designs,manufactures and markets industry-leading semiconductorproducts including Alpha microprocessors and PCI chips fornetworking, bridging, and graphics/multimedia, as well aslow-power StrongARM microprocessors under license fromAdvanced RISC Machines Ltd. Digital Semiconductor operatesdesign centers in Hudson; Palo Alto, California; Austin,Texas; and Jerusalem, Israel. A new, $450-million fabricationfacility in Hudson will begin revenue production in 1996.Mitsubishi Electric Company is a second source for Alphamicroprocessors. World Wide Web address:http://www.digital.com/info/semiconductorBack to Headline List CopyrightNETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQLSERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORDDigital Equipment Corporation and Microsoft Corporation hasunveiled audited transaction benchmark results that establishnew records in the highly competitive market for database,application and PC LAN servers. The results furtherdemonstrate the companies' leadership in providing customersthe industry's most powerful, most cost-effective open serverplatforms.Breakthrough results of 3194.4 transactions per minute (tpmC)at $196/tpmC, based on the TPC-C(2) benchmark Revision 3.0,were achieved on the AlphaServer 2100 5/300 64-bit SMP systemrunning Microsoft Windows NT Server operating system V3.51 andMicrosoft SQL Server V6.5 client/server database managementsystem. No other Microsoft SQL Server platform from any systemvendor delivers such impressive results.The 3194.4 at $196/tpmC result is the industry's best price/performance using any system, any database, or any operatingsystem. In fact, no other system has ever come close tobreaking the less-than-$200/tpmC barrier.With a total system cost of $626,102, the AlphaServer 21005/300 delivers transaction performance and price/performancesuperior to any other system priced below $1 million -- 24%better throughput performance and $46/tpmC less than itsclosest competitor, the Intel-based Compaq ProLiant 5/133Model 2. It also provides better performance and price/performance than many systems costing much more than $1million (see charts below).The Digital/Microsoft combination even outperforms a TandemHimalaya K10000-16 system with 16 processors and costing $3.5million. And compared with competitive systems from IBM, HP,Sun, Bull, AT&T, and others, these results are far superior."These independent benchmark results again demonstrate thebreakthrough performance and affordability of the Alphaarchitecture," said Pauline Nist, Digital vice president ofthe Alpha Server Business Segment. "For customers, thisrepresents the industry's best value in high-performanceserver capabilities. It also further demonstrates theengineering achievements of our strategic alliance withMicrosoft."The TPC-C benchmark is the industry-standard test formeasuring database transaction processing performance andprice/performance. The $/tpmC result reflects the cost ofacquisition and ownership of the system over a five-yearperiod, including hardware and software maintenance, softwareupgrades, and extended warranties."Today's news is one more way Digital and Microsoft arebringing to customers computing solutions that offerunprecedented value and flexibility," said Rich Tong, generalmanager of the Business Systems Division at Microsoft."These TPC results demonstrate the power of the Microsoft SQLServer and Digital Alpha platform for transaction- andcompute-intensive business applications in heterogeneousenvironments."Heterogeneous Computing EnvironmentThe AlphaServer 2100 5/300 benchmark was conducted using threeCPUs and 2 gigabytes of memory. These results were achievedin a heterogeneous computing environment, using VisigenicsODBC client software for SCO UNIX running on Digital'sIntel-based Prioris PC systems."No longer must customers limit themselves to a singleoperating system to get interoperability, performance, andaffordability," said Nist. "With these results, Digital hasproved that one of the best ways to solve business problemscan include a heterogeneous environment. Digital demonstratesthat a customer can leverage the strengths of both Windows NTand UNIX to provide a cost-effective high-performancesolution." Competitive ComparisonsPRICE PERFORMANCE tpmC $/tpmC total system costDigital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 $196 $626,101Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216Digital AlphaServer 8400 5/300 9414.06 316 2,972,726Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/100-1 1516.77 319 484,108IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831HP 9000 K410 3809.46 364 1,384,763TRANSACTION THROUGHPUT tpmC $/tpmC total system costHP 9000 K410 3809.46 $364 $1,384,763Sun SPARCCenter 2000E 3534.20 495 1,751,004AT&T 3555/4-XP 3312.70 587 1,942,593Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 196 626,102IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831Tandem Himalaya K10000-16 3043.49 1160 3,529,520Bull ESCALA Deskside D401/8 2660.03 530 1,409,965Compaq ProLiant 45005/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216Customers Deploying Enterprise Database SolutionsThe Potomac Group, of Nashville, Tenn., provides doctors andhospitals in 20 states instant on-line access to Medicaidsubscriber data. According to Bill McClary, executive vicepresident of operations, "Our AlphaServer 2100 / Microsoft SQLServer solution enables us to compete and win in a marketdominated by giant companies with multi-million dollar legacysystems."At Ruben H. Donnelley Corporation, the world's oldestpublisher of Yellow Pages, AlphaServer 2100 systems andMicrosoft SQL Server are greatly expanding the company'sInteractive Yellow Pages, with new features such asFAX-on-demand and sophisticated database manipulation.And at the Los Angeles Times, the third largest newspaper inthe country, AlphaServer 2100 systems and Microsoft SQLServer, together with Autologic for Windows NT, are powering arastor image processing (RIP) systems that enables the Timesto product more pages faster, with more graphics and higherresolution, at lower cost.300MHz Processor Upgrade, Special PricingIn announcing the benchmark results, Digital also unveiled aprocessor upgrade program for the AlphaServer 2100 and 2000systems, raising the performance of the Alpha 21164 CPU usedin this system to a blazing 300MHz. The Alpha 21164microprocessor is still the industry's fastest and only BIPS(billion instructions per second) chip.Through December, this upgrade is specially priced at only$4,000. Complete 300MHz AlphaServer 2100 systems will begenerally available in Q1 of CY1996.60-Day Payment-Free Leasing OfferDigital also announced a limited-time leasing offer on allAlpha servers and workstations. Through June 1996, DigitalFinancial Services, a division of GE Capital, is offeringcustomers who migrate to Digital from competitors' systems a60-day payment holiday on all 36-month leases. The program isavailable to all direct and partner channels worldwide.The Digital/Microsoft AllianceDigital's AlphaServer systems provide a highly scalableenterprise platform for the Microsoft BackOffice suite, whichincludes Microsoft Windows NT operating system, Microsoft SQLServer, Microsoft Systems Management Server, Microsoft SNAServer, and Microsoft Mail Server. In June, Digital announcedan OEM agreement with Microsoft to bundle the MicrosoftBackOffice server suite with Digital AlphaServers andIntel-based Prioris servers.In August, Digital and Microsoft announced a major alliance,the Microsoft-Digital Alliance for Enterprise Computing,which will help customers implement and support Windows-basedcomputing in the enterprise. The enterprise level performancenumbers announced today demonstrate the results of the jointefforts of Digital and Microsoft to deliver Windows NT-basedsolutions to the enterprise.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIGITAL UNVEILS INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS FOR ADINSERTION AND NEAR VIDEO-ON-DEMAND APPLICATIONSNew Products Generate Immediate Revenues For Cable Companiesand Telcos, Provide Strong Pathway To Digital FutureIn a move that brings the interactive TV future into closerreach, Digital Equipment Corporation has announced four newinteractive video servers supported by the company's powerfulMediaplex video server architecture. The new offerings,comprised of the Mediaplex 24-channel and 40-channel adinsertion systems, and the Mediaplex 12-channel and 24-channelnear video-on-demand (NVOD) systems, leap frog industrycompetitors to provide the fullest range of digital videoserver solutions currently available."This announcement reaffirms that interactive television isviable and being implemented today," said Peter Ryus,director of worldwide marketing, Digital's Video andInteractive Information Services. "Using existing analogwiring infrastructures, Digital's Mediaplex servers enablecable companies and telcos to immediately capture higherrevenues by inserting locally customized ads on cable channelsor giving viewers more selections of pay-per-view programmingand expanded schedule options.By coupling Digital's heritage in systems integration andnetworking with Mediaplex video server solutions, we arepaving the way for cable companies and telco customers toenter a promising digital future, while providing tangiblebenefits now."Mediaplex Video Advertising SystemsThe Mediaplex ad insertion systems position Digital as aleader in providing digital ad insertion solutions for smallto large cable installations. Recently, Adlink, the regionalcable advertising interconnect tying the largest number ofcable systems in the United States, installed Digital'ssystems in all 57 headends in their southern Californiaservice area.The 24-channel and 40-channel Mediaplex ad insertion systemsdigitally encode advertisements using MPEG-2 compressiontechnology, then store and distribute ads over cablecommunications networks to a pre-selected audience. Bothsystems provide the ability to encode and distribute a 30-and60-second spot to a cable operator's network in one hour orless.The Mediaplex ad insertion systems cut the costs of adinsertion, thus improving the efficiency of advertisingscheduling, insertion and billing operations. They alsoincrease the inventory availability for advertising on cablechannels; enable the distribution of time-sensitive ads andguarantee high video quality through adherence to theInternational Standards Organization's (ISO) MPEG-2 standardfor full-resolution video and audio encoding.Other Mediaplex video advertising system features include:o local storage of 300 or more 30-second encoded ad spots;o the StorageWorks highly available subsystem, providing easeof maintenance with hot swap disk drives supporting RAID Level5;o the ability to continue inserting spots in the event of adisk failure;o separate hot-swap digital-to-analog decoders for eachchannel, for the highest level of scheduling reliability andease of maintenance;o automatic verification of completed spots from the adinsertion system for customer billing.These systems, which will begin shipping in volume in February1996, are priced as low as $8,000 per channel.Mediaplex Near Video-On-DemandThe Mediaplex NVOD systems give cable companies and telcos theability to broadcast multiple movies and other pay-per-viewprograms according to any schedule over existing analoginfrastructures. They also provide the flexibility to programclosely staggercasted distribution of one movie, a wider rangeof movies with more delay between streams, or any combinationof the two.An optional encoding station is available so that serviceproviders can digitize their own content. Once digitized,movie content is a computer file that can be routed to localand remote video servers using traditional data networking.By installing the Mediaplex NVOD system, customers avoid thelimitations and costs of analog-based pay per view systems,and can begin establishing a digital infrastructure thatscales to support full interactive services, such as fullvideo-on-demand.The Mediaplex NVOD system is available in two configurations:o An Alpha-based server, priced below $180,000, provides up to12 video streams at 8 Mbps with the capacity to store up to 18hours of encoded content, also at 8 Mbps. A smaller system,providing up to 6 video streams, is available for less than$150,000. These systems are available immediately.o A second AlphaStation system, priced at $200,000, providesup to 24 channels of output with the capacity to store up to18 hours of content. This system will be available in thesecond quarter of 1996.The Mediaplex PlatformBoth the Digital Mediaplex NVOD and ad insertion systems arebased on Digital's industry-leading Mediaplex technologyplatform. The applications are similar because they share thetasks of scheduling and inserting content into analogchannels, and do not require a digital network from theheadend to the home.Digital is currently the market leader in interactiveinformation technology, supplying media server solutions formore trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cabletelevision companies using Digital's Mediaplex serverarchitecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden; WestminsterCable in London; and Adlink, one of the largest advertisinginterconnect services in the United States. Trials bytelecommunications companies using Digital technology includeUS West's trial in Nebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEXand Ameritech in the Northeast and Midwest of the UnitedStates. Digital's servers are also being used to deliverpay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks inCanada.Back to Headline List CopyrightNETWORKS UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996CABLE INDUSTRY NETWORK COMPETENCY CENTER CREATEDWith the announcement of the Cable Industry Network CompetencyCenter, Digital Equipment Corporation has positioned itself tobecome a driving force in the high-speed data communicationsnetwork industry. The Cable Industry Center offers networkconsulting, integration, and management services to cable andtelecommunications companies around the world that are addinghigh-speed data communications and Internet access to theirexisting hybrid fiber/coax networks.The Cable Industry Center, located in Littleton,Massachusetts, is a logical outgrowth of the unique technicaland market experience Digital has gained over the past threeyears. During that time, 60 high-speed data networks for cableoperators worldwide were installed to provide services tolocal governments, schools and colleges, manufacturers,healthcare institutions and telecommuters."We found that customers require both products and multivendorintegration services," said Larry Walker, vice president andgeneral manager of the Network Product Business Unit,"therefore we have moved the Cable Industry Center from theNetwork Product Business Unit to Digital's Network Servicesgroup where its vast resources can be leveraged."Graeme Shorter, vice president, Digital Network Services said:"with this team of individuals we now have the experience,skills, and knowledge to play a critical role as a partner inthe design, development, and deployment of complex, high-speeddata communications networks in the cable industry. Thismarket focus is an ideal complement to our existing networkbusiness."These networks provide users with high-speed access to the"Information Superhighway," including Internet and on-lineservices, as well as the ability to work at home, usingnetwork connections that are 1,000 times faster thanconventional telephone modems.In one of the initial projects for the Center, DigitalEquipment Corporation, MCI and Colorado Springs Cablevisioncollaborated on a successful trial of the nation's first largescale advanced telecommuting pilot during this past summer.The Cable Industry Center is also currently working withseveral other industry leading cable companies on their plansto deploy new services.Center Meets Urgent Need for Timely Network ImplementationDigital has created the Center at a crucial time in thedevelopment of the high-speed data communications market. Manyservice providers are now ready to move from the trial phaseto investment in full-scale full-service networks.At the same time, changes in the regulatory environment areopening up competition between telecommunications and cablecompanies. Through the efforts of the IEEE 802.14 Committee,the standardization and interoperability of technology formultiple services over hybrid fiber/coax is fast approaching,which will meet the needs of the cable industry."Multiple Systems Operators feel a great sense of urgency todeploy networks," said Art Zins, managing director of theCable Industry Network Competency Center. "However, they worryabout making short-sighted decisions now that will precludeother choices later. Our technical and business services canhelp our customers implement flexible, modular, and economicalnetworks that meet their strategic business needs now and inthe future."Leveraging Network Services and Multivendor CapabilitiesThe Cable Industry Network Competency Center staff bring withthem the skill and knowledge that was gained throughintroducing and deploying Digital's ChannelWorks productsenabling high-speed data transmission over the existing cableinfrastructure.As part of Network Services, the Cable Industry Center canmeet its customers' needs with cable data solutions thatemploy products from multiple vendors. The Cable IndustryCenter is establishing alliances with targeted cable modemmanufacturers and will continue to partner with cableoperators and systems integrators, as appropriate, to providethe best-in-class solution. In addition, the Cable IndustryCenter will be able to leverage the expertise of NetworkServices' 1,300 network professionals and 40 Network Centers.Network Services is part of Digital's Multivendor CustomerServices Division.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-8IA059-000323-B025-214http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec89.html 205.156.212.5 19970114222906 text/html 107523HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:26:35 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:11 GMTContent-length: 107335Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec89.html Sample Issue Copyright NEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NewsPix Images For Newsbytes Publishers 01/03/96 (463 words) MoSys To Ship Multibank DRAM 01/03/96 (562 words) Ericsson Secures Further Mobitex Order In Singapore 01/03/96 (303 words) Motorola Claims Chinese Handwriting Breakthrough 01/03/96 (446 words) Asia Newsbriefs 01/03/96 (445 words) Japan Newsbriefs 01/03/96 (685 words) ****European Cross-Border Decency Laws In Spotlight 01/03/96 (635 words) Final Stuff Technology Claims Against Storagetek Dismissed 01/03/96 (319 words) New UK Nat'l Internet Service Provider 01/03/96 (764 words) Telecom Ireland Links To Internet Backbone Via MCI 01/03/96 (595 words) America Online Readies UK Rollout 01/03/96 (649 words) China - Large-Scale Production Of Windows 95 Starts 01/03/96 (274 words) China - Asia-Pacific Mobile Telecom Project Founded 01/03/96 (174 words) Philippines - National Telecoms Commission Plans Growth 01/03/96 (312 words) Printer Sales In Asia-Pacific Unaffected By EDI 01/03/96 (609 words) Philippines - Cisco Office Now In Operation 01/03/96 (257 words) Canadian Product Launch Update 01/03/96 (186 words) ****Telecom Bill Hits New Trouble 01/03/96 (389 words) Federal Shutdown Web Page 01/03/96 (400 words) Texas Instruments & Samsung Continue Patent Dispute 01/03/96 (427 words) ****CompuServe Suspends Access To 200 Newsgroups 01/03/96 (490 words) ****AT&T Restructuring To Cost $6Bil & 40,000 Jobs 01/03/96 (642 words) STD Claims First With Canadian-Built PowerPC Systems 01/03/96 (307 words) Security Dynamics Plans To License "Concryption" 01/03/96 (614 words) Pipeline Ships Electronic Customer Registration Product 01/03/96 (381 words) Real-Time Quotes For $30 Per Month 01/03/96 (486 words) ****Cyrix Expects Loss, Writes Off Entire 486 Inventory 01/03/96 (313 words) America Online Warns Members Of Password Security 01/03/96 (452 words) ****Web Slowdown In 1996, Followed By Boom, Says IDC 01/03/96 (788 words) Newsbytes Daily Summary 01/03/96 (1989 words) CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996NewsPix Images For Newsbytes Publishers 01/03/96NewsPix Images For Newsbytes Publishers 01/03/96MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Photos are nowposted as they arrive, which means quicker access to the story pictures.The bulletin will continue on Mondays, with updates Wednesdays andFridays as needed.These photos correspond to recent Newsbytes stories. They are onlinein the Newsbytes menu on America Online, NiftyServe, and the Newsbytesprivate bulletin board system in Minneapolis. Some selections arealso available from the Newsbytes Pacifica Website athttp://www.islandtel.com/newsbytes/JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) files are larger in size,PICT files are designed as thumbnails for onscreen viewing.The photos are titled with name/year/month/day.PICT/thumbnail pictures are black and white (gray scale). Filemessage will indicate color if the JPEG image is color.Some of the "for use" images, may be PICT files. To distinguishthese files from the thumbnail preview PICT images, the tag for thecolor "for use" image will have PICT, all caps. The thumbnail willremain noted as "pct."To become a licensed Newsbytes publisher, call Newsbytes at612-430-1100 (US) or write to wendy@newsbytes.com on theInternet. Licensing applies to any medium.---------------------------Week of JANUARY 2 - JANUARY 5,1996---------------------------- NEW THIS WEEK -BUS-CARD951220 - color / Yellow Pages On A Business Card: basicproduct shot The Business Card.FUJI951130 - color / Fuji Offers Zip Disks, Flash Memory: slip coverart from the new Fuji100 megabyte Zip Disk 1.IMAGER951127 - b&w / Fuji's Film Image Capture Device, Digital Cameras:basic product shot of the Fujix Photo-Video Imager FV-7.---------------------------------------------------------------- PARTIAL LISTING OF PREVIOUS ITEMS -ONTECH951213 - color / Software Finds Network Files: screenshot of thesearch mode, text lines (no gif).VACATIONS951213 - color / Free Travel & Vacation Planning On The Web:screenshot of web page graphic.DELUXE951212 - color / Adobe Intros Mac Photo Editing Software:screenshot of work screen.PEACHTREE951212 - color / Peachtree Intros Electronic Bill PayingService: shot of the software package.POWER951208 - color / AER's 12-hour Battery For HP OmniBook: ThePowerslice LX with tray that slides out to support the Omnibookmouse.COMPCARD951207 - color / OKI Develops PC On A Card: the card with theOKI imprint visible.WTC951211 - color / Internet World Trade Center Opens On Web: mainart banner from web site.EARTHWEB951205 - color / WebInnovation - EarthWeb Shows Gamelan& Hot Web Sites: Gamelan logo.WEBINNOV951206 a, b, c - color / Web Frenzy in San Francisco:a) Marc Andreesson giving the keynote address, b) the SGI COSMO logo,c) view of exhibition floor at the San Francisco Hilton.(Newsbytes/19960102)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996MoSys To Ship Multibank DRAM 01/03/96MoSys To Ship Multibank DRAM 01/03/96SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- MoSys Inc. is set tobegin shipment of its Multibank dynamic random access memory (MDRAM)product. The MDRAM is an extended-performance synchronous DRAM withhigh bandwidth, short access times, and, according to the company,"unique pricing."Speaking to Newsbytes, Gary Banta, vice president of marketing forMoSys, said: "The MDRAM is the highest performance DRAM architectureavailable on the market today. Its peak bandwidth exceeds the nearestcompetitive product by nearly one-third."He continued: "First, we achieve access times on 20 nanoseconds (ns)compared to all other DRAMs between 70 and 100 nanoseconds. Second wenot only start and stop faster, our top speed is faster, operating atover 600 kilobytes per second. SDRAM (synchronous DRAM), for example,operates at around 200 kilobytes per second."MoSys claims that it employs an independent multibank organizationthat is unique from any other DRAM product. This organization allowsindependent operations to access different banks independently.Because of the independent multibank system, it is no longer necessaryto use memory in predefined one megabyte (MB), 2MB, or 4MB increments,according to the company.Starting from 0.5MB, the MDRAM is available in 0.25MB increments. Forexample, this allows 1,024 by 768 "True Color" applications, which require2.25MB for frame buffer, to be implemented with exactly the correct amountof memory, says the company.Banta claims that the cost savings to the end-user is significant, saying:"Before, if you needed a 2.25MB DRAM, you had to buy up to a 4MB product.Buying a 2.25MB MDRAM saves the cost of the excess 1.75MB.""While DRAM process technology affords a lot of opportunity to excel,traditional DRAM market leaders have been reluctant to innovate inother than standard DRAMs," said Dr. Yong Yao, senior analyst atMicroDesign Resources. "However, standard DRAMs are bottlenecks formany emerging applications, such as multimedia and others requiringultra-high performance PC graphics. Thus, market dominance by theconventional 'dinosaurs' in DRAM technology is going to be challengedand there clearly is an opportunity for a company like MoSys, with itsMDRAM, to be a significant player in the high-performance memory arena."Ralph O. Cognac, vice president of business development for MoSys,said: "This marks an important milestone in the company. With ourmanufacturing partnerships in place and demand growing rapidlyafter our award-winning demonstrations at Comdex, we are nowprepared to become a major player in the specialty DRAM market."Cognac also commented that, while MoSys has received MDRAM inquiriesfrom a wide variety of companies from diverse application areas -- suchas high-definition television, set-top box converters, hyper-realitygames, and networking -- the closest-to-production applicationscontinue to be those in the PC graphics arena.The MDRAM initially will be available in five configurations, at both100 megahertz (MHz) and 125MHz clock speeds, with capacities that rangefrom 0.5MB to 1.25MB. The product is available in both 68-pin plasticleadless chip carriers (PLCC), and 128-pin 14 by 20 by 2.7 millimeter(mm) plastic quad flat pack (PQFP). Available immediately is the 1MBMDRAM in 10 thousand units at $40 each, and the 1.125MB MDRAM in 10thousand units at $45 each. Others will be available in the firstquarter, 1996.(Richard Bowers/19960103/Press Contact: Gary Banta, MoSys,408-321-0777)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Ericsson Secures Further Mobitex Order In Singapore 01/03/96Ericsson Secures Further Mobitex Order In Singapore 01/03/96STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Ericsson has secured anothermajor order for its Mobitex radio packet data network (PDN) inSingapore. This time the company has contracted with the TIBS taxifleet, which covers the colony with 800 vehicles, to install a Mobitexsystem for use by drivers, customers, and staff of the company.According to Ericsson, using the system, customers can dial the taxicompany and, following audiotex menus, can press buttons on theirphones to order their cab.The task is not as complex as it sounds, as TIBS has set up accountsfor its regular users, who are then offered a choice of their fivemost regular pickup points. Users key in their account number andpersonal identification number (PIN) to get this menu, and then receivea confirmation of the order, together with an estimated time of arrival.If they stay on the line, they are told which taxi driver will bemeeting with them, and, if the order if an immediate one, where thatdriver is currently, together with an estimated wait time.Ericsson claims that the Mobitex system being installed for TIBS willallow the company to handle up to 1,000 bookings an hour, comparedwith a manual system that could handle a maximum of 120 bookings anhour previously.The contract means that there are now 16 public Mobitex networksoperating in 15 countries. Although the radio PDN service is designedfor many different applications, Ericsson claims that the technologyis rapidly gaining a foothold in the transportation business, as wellas in field service and public safety organizations.(Sylvia Dennis/19960103/Press Contact: Agneta Harte Jacobson,Ericsson Business Area Radiocomms, +46-8-404-5983; Reader Contact:Jonas Lindgren, Ericsson Mobile Data Systems, +65-350-1604)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Motorola Claims Chinese Handwriting Breakthrough 01/03/96Motorola Claims Chinese Handwriting Breakthrough 01/03/96LONDON, ENGLAND, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Motorola's Lexicus Division hasunveiled a Windows 95 handwriting recognition package for the Chinesealphabet. According to officials with Lexicus, using the package,writers will now be able to accurately input the 13,000 Chinesecharacters into Windows 95 applications on standard desktop ornotebook computers.Known as the Lexicus Recognizer, the software is claimed to be a"highly effective solution" with over 95 percent accuracy ratiosin "real usage situations."The package, which will ship in the first quarter of 1996 at a priceto be announced, comes with two dictionaries containing the wholeChinese character set (over 13,000 characters), and can be run on an80486-based PC or better.According to Motorola, the large number of Chinese characters is verydifficult to recognize for most users, and additional variances inpersonal writing makes the procedure more complicated. Lexicus,claims the company, can "easily cope" with these differences, making out"cursive" style characters and so being able to handle faster and "morenatural" handwriting.Motorola officials explained to Newsbytes that there is an additionalproblem -- European keyboards are different for those designed foruse in China and other Asian countries. Lexicus can cope with even themost basic of European keyboards, it is claimed.According to Elton Sherwin, vice president of marketing with Lexicus,"This technology will revolutionize the use of PCs and microprocessorsin Asia. Users no longer need to learn the English keyboard to enterChinese characters into PCs, PDAs (personal digital assistants), andnotebook computers. By the turn of the century this technology may runon the surface of a watch crystal," he claimed.Newsbytes notes that there are more than a billion writers of theChinese alphabet in the world. They uses one of two character sets --traditional or simplified. The Traditional character set is in use inTaiwan and Hong Kong.Simplified, meanwhile, was developed in the Peoples Republic of Chinaand combines traditional characters with some simplified versions ofcharacters. Japanese Kanji letters have a considerable overlap withtraditional and, to a lesser extent, simplified Chinese characters.Lexicus was acquired by Motorola in the fourth quarter of 1993, fromits founders, a private development company. At the time, industryexperts noted that handwriting recognition had had only a limitedtechnological and market success, but was seen as a key to thepotentially lucrative market for hand-held devices. Lexicus wasacquired and added to Motorola's Paging and Wireless Data Division.(Sylvia Dennis/19960103/Press Contact: Dawn Montoya, SwitzerCommunications, 415-945-7073; Reader Contact: Motorola,tel +44-1793-541541, fax +44-1793-541227)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Asia Newsbriefs 01/03/96Asia Newsbriefs 01/03/96TOKYO, JAPAN, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- In this roundup of news from acrossAsia: Korea - Foreigners to invest in telecom companies; Indonesia -Mitsui to launch pager service; Singapore - Telecom violations down;India, Malaysia - Casio expands Asian production.Korea - Foreigners To Invest In Telecom CompaniesThe Korean government has said foreigners or foreign companies will beable to hold equity stakes of up to 33% in Korean telecommunicationcompanies from 1998. At the same time, restrictions will be lifted onthe number of foreign board members at companies, presently pegged atone third, and the way will also be cleared for foreigners to managetelecommunications projects. Further afield, in 2001, the governmentwill allow foreigners to operate telecommunications services in Koreaby leasing lines and capacity from Korean operators. Restrictions willcontinue that ban foreigners from becoming majority stakeholders intelecommunications projects.Indonesia - Mitsui To Launch Pager ServiceJapan's Mitsui & Co. Ltd. trading house will launch a pager service inIndonesia this year. The company will jointly establish P.T. BuanaBintangbayu with Jakata-based telecommunications company P.T.Telekomindo Primabhakti. From the middle of January the service willbe made available in Jakata and slowly expand to other major cities inthe country. Mitsui & Co. will hold 25% of the company which will sendits signals via the Indosat satellite.Singapore - Telecom Violations DownSingapore's Business Times newspaper has reported the number ofviolations of the telecoms laws fell in the April to September periodlast year. Singapore Telecom found 19 infringements in the course of1,327 inspections carried out during the period. In the previous sixmonths it conducted 1,057 inspections and discovered 52 violations.The infringements range from selling equipment without a dealer'slicense to selling equipment for local use without the correctapproval labels. Of the 19 regulation breakers, sixteen wereprosecuted, reported the newspaper.India, Malaysia - Casio Expands Asian ProductionJapan's Casio Computer is to begin manufacturing and selling pagers inIndia from February. The company will establish Casio Bharti MobileCommunications Ltd. and hold 51% of the stock, with India's BhartiTelecom holding 40%, and Japanese trading company Mitsui & Co. Ltd.holding the remaining 9%. Reports put first year sales targets at26,000, but eventual manufacturing is hoped to reach 600,000 pagersannually. The announcement came a few days after Casio said it wouldbegin manufacture of digital cameras in Malaysia. Production willbegin in April with full production of 70,000 units a month of theQV-10 digital camera due on stream in the summer.(Martyn Williams/19960103)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Japan Newsbriefs 01/03/96Japan Newsbriefs 01/03/96TOKYO, JAPAN, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- In this roundup of news from Japan:Hashimoto ponders for NTT, KDD merger; NTT DoCoMo profits to surge;Star TV plans Japanese channel; Short holidays at chip makers; Sanyoshifting production; Ziff purchase to be partly funded by bonds issue;Sony to enter video CD software market.Hashimoto Ponders For NTT, KDD MergerJapanese Trade Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto has proposed the idea of amerger between Nippon Telegraph & Telephone (NTT) and Kokusai DenshinDenwa (KDD). NTT is the world's largest telephone company anddominates the domestic telephone market in Japan, while KDD holds asimilar dominant position in the international telephone market.Hashimoto, who is also president of the Liberal Democratic Party,was speaking on a TV Asahi talk program. He called for furtherderegulation of the Japanese telecommunications market and the joiningtogether of the two companies to maintain a strong position in theface of competition from overseas telephone companies.NTT DoCoMo Profits To SurgeProfits at the nine companies of the NTT DoCoMo network are set tosurge 36% in fiscal year 1995 to 1.1 trillion yen ($11 billion),companies officials have said. In the eight months to September, 1995,the companies attracted 1.48 million new subscribers, underlining thestrong growth in the sector that is leading to the profits jump.Star TV Plans Japanese ChannelHong Kong-based Star TV, Asia's top satellite television network, willstart a new channel for the Japanese market, according to sourcesquoted by the Kyodo news service. Star TV, owned by media tycoonRupert Murdoch, gained permission from the Ministry of Posts andTelecommunications to beam programs to Japan in early 1995. The newchannel will be offered via cable and in some hotels, but not initiallyvia direct-to-home satellite reception. The reports suggested thechannel will begin broadcasting in April this year. Other broadcastersplanning to enter the Japanese market include Turner's TNT & CartoonNetwork and CNBC Asia. CNN International and BBC World are alreadyavailable on Japanese cable, as is a local version of MTV.Short Holidays At Chip MakersWorkers at Japan's semiconductor manufacturers could only enjoy shortholidays this new year because of the strong demand for products.Units of NEC Corporation reported holidays of just three days fromJanuary 1. Other manufacturers have also cut holidays from an originallyplanned six or seven days to just three. In the summer, the samecompanies also cut holidays to cope with the strong demand forcomputer chips.Sanyo Shifting ProductionConsumers buying Sanyo video cassette recorders will soon be unable tofind any carrying the "made in Japan" impression, according to a reportin the Yomiuri Shimbun. The newspaper said the company is looking tomove all VCR production to plants overseas to better insure againstlosses due to the strong yen. Of the 3.3 million machines Sanyo makeseach year, 600,000 are produced at a plant in Osaka. The remainder areturned out from factories in Indonesia, China, and Germany.Ziff Purchase To Be Partly Funded By Bonds IssueSoftbank Corporation announced just after Christmas that it intends tofund its purchase of Ziff Davis Publishing through the issue of 70billion yen ($700 million) worth of bonds. The company agreed topurchase Ziff Davis Publishing for $1.8 billion and has already issuednew stock and raised around 63 billion yen ($630 million).Sony To Enter Video CD Software MarketSony Pictures Entertainment (Japan) Inc. will begin producing softwarefor the Video CD format in March. The company announced it willrelease ten titles, including Stand By Me, Easy Rider, Taxi Driver,The Adams Family, Kramer vs Kramer, Ghostbusters, Last Action Hero,No Way Out, Silence of the Lambs, and Robocop. The Video CD format isbased on the CD platform and supports MPEG-1 (Motion Picture ExpertsGroup type 1) video compression. It is already widely used in Karaokemachines and several manufacturers offer combined VHS/Video CD playermachines in Japan.(Martyn Williams/19960103)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996 ****European Cross-Border Decency Laws In Spotlight 01/03/96 ****European Cross-Border Decency Laws In Spotlight 01/03/96TOKYO, JAPAN, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- The decision by Compuserve to remove20 Usenet newsgroups after complaints from German legislators isnot the first time cross-border decency and obscenity has reared itshead in Europe. The British government has already experienced theproblems universal access can cause in the satellite television sectorand other nations have been angered by cross-border broadcasting.From the late 1980s, widespread access to broadcasts from otherEuropean countries has become more common as small, cheap satellitedishes have appeared on millions of European rooftops to pull in, notjust more local programming, but transmissions from other countries.In the UK, the most well-known example of such problems involved RedHot Television, a late night hard core porn channel that was based inDenmark and broadcasting to viewers across Europe.Such programming was well in excess of British decency standards but,the channel argued, it was legally broadcasting to the UK because thematerial was within the laws of its country of origin, Denmark. Underthe European Community's "Television Without Frontiers" directive,broadcasts were deemed acceptable community wide if they met therequirements of the state from which they emanated from.After much study of the laws, and consultation with the EuropeanCommunity, the British government decided a clause in the directive,allowing broadcasts to be proscribed if they threatened to corrupt themoral values of the country, applied, and the channel was successfullybanned from the UK market. Steep fines and possible jail awaitedanyone caught selling subscriptions.Other countries have also faced problems caused by cross-borderbroadcasting. In 1989, the Dutch authorities told cable networks theycould not carry TV10, a Dutch language channel based in Luxembourg.The channel located there because of problems obtaining a commercialbroadcasting license in the Netherlands. TV10 never launched after itwas banned from its intended audience and later appealed to theEuropean Court, only to be ruled against.Last year, neighboring Belgium attempted to ban a Scandinavian-basedFlemish language channel, VT4. The station located outside of Belgiumbecause the country would only allow one commercial broadcaster. Onthis occasion, the broadcaster won, due to the country having norestrictions on foreign broadcasters.The French too have also been angered by foreign channels -- thistime Ted Turner's TNT & Cartoon Network which broadcasts from London.France said there was not enough French language content to complywith French cultural laws and threatened to pull the channel fromcable networks nationwide. Turner added French audio channels andsubtitles and the situation was resolved.Back in the UK, sex is again in the news as the country recentlyblocked access to TV Erotica. However, pornography has not beenthe only thing to upset the British. Several years ago, cableoperators were cautioned over Galavision, a Mexican TV broadcaster,because of its screening of bull fighting.Ironically, British-based broadcasters have also caused problemsoverseas. TV3 is a network of three channels broadcasting to Sweden,Denmark, and Norway, and established itself in London to escape strictScandinavian commercial laws.The laws ban advertising for all alcoholic drinks and products,something which the UK allows. Despite requests from the Scandinavianauthorities, the UK government cited the cross-border broadcasting lawsand TV3's legality under UK laws as the reason for its refusal to takeaction.European media chiefs and the European Union are currently inconsultation over a more comprehensive and accepted replacement to the"Television Without Frontiers" directive. Such a directive is likelyto be closely followed by online regulators seeking to ensure common,unrestricted access to information and services across the entireEuropean Union, one of the major cornerstones of the union.(Martyn Williams/19960103)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Final Stuff Technology Claims Against Storagetek Dismissed 01/03/96Final Stuff Technology Claims Against Storagetek Dismissed 01/03/96LOUISVILLE, COLORADO., U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- A judge hasdismissed the last two charges in a lawsuit that charged that StorageTechnology Corp. (NYSE: STK) had breached a 1990 agreement withStuff Technology Partners, a former development partner. Stuff hadsought $2.4 billion in its original suit.The suit was originally filed in early 1994. Judge Morris SandsteadJr. dismissed 14 of the original 16 claims in June, 1995, ruling thatthe General Mutual Release agreement signed by the two companies wasunambiguous. The release settled a dispute over rights to an opticaltechnology developed jointly by Storagetek and Stuff. Storagetek saidthe two companies put about $68 million into the project, but noproduct was ever brought to market.The final two claims were based on a Stuff allegation thatStoragetek had breached the original 1990 agreement by developingand/or manufacturing optical disk products and/or media. Storageteksaid the 1990 agreement allows both parties to use the technology --Stuff in optical products and Storagetek in any non-optical application.However, according to Storagetek spokesperson David Reid, that doesn'tmatter because none of Storagetek's products use Stuff's technology.Storagetek said affidavits signed by numerous Storagetek senior managersand engineers prove that no such products have been developed ormanufactured since the release was signed.At the time Stuff filed its suit, Storagetek spokesperson JudithHargrave, in an interview with Newsbytes, called the suit "frivolous."Hargrave said the partnership raised about $40 million. The funds wereto be paid out to Storagetek as the technology was developed.Storagetek said it is considering filing a claim to recover damageson the grounds that the suit filed by Stuff was a violation of theterms of the 1990 agreement between the two organizations.(Jim Mallory/19960103/Press contact: David Reid, Storagetek,303-673-4815; Public contact: Storagetek, 303-673-5020)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996New UK Nat'l Internet Service Provider 01/03/96New UK Nat'l Internet Service Provider 01/03/96WALSALL, WEST MIDLANDS, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Open Integration, a well-known computer systems supplier, has set up a subsidiary operation tooffer Internet services. Known as Cyberphile, the Internet serviceprovider (SP) claims that, thanks to its parentage and a UKP500,000investment in a fiber optic network spanning the UK, it can offer"third-generation" Internet facilities to its customers.Susan Perry, a spokesperson for the company, told Newsbytes that thereference to the third generation is because the company is adopting a"serious approach" to its provision of Internet services, offeringsubscriptions ranging from simple dial-up monthly packages through toleased line circuits with attendant consultancy and services such asWorld Wide Web hosting."Because of our links with Open Integration, although we are aseparate company, we can provide businesses who need hardware supporta variety of options, including the leasing or rental of computerhardware to run their Internet systems on," she claimed.Cyberphile's headquarters is located in Walsall, in the West Midlands,with the company claiming to have a 256,000 bits-per-second (bps) linkdirectly into the Internet backbone in the US. The company hascontracted with Energis, the National Power telecoms company, foraccess to its virtual Points of Presence (vPOP) network across the UK,which currently has around 80 percent local call access.Because the Energis network is "virtual," all modem calls terminate atCyberphile's offices, where a bank of 28,800 bps Multitech modems linkinto a series of Digital 64-bit Alpha servers that feed into the USInternet backbone.According to Perry, although there are now more than 80 Internetservice providers (SPs) operating in the UK, Cyberphile reckons thereis room in the market for another one, especially since only four otherInternet SPs have national local call coverage.Sign-up to the Cyberphile service costs UKP19.99, with a monthlysubscription charge of UKP12.99. In return, subscribers get a fullyregistered copy of Netscape, plus a suite of Internet applicationssoftware for Windows. Plans are in hand to offer an Apple Macintoshcomputer package for Mac subscribers, Perry told Newsbytes.In addition to the basic service, the company is offering the Cybernettoolbox Internet package, along with Cybersolve, an interactivehelpdesk utility. According to the company, Cybernet supports a fullyautomated installation and configuration of the user's software,allowing subscribers to be up and running in "a matter of minutes."Cybersolve, meanwhile, is an interactive helpdesk application thatthe company claims can be used either between Cyberphile and thesubscriber, or between a customer's in-house support team and themembers of staff on the Net. The package is billed as being "invaluable"in an academic environment where many students are using the Internet,and in large companies where all staff use e-mail and other Internetfacilities. In use, Cybersolve is billed as enabling the helpdesk totake over the user's PC in order to solve problems remotely.On the corporate front, Cyberphile claims to offers two services tocorporate subscribers which include the rental of Digital 75 megahertz(MHz) Pentium PCs, 28,800bps BABT-approved modems, and Windows 95preloaded. The advanced option includes 16 megabytes (MB) of memoryin place of the standard 8MB, along with Web page authoring andCybersolve software.To encourage new subscribers to the fledgling service, Cyberphile isoffering half-price starter packs and the first month's subscriptionfree of charge. According to Mike Hurney, Cyberphile's managingdirector, the Internet SP is among the top four SPs from day one ofits operation in terms of coverage, service, and training."We aim to be number one with subscribers and once there we'll staythere. We have invested more, we charge less, and subscribers aregoing to be very happy with our unique level of service. Many of ourcompetitors still offer services based around 2,400bps modems andrender additional charges based on elapsed connection time," he said.Hurney went on to say that he views this as very much first-generationInternet. Cyberphile, on the other hand, he claims, "represents thebirth of the third generation."To get new users online to the Internet, Cyberphile is offeringsubscribers free seminars on most weekday evenings so that aspiringcorporate, academic, or general public "surf slaves" need simply turnup to become tuned in.Further details of Cyberphile can be found on the company's Web pages,which are located at http://www.cyberphile.co.uk .(Steve Gold/19960103/Press & Reader Contact: tel +44-1543-454840,fax +44-1543-454939, Internet e-mail info@cyberphile.co.uk)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Telecom Ireland Links To Internet Backbone Via MCI 01/03/96Telecom Ireland Links To Internet Backbone Via MCI 01/03/96DUBLIN, IRELAND, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Telecom Ireland has contracted withMCI to take a two megabits-per-second (Mbps) link from Telecom Ireland'sheadquarters in Dublin to MCI's Internet backbone in the US. Accordingto David Hughes, a spokesperson for Telecom Ireland, the link willmean that more than 40 percent of all Internet traffic from Irelandtravels over MCI's 45Mbps and 155Mbps backbone lines in the US.According to Hughes, Internet service providers (SPs) to date inIreland have been offering relatively localized Internet SP servicesconcentrated on the Dublin area, with some regional points of presence(POPs) in other Irish cities."These SPs have then been taking a 64,000 bits-per-second (bps) or128,000 bps leased line (from Ireland) into the UK or France, via servicessuch as Pipex and France Telecom. The problem with this approach is that a64,000 bps leased line costs around the IRP (Irish Punts) 80,000 mark,once all the costs have been added in," he said."This means that those smaller Internet SPs have had to concentrate asmuch traffic as possible into the limited capacity leased lines inorder to get a return on their investment that can be charged atnormal Internet rates in the Irish Republic. There have been reportsof congestion on some Internet SPs' services," he said."What our initiative with MCI means is that the cost of a 64,000 bpslink through ourselves into the MCI US network is around the IRP40,000 mark a year, which is around half of the competition. Sincewe're not in the market for end-user Internet services, we plan tooffer slices of the 2Mbps link to Internet SPs in Ireland," he added.Hughes claims that Telecom Ireland's deal with MCI on the Internetfront will see a downward pressure on Internet pricing in Ireland,once the Internet SPs take advantage of the lower commercial rates ofthe MCI link. This, he said, has to be good news for the Internet usercommunity, who will see the cost of their services fall, along withcongestion on the Internet, from their perspective.MCI, meanwhile, is also providing a 512 kilobits-per-second (Kbps)connection into the internetMCI backbone for Ireland's Higher EducationAuthority. This link, the US telecoms giant claims, is being used bycolleges and universities in Ireland for Internet access.According Margaret Malloy, vice president of marketing for TelecomIreland's US operation, the 2Mbps and 512Kbps links are criticalto the expansion of Internet service by Telecom Ireland. Plans are inhand to extended Telecom Ireland's current nine POPs to 26, one forexact local calling area in Ireland, with each POP connected by aframe relay backbone."Telecom Ireland now provides service to more than 75 percent ofIreland's end-users with additional roll-out already underway," shesaid. She added that Telecom Ireland will be the first provider inEurope to offer country-wide Internet access for the cost of a localtelephone call.According to Malloy, plans also for Telecom Ireland to provide privateline and ISDN (integrated services digital network) access to theInternet during 1996. "These links ensure high-quality access to theInternet both to domestic users in Ireland who are accessing theInternet, and to World Wide Web users who access Web pages in Ireland,"she said.(Steve Gold/19960103/Press Contact: Alan Garratt, MCI, tel 914-934-6484,fax 914-934-6374, Internet e-mail 3577174@mcimail.com; Telecom IrelandUS Headquarters, tel 203-363-7171, fax 203-363-7176; Reader Contact:Telecom Ireland, +353-1-671-4444)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996America Online Readies UK Rollout 01/03/96America Online Readies UK Rollout 01/03/96LONDON, ENGLAND, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- The UK will get its first taste ofAmerica Online's European service later this month when the service isofficially launched to the media, prior to a formal public launch inMarch, Newsbytes has learned. Although the plans are top secret prior toa media launch in two weeks time, Newsbytes has discovered that UK pricinghas been set at UKP3.95 per month for up to five hours of access, andextra hours billable at UKP1.85 each.The rates are slightly under the "Internet in a box" service launchedlast month by CompuServe UK, but the AOL UK service does not surchargeusers for non-metro access, nor are any extra charges levied fordaytime usage.AOL has seemingly spurned the Sprint International packet data network(PDN) option that it was expected to use for European access to itsonline service. Instead, the network has secretly constructed UKextensions to its AOLNet private PDN that operates in the US andCanada.The UK AOLNet offers local calling service to around 85 percent of theUK's population at 28,800 bits-per-second (bps), and plans are in handto cover the whole of the UK on a local calling basis by this summer.Interestingly, the UK AOLNet does not seem publicly available toUS/Canadian subscribers of AOL, who are being steered to AOL'sGlobalNet PDN service for international access to the online service,at a cost of $6.00 per hour, over and above normal US/Canadian AOLaccess charges.Detailed examination of the AOL GlobalNet files published on AOL overthe Christmas period shows that the service its actually the SITAScitor private global PDN service that CompuServe also uses forinternational access in out-of-the-way places. Unlike AOL, however,CompuServe surcharges its subscribers $12.00 per hour for Scitor PDNaccess, which is aimed at users of CompuServe in Eastern Europe andparts of the Far East and South America that are "non metro."This strategy appears to be to ensure that new subscribers to AOL's UKservice have the best data throughput, since fast Internet access --at 28,800 bps -- will form the basis of AOL's UK offering to PCWindows and Apple Mac users, once the service is formally launched inMarch.Like CompuServe, AOL is hosting its "UK service" on the US computerservice, and plans are in hand to host UK-specific informationservices on specific areas of AOL closer to the March launch date.The fact that AOL is rolling out international service via the ScitorPDN, however, under its AOL GlobalNet banner, suggests that a pan-European rollout, and a global rollout, of the online service cannotbe far behind the UK launch this March.Newsbytes has tested the AOL GlobalNet (Scitor) PDN access for AOL, aswell as the AOLNet UK service, over the Christmas period using theWindows and Apple Mac 2.6 versions of AOL's software, and can reportthat the GlobalNet access works, albeit only at speeds of up to 14,400bps from non-metro locations.The AOLNet UK service, however, operates at 28,800 bps from mostlocations and works at speeds comparable with the AOLNet PDN servicein the US and Canada. At peak times, however, Internet Web access isrelatively slow, although to be fair to AOL, this criticism can alsobe levied at CompuServe.Advertisements have now started appearing in the quality press in theUK, offering PC Windows users with modems the change to try out theAOL UK service free of charge for two months, on an unlimited basis,provided they have a valid credit card. Representatives of AOL thatNewsbytes spoke with at the UK toll-free hotline said that take-up ofthe ads has been "excellent."(Steve Gold/19960103/Press & Reader Contact: AOL UK, 0800-279-7444)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996China - Large-Scale Production Of Windows 95 Starts 01/03/96China - Large-Scale Production Of Windows 95 Starts 01/03/96BEIJING, CHINA, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- The Chinese version of Windows 95 hasbeen put into large-scale production in Shanghai. The Chinese versionwill follow the standard Chinese fonts and input methods recommended bythe Chinese Committee on Information Technology Standards (CCITS).All the development and testing of the Simplified Chinese version ofWindows 95 has been completed and the production has started at a jointventure with Microsoft in the Pudong New Development Area of Shanghai,said Jia-bin Duh, general manager of the Microsoft representative officein China.The new software will follow the standards recommended by CCITS, whichis China's highest body for language standardization in the computerfield. In return, the Ministry of the Electronics Industry and ChineseState Bureau of Technology Supervision agreed to endorse ChineseWindows 95 as a "preferred product" and recommend it to domestic users.Microsoft's list of new products to be introduced to Chinese users in1996 will also include Microsoft Office 95, and Chinese versions ofWindows NT and Fox Pro, according to Duh.The Chinese version of Windows 95 is expected to attract many customersfrom the Chinese mainland, and the software should find huge marketsin Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, the United States, and Canada, wherethere are big Chinese communities, software experts said.In China, Microsoft invested more than US$2 million in 1995, and itsregistered sales showed a 100 percent growth in 1995. The software giantwill also set up more branches in Shanghai and Guangzhou in 1996.(Chih-Ho Yu & Ning Huang/19960103)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996China - Asia-Pacific Mobile Telecom Project Founded 01/03/96China - Asia-Pacific Mobile Telecom Project Founded 01/03/96BEIJING, CHINA, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- An Asia-Pacific Mobile Telecom projecthas recently been founded by six entities from China and Singapore withthe intention of providing mobile phone services to any place in theAsia-Pacific region.The project was founded by four Chinese government organizations andtwo Singapore partners: China Satellite Launch and Tracking ControlGeneral, China Aerospace Corp., China Unicom Satellite Telecom Co. Ltd.,China Telecommunications Broadcast Satellite Corp., Singapore Telecom,and Singapore Technologies Telemedia.With an estimated cost from US$500 million to US$800 million, theproject intends to allow mobile phone users to make calls from anywherein the Asia-Pacific region. The project is to start operation in 1998,providing "seamless" phone usage from Pakistan to Japan and coveringalmost half of the world's population.The services are aimed not only at residents in rural areas, but alsoat business travelers working on infrastructure projects in remoteareas without telephone facilities.(Chih-Ho Yu & Ning Huang/19960103)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Philippines - National Telecoms Commission Plans Growth 01/03/96Philippines - National Telecoms Commission Plans Growth 01/03/96MANILA, PHILIPPINES, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- A recent report released by theNational Telecommunications Commission (NTC) projects that, three yearsfrom now, there will be ten phones for every one hundred Filipinos, andseven million main lines throughout the Philippines. There are presently1.9 million main lines in the country, according to the NTC report.To meet the demand for basic telephone service, the NTC is currently"leveling off" the telecommunications playing field so that "all serviceproviders may compete in an atmosphere of equal opportunity anduniversal access," claims the commission. This is in accordance withPresident Fidel V. Ramos' Executive Order (EO) 109, a policy to improvethe provision of local exchange service (LES).The NTC claims that the government policy is unique in that "lucrativetelecommunications services such as the Cellular Mobile Telephone Systemand the International Gateway Facility are being used to cross-subsidizethe less profitable but equally essential local exchange service."EO 109 requires a minimum installation of 400,000 local exchangelines for each cellular operator, and a minimum of 300, 000 localexchange lines for each IGF operator within three years from the dateof authority to operate and maintain LES, the NTC report explains.The NTC report also bared the "flagship" programs of the commissionfor 1996, which includes the provision of "universal access" of basictelephone services to rural areas, and the intensification of "enforcementand monitoring activities" to clear the radio frequency spectrum toencourage new telecommunications services and more investments inthe industry.The NTC vision is that, after three years, applications for telephoneconnections anywhere in the Philippines will be served within "tendays and not ten years."(Kay Yeban & Metropolitan Computer Times/19960103/Press Contact:Commissioner Simeon L. Kintanar, National Telecommunications Commission,tel 632-924-4042)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Printer Sales In Asia-Pacific Unaffected By EDI 01/03/96Printer Sales In Asia-Pacific Unaffected By EDI 01/03/96MANILA, PHILIPPINES, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Printer sales in theAsia-Pacific region do not exhibit any signs of being affected by themove towards a "paperless office concept," or a part implementation ofit in the near future, despite the growing awareness and complianceregarding electronic data interchange (EDI) by certain industry andgovernment segments in the region. This is according to InternationalData Corporation (IDC), a market research and consulting firm.In a recently published study on the Asia-Pacific printer market, IDCforecasts a 15 percent compound annual growth rate (CAGR) in termsof unit shipments, and a 20 percent CAGR in terms of value shipmentsof printers for the 1995 to 1999 period. In 1994, regional printeroff-takes stood at 3,630,482 units worth $2.785 billion, with the smalloffice/home office (SOHO) as the largest application segment, IDC said.The Asia Pacific region, according to IDC definitions, is composed ofthe large country markets of Australia and Korea, the economicallyvibrant markets of Singapore and Hongkong, and the emerging markets ofthe Philippines, Vietnam, China, India, Malaysia, and Indonesia.The market for impact printers (serial dot-matrix and line printers) isnot likely to peak in the next few years. In 1994, impact printers madeup 43 percent of the market share in units and 30 percent in value. By1998, according to IDC projections, the impact market is estimated tobe less than 30 percent of the total printer market in unit shipments,and around 12 to 18 percent in value. Inkjet printers are the biggestthreat to the market, particularly the 24-pin serial dot-matrix printers,because inkjets are now priced at or below $500.In the non-impact market (inkjet, laser, and thermal printers), inkjetsare currently growing in unit shipments at a much faster rate whencompared to laser printers. IDC predicts that inkjet prices will slipfurther as this printer type continues to grow and eat into the impactmarket share. By 1998, however, "inkjets are expected to plateauand lasers will get into replacing inkjets, especially in areas wherespeed is a significant factor," said IDC.As for the future of thermal printers, IDC predicts that it will beslow in unit shipment terms. "Thermals, to an extent, have got into aniche market and it seems rather unlikely that they will come out of itand proliferate into the general corporate applications in the nearfuture."In a related survey on printer sales in the Philippines during the firsthalf of 1995, IDC marks that the local printer market posted sales ofabout 48,160 units, worth $27.8 million.The IDC study reveals that domestic printer market revenues in theJanuary to June period of 1995 surpassed that of the first half of 1994by approximately 48 percent.Of the total amount of printers sold in the country in the first half of1995, serial dot-matrix (24-pin and nine-pin) printers accounted for59 percent of market revenues. Laser printers made up 19 percent ofthe market, while inkjet printers took up 17 percent. IDC furthernotes that the share of inkjets to domestic printer market revenues inthe first half of 1995 exceeded that of the first half of 1994 by 100percent.The studies on printer sales in the Asia-Pacific and in the Philippinemarkets were prepared by the IDC Asia-Pacific office based in Hongkong.The IDC Philippines office is currently conducting a survey on thedemand of information technology (IT) products.(May Jurilla/19960103/Press Contact: Dilip Shrivastava, IDCPhilippines, tel 632-924-2845, fax 632-924-6840)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Philippines - Cisco Office Now In Operation 01/03/96Philippines - Cisco Office Now In Operation 01/03/96MANILA, PHILIPPINES, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Cisco Systems Inc. hasannounced the opening of its representative office in the Philippines.According to J.T. Yeoh, managing director of Cisco's South AsiaOperations, the goal of the representative office in the Philippines isnot to replace Cisco resellers, but to further extend customer supportand to "educate the market." Yeoh also disclosed that the company isinvesting US$3 million over a period of three years.Yeoh further revealed that Cisco had a 300% revenue growth in thecountry from 1994 to 1995, and that same three-digit growth istargeted for 1996."That we did establish our office this year as we have earlierannounced is a test of our commitment to helping the Philippinemarket grow," said Cynthia N. Torres, country manager of thePhilippine office.The Philippine representative office, Cisco Systems' 12th in Asiaand 90th worldwide, has a staff of three. Within 1996, the officeaims to expand the staff to six.Resellers in the Philippines which have been largely responsiblefor pushing Cisco products in the market include Ayala SystemsTechnology Inc., Computer Network Systems Corp., Phil-DataBusiness Systems, and Fujitsu Philippines Inc.Cisco also has three active global partners -- Alcatel, Siemens,and Olivetti -- and maintains worldwide relationships with Hewlett-Packard, AT&T, Unisys, and Digital Equipment.(Jenny Malapitan & Metropolitan Computer Times/19960103/PressContacts: Erlie Lopez, Baby Balio, Eman Tonogbanua; CommwaysInc. for Cisco Systems, tel 632-843-4219)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Canadian Product Launch Update 01/03/96Canadian Product Launch Update 01/03/96KINGSTON, ONTARIO, CANADA, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- This regular feature,appearing on the first day Newsbytes publishes each week, providesfurther details for the Canadian market on announcements byinternational companies that Newsbytes has already covered. This week:Lotus Development's new Notes Mail client and changes in Notes pricing.Lotus Development Canada Ltd., of Toronto, announced new pricing forexisting Notes client and server software, as well as a new clientcalled Notes Mail (Newsbytes, December 13). A single-user license forNotes Desktop, the run-time version of the workgroup software, goes fromC$224 to C$100. The new Notes Mail client will have a suggested volumeprice of C$80 per single-user license. It is to ship at the same timeas Notes Release 4. The full Notes desktop client is C$396 per userlicense.Notes server pricing also changes, Lotus Canada said, to C$655 in volumefor single-processor systems and C$3,035 in volume for multiple-processorsystems. These prices are to take effect when Notes Release 4 ships.(Grant Buckler/19960103/Press Contact: Marsha Connor, LotusDevelopment Canada, 416-364-8000)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996 ****Telecom Bill Hits New Trouble 01/03/96 ****Telecom Bill Hits New Trouble 01/03/96WASHINGTON, D.C., U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Thetelecommunications reform legislation has become a politicalhouse of cards that could collapse with the slightest ill wind.Prospects for passage remain in doubt with Congress back inWashington and seemingly paralyzed by the budget impasse.The latest episode in the telecommunications drama took placelate last week, when Senate Majority Leader (and likely GOPpresidential nominee) Bob Dole (R-Kan.) said he had problemswith a "multi-billion dollar giveaway" to broadcasters containedin the compromise legislation that has emerged from a jointHouse-Senate conference committee.The provision, sought most avidly by House Republicans, wouldreserve a portion of the broadcast spectrum for free licensesfor digital television. Government officials estimate that thelicenses are worth between $11 billion and $70 billion, if theywere auctioned off, the way other new spectrum allocations havebeen handled.In a news conference, Dole singled out the spectrum allocationas one of "three or four or five provisions" that Republicansshould re-examine in the complex legislation.Dole's comments put Sen. Larry Pressler (R-S.D.), nominally theRepublican front man on the issue, into near panic. "If we getinto a controversy over the spectrum again," he said, "the billis going to die."But Pressler has lost leadership on the issue, which has fallento Sen. Ernest "Fritz" Hollings (D-S.C.), ranking Democrat onPressler's Senate Commerce Committee and former chairman.Hollings has used the threat of a filibuster to win changes inthe legislation sought by the Democrats.Earlier, House Republican freshmen objected to the deal theirleaders negotiated in the conference committee, particularlylimits on media cross-ownership that was a bottom line issue forthe Democrats and the White House.Ironically, Vice President Al Gore's bragging following theunveiling of the compromise bill that the White House goteverything it wanted contributed to the revolt of the GOPfreshmen. "If Al Gore was crowing, that meant we got rolled," astaffer for a Republican freshman told Newsbytes.The 281-page text of the bill is now circulating amonglawmakers, and the leadership hopes to work out a schedule foraction this week."But it could all come unglued very quickly," warns a HouseDemocratic aide.(Kennedy Maize/19960103)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Federal Shutdown Web Page 01/03/96Federal Shutdown Web Page 01/03/96WASHINGTON, D.C., U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- As Washington entersthe third week of the partial government shutdown, a local businesshas created a World Wide Web site intended to help tourists findplaces to visit in the Nation's Capital.The site, called Shutdown '95, has also become a place fordisgruntled bureaucrats to vent their irritation at theirpolitical masters. The site includes e-mail links to HouseSpeaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.), Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole(R-Kan.), and President Clinton.It also has listings of museums and other attractions in theWashington area that are still open to the public.The frustrated federal employees contacting Shutdown '95 havespread the blame around. One called Gingrich "a spy sent byalien life forms to disrupt the lives of ordinary Americans."Others have savaged Clinton and Dole.The site is being maintained by Business Information Network, aMaryland firm that specializes in creating Web pages for others,including some government agencies."The idea came to me when some friends who were visiting fromPhiladelphia got upset that their trip to DC had been ruined bythe shutdown," says Joanna Pineda, president of BusinessInformation Network. "Since they weren't from the area, theythought the only things left to do were to go shopping or maybeeat out."He continued: "And then it hit me. I've been living in the DC areasince 1989 and I know dozens of fabulous places in this area thatare completely unaffected by the shutdown. These museums, galleries,and other entertainment centers are open! We're hoping thatthis home page will help disaffected tourists and residentsalike enjoy the many other attractions that DC has to offer. Iwant people to have wonderful vacations here and leave DC withgreat memories. This is a great city, shutdown or not!"The opening graphic of the site is an empty House ofRepresentatives, which is somewhat misleading, as Congress isstill in business and has not been affected by the shutdown. Thesite also includes a graphic of the White House with a red slashthrough it.The Web page says it is "your starting point for having awonderful time in Washington in spite of Bill, Bob, and Newt."The Web site is located at http://www.bizinfonet.com/shutdown .(Kennedy Maize/19960103)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Texas Instruments & Samsung Continue Patent Dispute 01/03/96Texas Instruments & Samsung Continue Patent Dispute 01/03/96DALLAS, TEXAS, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Texas Instruments Inc.(NYSE: TXN) and Korea-based Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd could bechipping away at each other in a courtroom if the two companiescan't settle patent infringement allegations.TI has filed a suit in the Federal District Court for the EasternDistrict of Texas that alleges patent infringement by Samsung in themanufacture of semiconductor devices, including dynamic random accessmemory (DRAM) chips. A TI spokesperson said the suit asks forunspecified damages. Samsung has countered with a suit of its ownalleging infringement of 13 of Samsung's US patents by TI.The suits come after the two companies were unsuccessful innegotiating the renewal of a five-year semiconductor patentcross-licensing agreement that expired December 31, 1995. Thenegotiations went on for almost one year."We have been through this before," TI spokesperson Neil McGlonetold Newsbytes. He was referring to the fact that the five-yearagreement was the result of a patent infringement suit filed by TIagainst Samsung in 1990. It took two years to hammer out thatagreement.Richard Agnich, TI senior vice president and general counsel, saidthe company is protecting its investment of billions of dollars inresearch and development. A number of TI patent licensingagreements were scheduled to expire at the end of 1995 or in early1996. In addition to Samsung, those agreements include deals withNEC, Fujitsu, and Nippon Denso. TI expects to realize an estimated$108 million in royalties from those agreements in the fourthquarter, which ended December 31. McGlone said Samsung accountedfor a majority of that amount.TI expects to announce its fourth quarter and fiscal 1995 resultson January 23. While he wouldn't comment on what those resultswould be, McGlone told Newsbytes, "1995 was a very good year for theentire industry and we expect the news to be in line with that kindof growth."TI said it will also file a complaint with the InternationalTrade Commission asking that group to prevent Samsung from importingdevices that infringe TI's patents.In addition to patent infringement allegations, Samsung alsorequested the court to declare that the patents owned by TI arenot infringed by Samsung and are invalid and unenforceable.Samsung is building a semiconductor fabrication facility inAustin, Texas, that is expected to become operational by early1998.(Jim Mallory/19960103/Press contact: Neil McGlone, Texas Instruments,214-995-4961 or Charles Donohoe, Samsung, 202-296-0227)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996 ****CompuServe Suspends Access To 200 Newsgroups 01/03/96 ****CompuServe Suspends Access To 200 Newsgroups 01/03/96COLUMBUS, OHIO, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- CompuServe made internationalheadlines this past week when it announced it would temporarily suspendaccess to more than 200 Internet newsgroups. Contacted by Germanauthorities, the online giant was told the delivery of "certain specifiednewsgroups" carrying pornographic material constituted a violation ofGerman criminal law.Across a number of Internet newsgroups, CompuServe is the object ofcriticism for what some Internet users are calling "severe censorship."The German government says the investigation into the groups isfocused on compliance with the country's laws regarding pornography.In a formal statement, CompuServe said it was not involved withdetermining the specified groups, but would temporarily suspend accessto the groups in order to adhere to an ongoing German investigation.German authorities ordered CompuServe to do what was necessary to complywith German laws regarding child pornography, other pornographic materialillegal for adults, and potentially illegal material for minors.Newsbytes learned the 200+ list includes newsgroups such as:alt.magick.sex, alt.religion.sexuality; alt.homosexual, alt.sex, andgay-net.coming-out.CompuServe says it is working with German officials to resolve thematters in question and since altering the content of any of the groupsin question is not possible, the only alternative is the temporarysuspension.Unlike its main competitors -- America Online (AOL) and Prodigy --CompuServe has offered its online services internationally since 1979.AOL is just now establishing a European presence through a partnershipwith Bertelsmann in Germany. In a recent announcement, CompuServe saidits European subscriber base numbered in excess of 500,000 with another200,000 in Great Britain.Outlining the problem, Kim Scher, a spokesperson for CompuServe, toldNewsbytes, "We have received the fullest possible reaction to theannounced suspension of these newsgroups. From negative comments topraise, responses from our members seem to cover the full gamut ofreactions. What people may not realize is that our only choice was tosuspend the groups in question. The prosecutor in Munich, Germany,informed us our employees in Germany could face prosecution."Scher said CompuServe does not, at this time, have the capability tosuspend the listed newsgroups only in Germany. "We have workedintensely over the holidays to build segments which will allow us tocontrol the delivery of Internet content to specific countries," saidScher. "Once we have that capability built into our online technology,we will be able to comply with the laws of specific countries.""Other online services and Internet providers will be watching ourresponse to this issue in Germany. Around the world, the Internet willbe met by different national legal systems and some of those may bemore strict than Germany," said Scher. Instead of a universal Internet,users across the world may see a national or regional delivery ofInternet content, claim some observers.(Patrick McKenna/19960103/Press Contact: William Giles,CompuServe, 614-538-4388)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996 ****AT&T Restructuring To Cost $6Bil & 40,000 Jobs 01/03/96 ****AT&T Restructuring To Cost $6Bil & 40,000 Jobs 01/03/96NEW YORK, NEW YORK, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Breaking up, as the songsaid, is hard to do. That's especially true if you work for AT&T (NYSE:T),which has announced it will cut about 40,000 jobs in its telecommunicationsservices and systems and technology companies as these and AT&T GlobalInformation Solutions become independent firms.AT&T Global Information Solutions, the company's computer operation,had already announced plans to shed about 8,500 jobs as part of therestructuring. AT&T said its latest announcement will not affect AT&T GIS.The 40,000 figure does include roughly 6,500 managers who have alreadytaken a voluntary severance package, officials said.In a teleconference Tuesday, Rick Miller, senior executive vice-presidentand chief financial officer, said AT&T will take a charge of about $6billion before taxes for the breakup, which the company announced inSeptember. Of this, Miller said, about $2.6 billion will cover the costof separation agreements with employees who lose their jobs. Another $1.1billion has been allocated for closing facilities, and $1.7 billion forasset write-offs.After taxes, the charge is expected to reduce AT&T's fourth-quarter earningsby about $4 billion. The company has not released projected fourth-quarterfinancials yet, but given that its earnings in the first nine months ofthe year were only $2.82 billion, it seems clear the special charge willlead to a sizable loss in the quarter, and could put AT&T in the red forthe year. AT&T took a post-tax charge of $1.17 billion in the third quarterto cover cuts in AT&T GIS and other actions.AT&T announced in September that it would break into three units. Onecompany, offering telecommunications services, will keep the AT&T name.A new systems and technology company -- theoretically freed by the breakupto sell its wares more easily to potential competitors -- will go publicsome time in the first half of this year. It has not yet been named. AT&TGIS, which is essentially the former NCR Corp., will be the third separateentity.AT&T officials said some 4,000 of the jobs that will disappear are inbusinesses the company plans to sell anyway, so those people will havesome hope of keeping their jobs under new ownership. Coupled with the6,500 managerial jobs already cut through voluntary packages, this meansabout 30,000 layoffs are looming. Of the 40,000 jobs cut altogether, AT&Tsaid, about 17,000 will be in the services business, and the other 23,000in the systems and technology operations. If implemented today, these cutswould leave the services business with 110,000 employees, and the systemsand technology company with 108,000. When it announced the breakup inSeptember, AT&T had about 303,000 employees.About 70 percent of the job cuts will be completed by the end of 1996,Miller said.Miller said AT&T will be announcing further divestitures like the already-revealed plan to sell its Paradyne unit. He also said some internationalinvestments, including the company's stake in Canadian long-distancecarrier Unitel Communications Inc., are to be revalued. Plans also includewriting off some technology that is obsolete or no longer strategic, suchas hardware related to the Telex business and proprietary online softwarewhose marketability is threatened by the current move to the Internet.Miller said plans for the breakup are moving ahead on schedule, with theleadership of the three companies now appointed and organizationalstructures designed. AT&T plans to file a prospectus for the systems andtechnology company's initial public offering with the Securities andExchange Commission (SEC) by the end of January, he said, and theoffering is expected this quarter.(Grant Buckler/19960103/Press Contact: Eileen Connolly, AT&T,908-221-6731; Burke Stinson, AT&T, 908-221-2062; Dick Gray,AT&T, 908-221-5057; Adele Ambrose, AT&T, 908-221-6900)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996STD Claims First With Canadian-Built PowerPC Systems 01/03/96STD Claims First With Canadian-Built PowerPC Systems 01/03/96LONDON, ONTARIO, CANADA, 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- STD Systems Inc. has begunshipping its Power2 workstations and servers, based on PowerPC chips, toCanadian universities, government buyers, and smaller corporations. Thecompany claimed it is the first to build PowerPC systems in Canada.The Power2 systems, additions to STD's CompuPartner product line, usePowerPC 603, 603e, and 604 reduced instruction set computing (RISC)processors on Motorola Corp. Atlas motherboards. They ship withMicrosoft Corp.'s Windows NT operating system.Abe Ellorin, an STD account manager, told Newsbytes that his companysells most of its products in Canada and does all its development there.Motherboards and other components are mainly imported, he said, thoughSTD assembles the systems in three Canadian manufacturing plants.Higher education is a major market for STD, Ellorin said, but thecompany also sells to the federal government and is pursuing smallcorporate accounts. Seven-year-old STD claims to have a 19 percent shareof the educational PC market in Canada.Company officials said the PowerPC technology is ideally suited toresearch and high-end applications where customers need powerful centralprocessors. STD said it hopes for "a few million dollars" in sales ofthe systems in 1996, growing in future years as more PowerPC-basedsoftware comes to market.The PowerPC processors, used in newer Apple Computer Inc. Macintoshes,some IBM RISC System/6000 machines and computers from several othervendors, are the result of a joint development effort by Apple, IBM,and Motorola.Prices for the CompuPartner Power2 systems will range from C$4,000upward, with top-of-the-line systems starting around C$8,000, Ellorinsaid.STD Systems has a site on the World Wide Web at http://www.std.ca .(Grant Buckler/19960103/Press Contact: Paul Tong, STD Systems,519-680-3333 ext 649, Internet e-mail paul@std.net)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Security Dynamics Plans To License "Concryption" 01/03/96Security Dynamics Plans To License "Concryption" 01/03/96CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- SecurityDynamics plans to license "Concryption," a just patentedtechnology combining encryption and compression, to outsidecompanies for use with a variety of security and compressionprotocols, revealed Kenneth Weiss, chairman and chief technicalofficer, during an interview with Newsbytes."It is my belief that Concryption will solve the two biggestproblems that exist today: the need for privacy and moreavailable bandwidth," Weiss told Newsbytes."Compression has been catching on. It takes less time today tosend a whole page of fax than it used to, for example, and partof that is because of better data compression. But encryption hasnot caught on in the way it should, because of time and expenseissues and the hassles of key management."Still, though, available bandwidth for data storage andtransmission is diminishing all the time, in arenas ranging fromfax to satellite technology, networked information, and the WorldWide Web, according to the company chairman.Compression will become an even more significant requirement inthe future, with an anticipated explosion of multimedia applications,he predicted.Security Dynamics has been awarded US Patent No. 5,479,512 forConcryption. The Cambridge, Massachusetts-based company now holdsa total of 14 patents from the US Patent Office, most relatedto its "core business" of computer security, he reported.One of the company's other patents, for instance, is for abiometric technology designed to enable "voice fingerprinting."Security Dynamics also produces the SecureID Card, ACE/Server,and ACM series of user authentication products.Security Dynamics' newly patented Concryption technology is basedon mathematical synergies between the processes of encrypting andcompressing data, Newsbytes was told. Both procedures call foranalyzing arrays of binary patterns, "seeing where the spacesare," and then applying rules to the data.Weiss added that encryption and compression are both highlyintensive in terms of CPU (central processor unit) cycles anddisk accesses. As a result, he asserted, integrating the twotechnologies into a "single set of operations" will bring costreductions in CPU usage as well as faster encryption times."The time to compress might increase a little bit, but on theother hand, the time to encrypt goes to zero. Whatever the diskaccesses are for compression, there would be no other diskaccesses for encryption."Security Dynamics sees Concryption as a "concept pattern" suitedto use with a variety of data types, network transports, andsecurity protocols, according to Weiss. "This is a new enablingtechnology that we believe should have an impact on the wayinformation is communicated in the future."The company intends to work with outside licensees on integratingdifferent compression and encryption methods. "Big users havealready optimized compression for their unique technologies. Weuse a different form of compression for fax than we would forsatellite data or TV pictures. Beyond that, companies mightemploy different compression algorithms. Similarly, people liketo have control over the type of encryption used," Weissmaintained.Although forthcoming multimedia applications will require muchgreater compression than text, conventional needs for "privacy"may not be as high, since many video offerings of the future willbe geared to entertainment, Weiss acknowledged."But we will probably be seeing `economic privacy,'" the companychairman noted, pointing to a trend, already well established inthe cable TV industry, toward providing "high demand" fare suchas first-run movies only on separately priced, encrypted,"premium channels."(Jacqueline Emigh/19950103/Reader Contact: Security Dynamics,617-547-7820; Press Contact: Owen Davis, Dana Harris or MikeFarber, Schwartz Communications for Security Dynamics,617-431-0770)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Pipeline Ships Electronic Customer Registration Product 01/03/96Pipeline Ships Electronic Customer Registration Product 01/03/96ATLANTA, GEORGIA, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Pipeline CommunicationsInc. rolled into the new year with the release of Pipeline API Toolkitfor Windows 95, an electronic customer registration product whichprovides hardware and software developers with tools to enable onlineregistration of Windows 95 programs.The company said the API (application programming interface) toolkitis "the answer" to low product registration via the traditionalpostcard method. The company said the traditional registrationmethod yields only a 10-20 percent registration. The companyclaims registrations jump by as much as 80 percent for applicationsusing the electronic registration method. Failure to register asoftware product means the user doesn't get information aboutupgrades and may have difficulty getting technical support.According to Pipeline, the electronic registration informationgoes into the company's worldwide data center in Atlanta, where itis processed and incorporated into the secure customer registrationdatabase of the appropriate vendor. Pipeline said it can provideelectronic product registration in more than 90 countries,using x.25 communications and global 800 service.A company representative told Newsbytes the developer can implement oneof several standard registrations or customize the process to gatherthe information the developer needs. The registration can include,what Pipeline calls, "reminder technology" which causes a registrationreminder to periodically appear on screen that reminds the user of thebenefits of registering the software."Sometimes the user is excited about buying a new product, like a game,and they don't want to take the time to register right now. They wantto do it later," said a company official.Pipeline spokesperson Phil Hall told Newsbytes the registrationdatabase information is provided to the developer for marketingpurposes such as sending users discount coupons for upcomingproducts and performing customer surveys.The Pipeline API toolkit for Windows 95 has a suggested retailprice of $995 and is shipping now. The new software adds toPipeline's family of similar products for Windows 3.1, DOS, andMacintosh-based products. The developer does not have to pay anyroyalty fees for applications using the toolkit.(Jim Mallory/19960103/Press contact: Phil Hall, Open cityCommunications for Pipeline Communications, 212-714-3575; Publiccontact: Pipeline Communications, tel 800-727-3546 or 770-612-8008,fax 770-916-0997/PIPELINE960103/PHOTO)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Real-Time Quotes For $30 Per Month 01/03/96Real-Time Quotes For $30 Per Month 01/03/96SAN MATEO, CALIFORNIA, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Data BroadcastingCorporation (NASDAQ: DBCC) has announced a new Internet financial dataservice, DBC MarketWatch. It will offer real-time stock market dataover the Internet at prices now charged for delayed services.DBC MarketWatch, which will go live on DBC's existing Internet site atwww.dbc.com beginning March 1, will be priced at $29.95 per month,and will include real-time stock market quotes, fundamental andhistorical data, a specialized business news headline service,portfolio features, links to online brokerage services, and otherinvestment-related services.The price includes mandatory exchange fees of approximately$13 per month to cover the New York, American, and Nasdaq stockexchanges. Financial exchanges require individual investors, whoreceive market trading data in real time, to sign contracts and pay"certain fees" to those exchanges. DBC will manage the exchangecontract and fee process for the customer.Larry Kramer, vice president of online services for DBC, toldNewsbytes, "Non-professionals have lower exchange fees thanprofessional financial users do. Every subscriber to DBC MarketWatchmust pay a monthly fee to the each of the exchanges. The total of allthe fees for our service is less than $13, and the fees are includedin the DBC monthly charge. Almost all online access to quotes are ona 15 minute delay. This service is real time for a price of mostdelayed services."The new Internet-based DBC MarketWatch will allow new customersaccess to large databases of historical, fundamental, and text data.Eventually, DBC MarketWatch will be available to all of DBC'sreal-time broadcast customers at no extra charge."DBC MarketWatch makes the world of real-time financial dataaffordable to virtually any investor for the first time," said AlanHirschfield, DBC's co-chairman and co-chief executive officer. "Wethink this is a prime example of how the Internet presents theopportunity to bring valuable financial information to the public."He continued: "Our real-time Internet product is designed to reachthe broad consumer market and to provide an affordable subset of theinformation we offer over our private networks. This consumer servicerepresents a vast improvement over information traditionally availableat these price points to this audience -- which until now has largelybeen restricted to data delayed at least 15 minutes."According to DBC, delayed quotes have been available on DBC's Website for the past four months, where requests for these quotes arecurrently averaging 750,000 hits per day.Through its DBC West and BMI services, DBC now delivers real-timestock quotes, financial and sports news and betting odds to more than30,000 subscribers via wireless FM, cable, and satellite transmission.Another DBC company -- Capital Management Sciences -- provides fixedincome portfolio analytics used for valuation and risk management.(Richard Bowers/1996103/Press Contact: Larry Kramer, DataBroadcasting Corporation, 415-571-1800)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996 ****Cyrix Expects Loss, Writes Off Entire 486 Inventory 01/03/96 ****Cyrix Expects Loss, Writes Off Entire 486 Inventory 01/03/96RICHARDSON, TEXAS, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Cyrix Corp. (NASDAQ:CYRX)has announced it will report a loss for the quarter ending December 31,and will take a write-off for its entire remaining inventory of 486 chips.While final numbers aren't available yet, the company said the losscould be more than $0.40 per share. The financial report is scheduledfor release after the market closes on January 18, 1996. For the firstnine months of the year, the company reported net income of $25.5million, or $1.28 per share.The loss, the first in the company's seven-year history, puts Cyrixin technical default of terms of its credit agreements. Dumping the486 products means the company is pinning its hopes of becoming asignificant challenger to Intel Corp.'s Pentium chip on Cyrix's M16x86 100 megahertz (MHz) and 120MHz chips. The M1 started shippingin September, 1995.Jerry Rogers, Cyrix chief executive officer, admits poor productexecution got him in trouble early in the year. He said the companyhas about 300,000 486 chips on hand.Cyrix has an $88 million agreement with IBM Credit Corp. and isnegotiating with IBM to extend a waiver on the technical violation.The company stressed that it hasn't missed any debt payments andhas over $35 million in the bank.Cyrix spokesperson Evan Fitzmaurice told Newsbytes the companyexpects to report the outcome of the negotiations with IBM onJanuary 18, although the announcement could come sooner. .Rogers said the company's 5x86 chip is selling well into theportables market. He predicts 6x86 production of about 175,000chips in the first quarter.Cyrix shares dipped 2-1/8 to 23 after the announcement. Todaythe stock had rebounded to $23.625.(Jim Mallory/19960103/Press contact: Evan Fitzmaurice, Cyrix,214-968-8238)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996America Online Warns Members Of Password Security 01/03/96America Online Warns Members Of Password Security 01/03/96VIENNA, VIRGINIA, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Acknowledging a passwordsecurity problem, America Online's (NASDAQ:AMER) president, Steve Case,has sent a letter to all AOL subscribers urging them to never revealtheir passwords. To acquire AOL user passwords, hackers are reportedlyusing e-mail and instant messages under the guise of AOL management.In his letter to subscribers, Case says the latest hacker ploy is toestablish a correspondence which appears to come from AOL. A sampleletter reads in part: "Dear AOL Community Member: AOL is experiencingmajor problems...due to a virus that was recently loaded...onto our mainuser database, containing most of our member registration information,we are currently experiencing widespread system failure. The problemoriginated...when our system was illegally breached by a former employee."America Online says that "this or any similar letter is entirely falseand should be reported to AOL management."The letter continues with a description of a virus which supposedlycorrupted AOL's database link files and asks users to help the companyre-establish the database and help AOL solve the problem by providingpassword information.Online Instant Messages, known as IMs, are also being used to falselyacquire passwords. A hacker will approach an AOL member with amessage identifying the sender as an AOL employee and attempt toacquire a user's password.Case clearly states the company's policy is to never have an employeeask for a member's password under any condition. He requests that anyattempt or suspected attempt be immediately reported to AOL management.Once a hacker has a user's password, hundreds of dollars of online timecan be charged to the user's account. Such information will not appearuntil the user receives a monthly statement. AOL members who attemptto sign onto the service and receive a message saying the account iscurrently being used should also contact AOL immediately.Advising members to be security conscious, Case suggests users changetheir passwords to at least six alphanumeric characters for all oftheir sub-accounts. As part of its service, AOL allows members to haveseveral different identities under sub-accounts. Passwords for allaccounts should be routinely changed.Case also suggests that members do not use common words such as acity, state, nickname, street, first name, address, or area codes aspasswords. Hackers often have programs which search for common words.The letter closes saying the problem is not widespread, but deservesimmediate attention from the "entire AOL community." To combat theproblem, Case said "appropriate legal action" would be taken againstsuspected perpetrators.(Patrick McKenna/19960103/Press Contact: Margaret Ryan, AmericaOnline, 703-448-8700)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996 ****Web Slowdown In 1996, Followed By Boom, Says IDC 01/03/96 ****Web Slowdown In 1996, Followed By Boom, Says IDC 01/03/96FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- Althoughthe World Wide Web will undergo a temporary slowdown in 1996,International Data Corp. (IDC) is "bullish" on the Internet's prospectsfor the next five to 10 years, predicting growth in numbers of onlineusers to more than 200 million and in electronic commerce revenuesto more than $200 billion by the year 2000, said Frank Gens, seniorVP of research, in a conference call with Newsbytes.Gens compared the Web's outlook for 1996 to the "lag time" thatset in for the PC industry during the 1982 to 1983 time frame,when the supporting infrastructure for PCs remained "weak" andsome early users grew "disappointed."Over the year ahead, a total of about 35 of the Fortune 500companies will abandon their current commercial Web sites,resulting in the emergence "ghost sites," Gens added.At the same time, though, also by the close of 1996, somewherebetween 150 and 200 of the Fortune 500 firms can be expected toopen new Web sites, the senior VP told Newsbytes."First wave," back-office functions such as airline reservationsystems and "second wave" tasks in the area of office automationwill continue to be carried out on the Internet. But many of thenewer sites will be aimed at a "third wave" of Internetapplications, calling for online communications with consumers,said Gens.Accordingly, also over the coming year, PC makers will be makingconsumers a major target. "Internet appliances" will hit themarket for as little as $100 to $300, and full-fledged multimediaPCs will be available for under $1,000, not including monitor, hereported."The next five to 10 years will also be an era of a turnover inleaders," Gens asserted. Drawing another parallel with the PCindustry, the IDC exec pointed out that among today's top 20 IT(information technology) manufacturers, only ten companies evenexisted 10 or 15 years ago.Online service providers will find that they must adapt to theWeb or fade away, Gens added, foreseeing a rough road ahead fortwo of today's four major online service providers."Some (online service providers) will do well, but others willculturally choke on the Web. The question will turn on whetherthese companies can change their business models from the old,proprietary `Club Med' model. Users are saying, `We don't wantthis very safe, walled world. We don't want to be confined,'"Newsbytes was told.Current industry leaders like IBM, Apple, and Microsoft will alsobe faced with tough choices, according to Gens. IBM will need todecide whether to continue to target consumers via Prodigy.Apple will have to determine whether to remain in the hardwarebusiness, or to concentrate strictly on its long-time strength of"human interface" software technology, either merging oraligning itself with another OEM (original equipment manufacturer).On Microsoft's part, the choice will boil down to focusing onconsumers through the Microsoft Network (MSN), or on Windows NT-based office and Web servers, so as to avoid "stretching itselftoo thin" in a market where "for the first time, Microsoft is notsetting all the rules.""If I were Microsoft, I'd go toward the consumer," Gens noted. Todate, he added, Windows NT has not shown the "scalability" ofUnix, a "reality" that will become particularly important "withall those users piling on to the Net."On the whole, though, the Web will contribute to a growth in ITindustry revenues from $500 billion to more than $2.5 trillion by2010, according to Gens.Product areas that look particularly promising include object-oriented development tools and, for telecommunications carriers,local Internet access. "If (the US Telecommunications Act) goesthrough, companies like AT&T, MCI, and Sprint will have carteblanche. The monopoly of the local Bells will be broken."Meanwhile, computer industry market analysts such as IDC areadjusting their sights toward a view that encompasses broadereconomics, taking into account not just revenues for IT companiesbut for the other industries that stand to profit from the Web,said Gens.The Web will allow publishers, for example, to cut their costs by80 percent, while at the same time enjoying "much broader marketreach" and instant distribution, he illustrated.And insurance firms, which currently spend 60 cents ondistribution for every dollar earned, will be spared the expenseof sending a salesperson into "every prospect's living room," thesenior VP told Newsbytes.(Jacqueline Emigh/19960103/Reader Contact: International DataCorporation, 508-872-8200; Press Contact: Heidi Davis, FaiolaDavis Public Relations for IDC, 207-363-8575)Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWSBYTES NEWS NETWORK via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Newsbytes Daily Summary 01/03/96Newsbytes Daily Summary 01/03/96MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA, U.S.A., 1996 JAN 3 (NB) -- These arecapsules of all today's news stories:========================================================================------------| N E W S B Y T E S    D A I L Y   S U M M A R Y |----------------------|           Wednesday, January 3, 1996           |----------========================================================================(c) Newsbytes News Network (Tm)             Editor in Chief: Wendy Woods------------------------------------------------------------------------Newsbytes News Network's on the Web! Check out http://www.nbnn.com forfree daily top stories from Newsbytes and its affiliate publications, andfrom PC Week, MacWeek, and other Ziff news magazines. A subscription givesyou all the news, full-text, plus the most comprehensive database of pastcomputer stories online. The keyword-searchable database dates from todayback through 1983. Subscriptions are $24.95 for three months. Questions?Send to 'administrator@newsbytes.com'  For Japanese Newsbytes andadditional services, see the Newsbytes Pacifica Website athttp://www.islandtel.com/newsbytes/------------------------------------------------------------------------CATEGORY  HEADLINES (*** indicates today's top stories)          STORY #========================================================================BUSINESS   ****AT&T Restructuring To Cost $6Bil & 40,000 Jobs........ 22BUSINESS   ****Cyrix Expects Loss, Writes Off Entire 486 Inventory... 27CHIPS     MoSys To Ship Multibank DRAM............................... 02GENERAL   NewsPix Images For Newsbytes Publishers.................... 01GENERAL   Asia Newsbriefs............................................ 05GENERAL   Japan Newsbriefs........................................... 06GENERAL   Canadian Product Launch Update............................. 17GENERAL   STD Claims First With Canadian-Built PowerPC Systems....... 23GENERAL   Security Dynamics Plans To License "Concryption............ 24GOVT      Federal Shutdown Web Page.................................. 19LEGAL      ****European Cross-Border Decency Laws In Spotlight....... 07LEGAL     Final Stuff Technology Claims Against Storagetek Dismissed. 08LEGAL      ****Telecom Bill Hits New Trouble......................... 18LEGAL     Texas Instruments & Samsung Continue Patent Dispute........ 20ONLINE    New UK Nat'l Internet Service Provider..................... 09ONLINE    Telecom Ireland Links To Internet Backbone Via MCI......... 10ONLINE    America Online Readies UK Rollout.......................... 11ONLINE     ****CompuServe Suspends Access To 200 Newsgroups.......... 21ONLINE    Real-Time Quotes For $30 Per Month......................... 26ONLINE    America Online Warns Members Of Password Security.......... 28ONLINE     ****Web Slowdown In 1996, Followed By Boom, Says IDC...... 29TELECOM   Ericsson Secures Further Mobitex Order In Singapore........ 03TELECOM   China - Asia-Pacific Mobile Telecom Project Founded........ 13TELECOM   Philippines - National Telecoms Commission Plans Growth.... 14TRENDS    Motorola Claims Chinese Handwriting Breakthrough........... 04TRENDS    Printer Sales In Asia-Pacific Unaffected By EDI............ 15TRENDS    Philippines - Cisco Office Now In Operation................ 16WINDOWS   China - Large-Scale Production Of Windows 95 Starts........ 12WINDOWS   Pipeline Ships Electronic Customer Registration Product.... 25========================================================================These are the headlines and first paragraphs of each story, in order:1 -> NewsPix Images For Newsbytes Publishers -- Photos are now posted asthey arrive, which means quicker access to the story pictures. Thebulletin will continue on Mondays, with updates Wednesdays and Fridays asneeded.2 -> MoSys To Ship Multibank DRAM -- MoSys Inc. is set to begin shipmentof its Multibank dynamic random access memory (MDRAM) product. The MDRAMis an extended-performance synchronous DRAM with high bandwidth, shortaccess times, and, according to the company, "unique pricing."3 -> Ericsson Secures Further Mobitex Order In Singapore -- Ericsson hassecured another major order for its Mobitex radio packet data network(PDN) in Singapore. This time the company has contracted with the TIBStaxi fleet, which covers the colony with 800 vehicles, to install aMobitex system for use by drivers, customers, and staff of the company.4 -> Motorola Claims Chinese Handwriting Breakthrough -- Motorola'sLexicus Division has unveiled a Windows 95 handwriting recognition packagefor the Chinese alphabet. According to officials with Lexicus, using thepackage, writers will now be able to accurately input the 13,000 Chinesecharacters into Windows 95 applications on standard desktop or notebookcomputers.5 -> Asia Newsbriefs -- In this roundup of news from across Asia: Korea -Foreigners to invest in telecom companies; Indonesia - Mitsui to launchpager service; Singapore - Telecom violations down; India, Malaysia -Casio expands Asian production.6 -> Japan Newsbriefs -- In this roundup of news from Japan: Hashimotoponders for NTT, KDD merger; NTT DoCoMo profits to surge; Star TV plansJapanese channel; Short holidays at chip makers; Sanyo shiftingproduction; Ziff purchase to be partly funded by bonds issue; Sony toenter video CD software market.7 ->  ****European Cross-Border Decency Laws In Spotlight -- The decisionby Compuserve to remove 20 Usenet newsgroups after complaints from Germanlegislators is not the first time cross-border decency and obscenity hasreared its head in Europe. The British government has already experiencedthe problems universal access can cause in the satellite television sectorand other nations have been angered by cross-border broadcasting.8 -> Final Stuff Technology Claims Against Storagetek Dismissed -- A judgehas dismissed the last two charges in a lawsuit that charged that StorageTechnology Corp. (NYSE: STK) had breached a 1990 agreement with StuffTechnology Partners, a former development partner. Stuff had sought $2.4billion in its original suit.9 -> New UK Nat'l Internet Service Provider -- Open Integration, a well-known computer systems supplier, has set up a subsidiary operation tooffer Internet services. Known as Cyberphile, the Internet serviceprovider (SP) claims that, thanks to its parentage and a UKP500,000investment in a fiber optic network spanning the UK, it can offer"third-generation" Internet facilities to its customers.10 -> Telecom Ireland Links To Internet Backbone Via MCI -- TelecomIreland has contracted with MCI to take a two megabits-per-second (Mbps)link from Telecom Ireland's headquarters in Dublin to MCI's Internetbackbone in the US. According to David Hughes, a spokesperson for TelecomIreland, the link will mean that more than 40 percent of all Internettraffic from Ireland travels over MCI's 45Mbps and 155Mbps backbone linesin the US.11 -> America Online Readies UK Rollout -- The UK will get its first tasteof America Online's European service later this month when the service isofficially launched to the media, prior to a formal public launch inMarch, Newsbytes has learned. Although the plans are top secret prior to amedia launch in two weeks time, Newsbytes has discovered that UK pricinghas been set at UKP3.95 per month for up to five hours of access, andextra hours billable at UKP1.85 each.12 -> China - Large-Scale Production Of Windows 95 Starts -- The Chineseversion of Windows 95 has been put into large-scale production inShanghai. The Chinese version will follow the standard Chinese fonts andinput methods recommended by the Chinese Committee on InformationTechnology Standards (CCITS).13 -> China - Asia-Pacific Mobile Telecom Project Founded -- AnAsia-Pacific Mobile Telecom project has recently been founded by sixentities from China and Singapore with the intention of providing mobilephone services to any place in the Asia-Pacific region.14 -> Philippines - National Telecoms Commission Plans Growth -- A recentreport released by the National Telecommunications Commission (NTC)projects that, three years from now, there will be ten phones for everyone hundred Filipinos, and seven million main lines throughout thePhilippines. There are presently 1.9 million main lines in the country,according to the NTC report.15 -> Printer Sales In Asia-Pacific Unaffected By EDI -- Printer sales inthe Asia-Pacific region do not exhibit any signs of being affected by themove towards a "paperless office concept," or a part implementation of itin the near future, despite the growing awareness and compliance regardingelectronic data interchange (EDI) by certain industry and governmentsegments in the region. This is according to International DataCorporation (IDC), a market research and consulting firm.16 -> Philippines - Cisco Office Now In Operation -- Cisco Systems Inc.has announced the opening of its representative office in the Philippines.17 -> Canadian Product Launch Update -- This regular feature, appearing onthe first day Newsbytes publishes each week, provides further details forthe Canadian market on announcements by international companies thatNewsbytes has already covered. This week: Lotus Development's new NotesMail client and changes in Notes pricing.18 ->  ****Telecom Bill Hits New Trouble -- The telecommunications reformlegislation has become a political house of cards that could collapse withthe slightest ill wind. Prospects for passage remain in doubt withCongress back in Washington and seemingly paralyzed by the budget impasse.19 -> Federal Shutdown Web Page -- As Washington enters the third week ofthe partial government shutdown, a local business has created a World WideWeb site intended to help tourists find places to visit in the Nation'sCapital.20 -> Texas Instruments & Samsung Continue Patent Dispute -- TexasInstruments Inc. (NYSE: TXN) and Korea-based Samsung Electronics Co. Ltdcould be chipping away at each other in a courtroom if the two companiescan't settle patent infringement allegations.21 ->  ****CompuServe Suspends Access To 200 Newsgroups -- CompuServe madeinternational headlines this past week when it announced it wouldtemporarily suspend access to more than 200 Internet newsgroups. Contactedby German authorities, the online giant was told the delivery of "certainspecified newsgroups" carrying pornographic material constituted aviolation of German criminal law.22 ->  ****AT&T Restructuring To Cost $6Bil & 40,000 Jobs -- Breaking up,as the song said, is hard to do. That's especially true if you work forAT&T (NYSE:T), which has announced it will cut about 40,000 jobs in itstelecommunications services and systems and technology companies as theseand AT&T Global Information Solutions become independent firms.23 -> STD Claims First With Canadian-Built PowerPC Systems -- STD SystemsInc. has begun shipping its Power2 workstations and servers, based onPowerPC chips, to Canadian universities, government buyers, and smallercorporations. The company claimed it is the first to build PowerPC systemsin Canada.24 -> Security Dynamics Plans To License "Concryption -- Security Dynamicsplans to license "Concryption," a just patented technology combiningencryption and compression, to outside companies for use with a variety ofsecurity and compression protocols, revealed Kenneth Weiss, chairman andchief technical officer, during an interview with Newsbytes.25 -> Pipeline Ships Electronic Customer Registration Product -- PipelineCommunications Inc. rolled into the new year with the release of PipelineAPI Toolkit for Windows 95, an electronic customer registration productwhich provides hardware and software developers with tools to enableonline registration of Windows 95 programs.26 -> Real-Time Quotes For $30 Per Month -- Data Broadcasting Corporation(NASDAQ: DBCC) has announced a new Internet financial data service, DBCMarketWatch. It will offer real-time stock market data over the Internetat prices now charged for delayed services.27 ->  ****Cyrix Expects Loss, Writes Off Entire 486 Inventory -- CyrixCorp. (NASDAQ:CYRX) has announced it will report a loss for the quarterending December 31, and will take a write-off for its entire remaininginventory of 486 chips.28 -> America Online Warns Members Of Password Security -- Acknowledging apassword security problem, America Online's (NASDAQ:AMER) president, SteveCase, has sent a letter to all AOL subscribers urging them to never revealtheir passwords. To acquire AOL user passwords, hackers are reportedlyusing e-mail and instant messages under the guise of AOL management.29 ->  ****Web Slowdown In 1996, Followed By Boom, Says IDC -- Althoughthe World Wide Web will undergo a temporary slowdown in 1996,International Data Corp. (IDC) is "bullish" on the Internet's prospectsfor the next five to 10 years, predicting growth in numbers of onlineusers to more than 200 million and in electronic commerce revenues to morethan $200 billion by the year 2000, said Frank Gens, senior VP ofresearch, in a conference call with Newsbytes.(Ian Stokell/19950103)Back to Headline List WT03-B33-9IA059-000323-B025-255http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec52.html 205.156.212.5 19970114222934 text/html 30513HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:27:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:56 GMTContent-length: 30326Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec52.html Sample Issue Copyright OBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNet October 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES A NEW NEWSLETTER (348 words) THE OBJECT-ORIENTED MARKET IN THE FALL OF 1991 (2210 words) OBJECT-ORIENTED PRODUCTS BEING SOLD IN THE US (86 words) *** TRENDS AND NEWS BRIEFS *** OMG Settles on ORB (645 words) Borland C++ & Application Frameworks (451 words) IBM Continues Push Into OO Domain (326 words) *** CALENDAR *** The following conferences should be of interest to those (18 words) 1991 North America (181 words) 1991 International (27 words) CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 1991A NEW NEWSLETTER     We had originally intended this to be the September issue ofIntelligent Software Strategies, a newsletter that we have beenpublishing for the last six years (originally as Expert SystemsStrategies).  But the rapidly growing amount of information onobject-oriented products and applications led us to conclude thatwe could better serve our subscribers by starting a secondnewsletter.     Before deciding to launch a newsletter on object-orientedtechnology, we surveyed the market to see if other newsletterswere already covering the same subjects that we will cover.  Wedidn't find any.  Object-Oriented Strategies will begin with asurvey of the entire market.  Having grouped products intocompetitive niches, we will provide information about the keyconcerns facing managers trying to decide when and how to useproducts from each niche.  As major contenders emerge within aniche, we will provide reviews that compare and contrast the keyproducts.  (Our hard-hitting reviews will be designed to helpmanagers make tough decisions.  We don't accept advertising.)  Wewill report on how companies are actually using object-orientedtechnology and what kinds of problems they are encountering.  Inaddition, every few months, we will step back and provide anoverview of the whole market so that readers can keep the bigpicture in mind.  Our newsletter is designed for managers anddevelopers who are charged with buying and using object-orientedtechnologies in corporate environments.     Our focus is not on research trends or noncommercialproducts and applications.  We will not include information aboutmanagement changes or announcements of new versions; readers canget these in the weekly computer newspapers.  We will notifyreaders of announcements that illustrate significant trends anddeserve to be placed in some broader context.  Occasionally wewill have articles by specialists in niche markets, but the greatmajority of the newsletter will be written by Paul Harmon andCurt Hall.  This will assure a comprehensive, consistentperspective on this rapidly developing technology.  We areconvinced that no other newsletter can offer the marketexpertise, managerial perspective, and comprehensive coverage weintend to provide.Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 1991THE OBJECT-ORIENTED MARKET IN THE FALL OF 1991     The move toward object-oriented (OO) technology marks a veryfundamental change in the development, maintenance, and use ofcomputer software.  Interest in object-oriented programming (OOP)is very intense at the moment, but the market for products isjust beginning.  Most companies are just starting to experimentwith OO technologies.  The market for products should growsubstantially over the next three years.     A wide variety of object-oriented products are beingintroduced very quickly.  The current crop of object-orientedproducts ranges from languages and software development tools tooperating systems, networks, and databases.  The market for theseproducts is new and most people have difficulty discriminatingbetween the uses and features of the different products.  To makethings even more confusing, the generic term "object" has beenused in computing in a variety of different ways.  And, ofcourse, some people are trying to cash in on the current interestin OO technology by claiming that their projects have OOcapabilities when they don't.     Figure 1 provides an easy way to conceptualize the overallmarket and current and future trends (see printed version of thisissue, available from Cutter Information Corp.; (800) 888-8939 or(617) 648-8700).  In effect, all computing will shift in thecourse of the 1990s.  By the end of this decade, three new typesof products will replace a wide variety of current products.     Object-Oriented Operating Systems will replace the existingcrop of operating systems.  A true OO operating system willcombine the ease of an object-oriented environment with OO-baseddevelopment tools and an OO-based client-server architecture.This will ensure that all systems running the operating systemcan transparently communicate with other operating systems onlocal area networks.     The Mac operating system, Windows 3.0, and New Wave aresteps in the direction of a true object-oriented operatingsystem, but they are only first approximations.  Until there is areal OO operating system, there will be lots of productscompeting to enhance existing operating systems.  Once true OOoperating systems appear and begin to gain market share, theywill eliminate the need for most of the current operating systeminterface development and enhancement products.     Object-Oriented Application Development Tools will replacethe existing group of OO languages (OOLs) and OO environments,CASE tools, and expert systems tools.  In effect, these productswill either merge or eliminate each other in competition, untilpowerful application development environments emerge and come todominate corporate software development.  The wide variety ofCASE and application development tools will soon narrow to a fewtools that will incorporate all of the basic paradigms.     Object-Oriented Databases (OODBs) will replace relationaldatabases by the end of the decade.  Meanwhile, OODBs willdevelop as the preferred databases for more specializedapplications like CAD/CAM.  The large-scale success of OODBs willdepend on the prior acceptance of OO-based client-servernetworks and the continued technological push of more complexapplications (e.g., multimedia).  The success of OODBs will meanthat databases, individually or collectively, will become a modelof the company and that class libraries used in both theoperating system and the application development tools will bekept in OODBs.     Most of the current object-oriented products should bethought of as approximations or steps toward one of these threeproducts.  It follows that there will be increased competition ormergers between products that are tending toward the sameultimate end.  Thus, CASE tools, expert systems tools, and OOlanguages and tools will necessarily find themselvesincorporating features currently possessed by the other types ofproducts as they fight for the same customers.Object-Oriented Products     Figure 2 is an overview of the object-oriented market in theUS (see printed version of this issue, available from CutterInformation Corp.; (800) 888-8939, (617) 648-8700).  We havedivided the market into niches by clustering products withsimilar functionality.  Initially we wanted to include acomprehensive list of the OO products being sold in each niche,but it proved too large for a single page.  Instead, we list someof the better known products to illustrate the constituents ofeach group.  The rows suggest some of the very different uses towhich object-oriented techniques are being applied.  We havefurther divided the products by suggesting where they lie on acontinuum that runs from languages through environments to toolsor shells and finally to finished applications.  (This continuumgets a little fuzzy in some cases, but the general idea is thatproducts to the right are built using products to the left.Likewise, products on the left require more programming skillswhile products closer to the right side are more likely to beused by end users.)     Products in bold type in Figure 2 are those that we willconsider in more detail later in the newsletter (Tables 1-4 inthe printed version of this issue, available from CutterInformation Corp.; (800) 888-8939 or (617) 648-8700).  We willconsider other products in detail in future issues on OOoperating systems, OODBs, and interface builders.  Beforeconsidering specifics, however, let's consider each of thegeneral niches suggested by Figure 2.OO Programming Languages     There are a number of different OOLs.  New OOLs are beingdeveloped, and in many cases there are several compilersavailable for a single OOL.  From a commercial perspective, thereis only one OOL of any importance: C++.  We expect that thecommercial interest in Smalltalk and other more flexible OOLswill fade as developers realize that they want to work in toolsrather than languages.  We observed this same phenomenon in theAI world.  Initially theorists argued about Prolog and Lisp andassured everyone else that they would need to use a symboliclanguage to really do the kinds of things they would want to do.In five years everyone realized that they could do everythingthey wanted in powerful tool environments while developingprograms much faster than they ever could in a language.  C++would be uncommercial if it weren't positioned as the nextgeneration of C.  As it is, many companies are experimenting withan OOL to learn what the technology is all about.  By 1993, theemphasis will be entirely on tools and the number of languagevendors will have decreased considerably.OO Programming Environments     As you move across the continuum, the first place to theright of a language is the programming environment, with a classlibrary and some editing and display utilities.  Since OOLs tendto include most of these things in the basic language, it's veryeasy for language vendors to expand their libraries and create anenvironment.  This is exactly what ParcPlace did when it movedfrom Smalltalk80 to ObjectWorks.OO Application Development Tools     One more step to the right and you arrive at a tool orshell.  A tool should provide an application developmentenvironment that is similar to a CASE tool.  A tool ought to haveeverything an environment has plus a lot more.  A tool certainlyought to have a graphical interface and interface developmentutilities.  In addition, tools usually incorporate codegeneration capabilities.  A great example of an OO tool isPrograph.  Prograph structures the application developmentprocess so well that it places Macintosh OO applicationdevelopment within the range of nonprogrammers.  You don't writecode in Prograph, you create diagrams and the tool generates thecode.Class Libraries     Some companies are offering class libraries by themselves.We don't expect this to last very long.  Tool vendors willincorporate libraries and developers will find it much easier toexamine and use libraries within an application or interfacedevelopment tool.OO Design Tools     Object International is offering tools that document OOanalysis and design efforts, using the Coad-Yourdon notationalsystem.  This type of product might sell for a while, but it willsurely disappear as soon as OO development tools or CASE toolsoffer graphical analysis and design interfaces that are directlytied to code generation capabilities.Conventional CASE Tools     There are a number of conventional CASE vendors that claimthey are adding OO capabilities to their products.  The claimsare rather weak just now, but over the course of the next threeor four years we expect that at least some of the major CASEvendors will incorporate powerful, graphical OO programmingenvironments within their products.  The problem they face ismodifying the structured, procedural methodologies that mostconventional CASE users expect to use.  The OO applicationdevelopment tool vendors are free to start from scratch anddevelop their products around an OO methodology.  Theconventional CASE vendors will try to combine a conventionalmethodology with an OO methodology.  The advantage of the OOvendors' approach will be elegance and clarity, while theconventional CASE vendors' approach will be popular with thelarge number of programmers that use structured methodologies.We expect that many CASE vendors will try to resolve theirdilemma by buying OO development tools and offering theircustomers two different approaches.OO Operating Systems     Within three years we will see true OO operating systems.In the meantime, we see operating systems that provide onlylimited OO capabilities.  The Mac operating system has offered anumber of OO capabilities for a long time and many peopleassociate windows and graphics with OOP.  Suffice it to say thatif there were any real OO operating systems in common use, therewouldn't be a market for the OO interface development tools thatare springing up all over the place.OO Operating System Interface Development Tools     Interface development tools are built around class librariesthat make it easy to develop an interface for one or moreoperating systems.  The tool makes it easy to assemble theinterface, and in most cases, makes it easy to attach code to theinterface that is developed.  Borland's ObjectVision is a niceexample of a graphical, 4GL interface developer that allows thedeveloper to create an interface form and then relate data fromBorland spreedsheets or databases to appropriate slots on theform.  As long as operating systems like Windows 3.0 are popular,developers will need tools to help them develop user interfaces.As OO operating systems become available, the functionalityprovided by the interface development tools will be incorporatedinto the operating system itself.Hypermedia Languages and Hypermedia Environments     Hypermedia languages and environments facilitate limited,user-friendly object-oriented programming.  We assume that trueOO operating systems will incorporate most of the features peoplelike about HyperCard and ToolBook, and that most of thisfunctionality will simply become part of a good operating system.Meanwhile, however, hypermedia constitute the main interfacebetween OO technology and lots of end users.OO Databases     Some of the OODBs are really databases, but most of theproducts in this category are OODB management systems that relyon more conventional databases to actually store data.  Therewill be a fight between the relational database vendors and thetrue OODB vendors to see which will prevail.  We assume that, inthe long run, the true OODB vendors will prevail and corporatedatabases will gradually become dynamic simulations of thecorporations that create them.Expert Systems Tools     The best expert systems tools include powerful OOprogramming environments.  Moreover, the better expert systemstools are already adapted to conventional IS environments (CICSand IMS, VMS, Unix, PCs, various relational databases, etc.).  Ascompanies become serious about developing and fielding majorobject-oriented systems, the expert systems vendors will findthemselves competing with the major OO development environments.CAD/CAM Tools     There are a number of problem- or domain-specificapplication development tools that depend on OO techniques.  Thecurrent crop of CAD/CAM tools is a good example.  Developersusing CAD/CAM tools may not think of themselves as OOprogrammers, but they are currently developing applications usingsome of the most sophisticated OO tools on the market.Other Niches     We didn't consider applications in this article, althoughthere are fielded applications in most of the categories we havediscussed.  (We'll feature outstanding commercial applications ofOO technology in the May issue of OOS.)     Another use of OO technology that we left out of Figure 2involves the use of OO technology in OO-based client-serversystems.  We expect that all client-server systems willeventually be based on an OO architecture and that future OOoperating systems will incorporate the ability to manage sendingand receiving messages from any other client or server on thenetwork.     Given this brief overview of the wide variety of differentproducts that all incorporate OO techniques, it's not surprisingthat companies and programmers new to the field often becomeconfused about what OO is or what it's good for.  In the monthsahead we'll explore each of these niches in more detail.  We'llconsider the key technical concepts and the resistance each groupof products will face as it vies for commercial acceptance.  Wewill also review the strengths and weaknesses of both the leadingproducts in each niche and the companies that are promoting them.(In February 1992 we will begin our annual estimates of themarket size and project the annual growth of each of these marketniches.)Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 1991OBJECT-ORIENTED PRODUCTS BEING SOLD IN THE US     In the course of each year, we will try to review all the OOproducts on the market and provide information so that readerscan keep up with the variety and features of the products in eachniche.  In this issue, we include tables on four groups ofproducts (see printed version of this issue, available fromCutter Information Corp.; (800) 888-8939, (617) 648-8700): (1) OOApplication Development Environments and Tools, (2) OO InterfaceDevelopment Tools, (3) OO Design Tools, and (4) OO Databases.Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 1991OMG Settles on ORB     The Object Management Group (OMG), formed in 1989, is theleading object-oriented (OO) standards group in the world.Virtually every major software and hardware company involved inOO technology is working under the OMG umbrella to establishstandards to facilitate the growth of OO technology.  OMG'sfirst goal is a standard format for passing messages on anetwork, called the Object Request Broker (ORB).     OMG requires that its standards be on existing,commercial-grade technology.  The company proposing an approachagrees to license its technology for relatively little money andOMG members agree that they will support whatever technology ischosen.     OMG put out a request for ORB technology in the fall of1990.  Initially, the group accepted 10 proposals.  By June 1991,at Object World (OMG's annual convention), the ORB proposals weredown to 2: (1) The HP/Sun proposal (also supported by NCR andODI) and (2) The HyperDesk/DEC proposal.  Each proposal embodiesa technically different approach to message passing.     The HP/Sun/NCR/ODI proposal.  This proposal embodies astatic approach to message passing, based on a new languagecalled class definition language (CDL).  CDL structures theclasses and relationships to be used in an applicationintegration scheme.  It also involves an application programminginterface (API) for accessing the functionality of thosestructures at run time, and a distributed object managementfacility (DOMF).  Together, the CDL language and the DOMF APIprovide a static language-based solution to building distributedapplications.  In theory, a static approach should result infaster message passing since most of the work can be precompiled.It should also facilitate compile-time type checking, and theunique language definition should lead to greater portabilitythan one written in an existing language.     The HyperDesk/DEC proposal.  This proposal embodies adynamic approach to message passing.  It assumes an applicationinterface (syntax) that can be called from C, C++, or otherlanguages.  The argument for a dynamic approach, of course, isthat one often can't anticipate the priority of the interfacesthat might be used at runtime.  In return for building parameterargument lists and marshaling arguments at run time, the dynamicAPI approach allows decisions to be made as late as possible.This is especially important for applications like browsers andresource managers.  In addition, this approach doesn't requirelearning another language; the developer writes the calls in alanguage he or she already knows, like C or C++.     Faced with a choice between a static definition language(CDL) or dynamic calling from within an existing language, theORB committee decided it wanted both and asked the two groups tocombine the two approaches.     The decision to accept a common standard for message passingrepresents a major triumph for OMG and the OO industry as awhole.  It also suggests that the way to set standards is to getin early and choose a very basic technology.  Even if all OMGmembers support the ORB, they will still be able to implement itin a number of different ways.  (An application can handlemessages any way it wants internally, it only needs a mechanismto convert outgoing and incoming messages from the accepted ORBformat.)     OMG's next task is to define a model for an object andspecify its use in data management.  Since this will come a lotcloser to implementation, OMG may find consensus on a model muchharder to come by.  Still, it is off to a good start and wide-spread acceptance of even its initial effort should speed theacceptance of OO techniques and open systems.  (We'll considerthe ORB in greater detail in a future issue when we consider OOoperating systems and networks.)     For more information, contact: Richard Soley, TechnicalDirector, The Object Management Group, 492 Old Connecticut Path,Framingham, MA 01701, USA; (508) 820-4300, Fax: (508) 820-4303.Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 1991Borland C++ & Application Frameworks     Application frameworks are intended to simplify applicationdevelopment by providing an object-oriented (OO) foundation onwhich to build software.  In effect, they enhance programmerproductivity by providing a prebuilt application that can becustomized, instead of forcing developers to write programs fromscratch.     Borland, which has been particularly successful in offeringlanguages and environments for OOP development, has announcedthat it is now bundling its popular C++ programming language withtwo new application framework facilities for developing programsfor MS Windows and DOS operating systems.  According to GeneWang, VP and GM of Borland's Language Business Unit, Borland hasshipped more than 400,000 copies of C++.     The new product -- Borland C++ & Application Frameworks --includes two new application frameworks: ObjectWindows and TurboVision.     ObjectWindows provides a generic, functioning Windowsapplication that can be used as a template to save programmerstime and code.  It lets programmers add windows, menus, dialogs,buttons, list boxes, edit fields, icons, etc. to theirapplications.  Full source code for ObjectWindows is included aswell.     Turbo Vision provides basically the same functionality inthe DOS environment that ObjectWindows provides for the Windowsenvironment, enabling programmers to produce DOS applicationswith character-based Windows user interfaces.  Full source codefor Turbo Vision is also included.     Borland C++ & Application Frameworks includes Borland C++2.0, which has a 100% ANSI C compiler, a C++ compiler, andprovides complete support for developing Windows applications,including Dynamic Link Libraries and EXEs.  The Whitewaterresource toolkit is also included, which allows programmers towrite Windows applications without using the MS Windows' SoftwareDevelopment Kit.     Borland C++ & Application Frameworks runs on IBM PCs and100% compatibles and sells for $695.  Current Borland C++ userscan upgrade to Borland C++ & Application Frameworks for $199.95;ObjectWindows or Turbo Vision for $99.95.     In other developments, Borland is selling "The World ofObjects," a videotape aimed at expanding the use of OOPtechnology, narrated by Philippe Kahn, Borland's chairman,president, and CEO.  The video features such leading computerscientists as Alan Kay (Apple), Marvin Minsky (MIT), BjarneStroustrup (designer of C++, AT&T Bell Labs), Joseph Weizenbaum(professor of Computer Science, MIT), and Niklaus Wirth (designerof Pascal and professor of Computer Science, ETH Zurich).     In "The World of Objects," Mr.  Kahn uses real-worldmetaphors to explain OOP and how this revolution in softwaretechnology benefits both software developers and end users.  The21-minute videotape (VHS) is intended for software developers andtechnical programmers who want to learn more about OOPtechnology.  It retails for $19.99.     For more information, contact: Borland International, 1800Green Hills Rd., P.O. Box 660001, Scotts Valley, CA 95067-0001,USA; (800) 331-0877 or (408) 439-4825.Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 1991IBM Continues Push Into OO Domain     About four months ago, IBM announced that its CASErepository, AD/Cycle, would be based on an object-oriented (OO)foundation.  Two months ago, IBM stunned the computing world byannouncing a joint venture with Apple to develop a new OOoperating system (based on a system underway at Apple, code-named"Pink").  IBM has also integrated former Metaphor personnel intothe operating system effort.  Now, in a series of announcementsmade in September, IBM has not only reinforced its commitment toopen systems, but stated that it will expand its concept ofNetview into a multivendor, enterprise-wide network managementsystem.  (The new version of Netview will be Version 2, Release3.  No shipment date has been set.)  At the same time, thecompany announced that its Network product will combine twographical standards, GMF (Graphics Monitor Facility) andNetcenter.  To facilitate this, the new version will incorporatea "Resource Object Data Manager," a kind of OO clearinghouse thatwill provide real-time information about the status andconfiguration of both IBM and non-IBM networks.     IBM claims that the OO component of the Netview system willmake it easier for developers to create network managementapplications and will guarantee that users of applications basedon the Resource Object Data Manager will be able to manageworldwide networks in real-time.     Surveys of IS managers at Fortune 500 companies indicatethat most have heard about OOP, but consider it a technology forthe future and not one of today's high priorities.  As IBM keepsannouncing products that depend on OO techniques, and that willunderlie most of the systems that Fortune 500 IS managers will bedepending upon in the years ahead, corporate consciousnessregarding OOP and the urge to find out more about the technologywill grow rapidly.  In fact, given IBM's moves, we expect that1992 will find OOP at the top of most IS managers' lists ofthings to find out about.Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 1991     The following conferences should be of interest to those     The following conferences should be of interest to thoseinvolved in the commercial application of object-orientedtechnologies.Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 19911991 North America     October 6-11.  OOPSLA '91 (Conference on OOP, Systems,Languages, and Applications).  Phoenix, Arizona.  Sponsor: ACM.Contact: John Richards, OOPSLA'91 Conference Chair, IBM ResearchCenter, P.O. Box 704, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA; (914)784-7616, Fax: (914) 784-7279.     October 17-18.  International Workshop on Object-Orientationin Operating Systems.  Palo Alto, California.  Sponsor: IEEEComputer Society Technical Committee on OS.  Contact: VincentRusso, Computer Science Dept., Purdue University, West Lafayette,IN 47907, USA; (317) 494-6008, Fax: (217) 494-0737.     October 28-31.  The Object-Oriented Approach in InformationSystems.  Quebec City, Canada.  Sponsored by IFIP (Working Group8.1).  Contact: Frans Van Assche, Conference IFIP-Quebec'91,James Martin Associates, Genevestraat 10 B4, Brussels, Belgium;Fax: (32) 2-242 1592.     November 18-21.  C++ At Work.  Santa Clara, California.Sponsored by The C++ Report and the Wang Institute of BostonUniversity.  Will cover a broad area of the uses of C++, fromintroduction to C++ to managing C++ projects.  Contact: C++ AtWork, 588 Broadway, Ste. 604, New York, NY 10012, USA; (212)274-0640, Fax: (212) 274-0646.Back to Headline List CopyrightOBJECT-ORIENTED STRATEGIES via NewsNetOctober 19911991 International     October 28-31.  SCOOP Europe.  London, UK. Contact: BostonUniversity Corporate Education Center, 72 Tyng Road, Tyngsboro,MA 01879, USA; (508) 649-9731, Fax: (508) 649-6926.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-10IA059-000323-B026-6http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec109.html 205.156.212.5 19970114223038 text/html 152940HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:28:26 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 21:05:20 GMTContent-length: 152753Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec109.html Sample Issue Copyright OEM MAGAZINE via NewsNet February 1, 1996 Vol. 4 No. SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES COLUMNS Alpha Site: Tool time for pc makers (493 words) LETTERS Kudos from Compaq (31 words) The Net is Key (97 words) Accolades from Apple (195 words) World PC inventor (59 words) Nuts about Acorn (65 words) World PC Won't Sell (304 words) Power Prose (167 words) Fighting Bloatware (275 words) Data Blaster (102 words) Krill or Cetacean? (895 words) A Battery No-Go (189 words) Skinny or FUD? (178 words) CORRECTION (45 words) MANAGING TECHNOLOGY Servers in training -- Video servers are cutting their teeth on training-on-demand applications, while waiting for the big opportunities in consumer video-on-demand to appear (1301 words) COLUMNS Tech law: Loose Lips Can Sink Standards (496 words) The big picture: Jigsaw-puzzle integration (432 words) FEATURES The PRET-A-PORTER PC -- (Ready-to-Wear Computing) (2603 words) Weight watchers for wearables (361 words) A wearable skids off the runway (260 words) The Interview: Carl Yankowski (2735 words) PCs step into 3D -- The journey into the world of three-dimensional computing will be a difficult one for PC makers, according to the publisher of the PC Graphics Report (2791 words) DVD -- Driving the Vidoe Disk (2645 words) Will Hollywood back DVD as a censor? (415 words) Wireless LANs -- Not of this World (2624 words) Infrared aims for the corporate LAN (210 words) OEM ENABLERS Multiplexing modem (67 words) Power designer (66 words) Soft sound synthesis (66 words) Fast Mac graphics (64 words) No smoke, just mirrors (58 words) Sizing up JPEG (70 words) COLUMNS Dream this: The Mainframe's Last Stand (475 words) COMPUTING 2000 Rainbow room -- A company spun out of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has devised a unique way to generate multiple colors in miniature flat-panel displays (1309 words) COLUMNS Fault line: Fishing on the Internet (446 words) Back panel: Digital Cellular Takes Its Toll (439 words) CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Alpha Site: Tool time for pc makersBy:Rick Boyd-MerrittI'm not much of a handyman around the house. I avoid preventivemaintenance of any sort and only operate in a reactive mode,trying to fix things that have broken. I toss the odd collectionof tools I have higgledy-piggledy into a cupboard above ourwashing machine. God help me when I need something specificlike a penny nail and have to fish around through the dregsof that cupboard! The point of this little domestic confessionis that I believe the PC industry operates in the same sorryway. OEMs don't think much about preventive maintenance.They let Intel or Microsoft or, sometimes, Compaq make theirregular service calls on the PC architecture, assuming that'senough to keep things humming. Every once in a while, a pipebursts, and they go digging around for a tool to deal withthe emergency. As often as not, the rusty, ill-kept tool boxtakes the form of an occasional meeting place known as theVideo Electronics Standards Association.VESA's been around since 1989 and lays claim to some 30-oddstandards. But the impact of the group has been a mixed bag.It's produced helpful bench-level engineering specifications,such as monitor timings. But its work on issues of broad impacthave often been met with push back from companies such as Inteland Microsoft, who often sit imperiously at the periphery ofthe group.Thus, the VESA Local (VL) Bus made a significant contributionto 486 systems but was snuffed out by the steamroller of thePCI bus from Intel. Similarly, the Unified Memory Architecturespec drafted by VESA now sits under a cloud generated by Microsoft'slack of support for it and a competing approach being implementedby Intel. A VESA set-top group was folded primarily becauseits work was not timely or relevant enough for the emergingmarket it hoped to serve; a new cable-modem group could facea similar fate.The problem lies in how the PC industry takes care of its tools.There are 250 members in VESA, but organizers say it is a stellarevent when 30 turn out for a meeting on any single issue. Otherissues struggle along with a fraction of that support, oftenfrom engineers who carry all too little clout with their companies,resulting in meetings sometimes defined by the agenda of asmall group.Worse yet, VESA doesn't even hold together well. Vendors tryto drive those issues in which they have a vested interestand ignore others. The group hit rock-bottom recently whenmember Dell Computer tried to collect royalties for a patentrelating to the VL Bus.The computer industry desperately needs a strong open forumthat can shepherd the PC architecture through the changes itfaces over the next few years. VESA could be it-if we learnhow to take care of our tools.You can reach me at rbmerrit@eet.cmp.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Kudos from CompaqBy:Bob Stearns, Vice President, Technology and Corporate Development,Your November issue was simply outstanding. I read it coverto cover. OEM has become a really great publication. Congratulations!Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. The Net is KeyBy:Anonymous, via the InternetThe idea of a WorldPC/NetworkPC [November, page 28] is a verywelcome one. A mass-market, $500 to $800 computer is feasible,and it will transform the PC industry if industry leaders pursuethe idea wholeheartedly.Every person should own such an information appliance. The crucialpart is the network-a reliable, affordable, Internet-connectednetwork with at least ISDN speed. Currently, that essentialpart is mostly missing. So I don't expect the World PC ideato succeed in the United States within the next two years.After that, things will change.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Accolades from AppleBy:Warren D. Raisch, Manager, Apple Pacific, Business Development,"The World PC" [November, page 28] was fantastic. Your ideasand research were right on the money. Congratulations: Youarticulated the opportunity perfectly.I am a senior business development executive at Apple Computerin Cupertino, Calif., but I am leaving Apple shortly to starta venture. Your article reads almost exactly like my businessplan.I have gathered $20 million in initial seed capital and am consideringpartnering with Apple on certain technology areas. But I believethat it will not be the PC vendors that will bring the WorldPC to market. I believe that it will be driven by a cooperativeof consumer-electronics companies and large network-serviceproviders. Your article correctly points out the significantopportunity in working with developing nations on this vision.I have spent much of the past 16 years working with developingnations' governments, the World Bank, the UN and private-sectorpartners to build an IT infrastructure that could easily leapfrogwhat we have in the United States. At this point, the barriersare more psychological than technological.Once again, congratulations on an outstanding article.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. World PC inventorBy:Alex Blok, President, Tecnation Digital World, Palo Alto, Calif.,Regarding "The World PC," [November, page 28], I wanted to letyou know that I conceived the idea for a network computer over10 years ago, and my company is working on it right now. LarryEllison, Sun and others are not the originators of the idea.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Nuts about AcornBy:Frank Towler, Strategic Unix Networks Corp., Victoria, B.C.,I enjoyed your article on Acorn in OEM Magazine ["The WorldPC," November, page 28] and would be interested in knowingmore about Acorn's products. Do you have a contact name ande-mail address you could pass on?Ed: You may contact Acorn through its public relations firm,Cain Communications, at (408) 291-2585.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. World PC Won't SellBy:Dave Ray, via the InternetI recently read your article on the World PC and felt compelledto comment. I don't know how long you've been around MIS orDP, but I have been in DP for almost 28 years and have watchedthe centralization/decentralization issue as well as the upsizedownsize paradigm. It never fails to amaze me that people actuallybelieve these have provided real benefit. The World PC is justanother stab at something that won't sell.I used to punch my own programs and dreamed of the day whenI would just have a terminal. The ability to have a fully functionalPC that can do most of what a mainframe does (and lots of whatit can't do) is something the World PC would take away. Howcan a machine that only has 16 meg of memory and no hard drivedo anything? Get real: If that was all that was needed, the386 with 16 meg of memory would have been just the ticket-butyou know how fast it failed. Without storage, it's just a dumbterminal.Consider the cost reduction in terms of computing power. Whywould anyone want a $1,000 dumb terminal, when a Pentium with8 meg and an 800-meg hard drive can be gotten for $2,000? Futuretechnologies will reduce the cost even more while providingmore power.Have you seen any of the surveys regarding the public's desirefor this type of machine? Not one has found favor with theidea. One of the few that touts this philosophy is Oracle-andOracle is one of the few companies that has not hit the markon any hardware or application it has created or promoted.True, it has a great DBMS, but other than that, it fails miserably.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Power ProseBy:John Ockerman, via the InternetThanks for your article in the November issue ("Batteries Aweigh,"page72). It is an excellent review of the portable power market.The arrival of the laptop catalyzed battery and charger developmentlike nothing else I can recall during 30-plus years in thebattery industry.In the 1980s, while at Exide, I helped the Department of Energyspend $160 million on EV battery improvements. For their money,they got maybe 50 Wh/kg lead-acid, and nothing much betteris available today. It is tough to compete with gasoline, at34,000 Wh/gallon.The work at Integrated Circuit Systems Inc., is one of the bestapproaches to fast charging that I know about. With Dave Whitmer'shelp, I've used its chips in the lab and at home. I hope ICSsucceeds in taming lithium-ion charging, but I wouldn't besurprised if another, safer lithium system comes along soon.An unsatisfied market for power at $200/pound and up is a terrificincentive.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Fighting BloatwareBy:S. Y. Wong, via the Internet"The World PC" [November, page 28] was very timely. I have beenvisiting China since 1989 and find that the PC situation haschanged dramatically. My nephew's son acquired an entry-level486SX machine upon his graduation from college. The machinewas about $1,000. The operating system, UCDOS, is DOS withthe character type modified to be 8 bits, with the eighth bitencoding 1-byte ASCII or 2-byte Chinese GB-2312. The UCDOShas an extender and interesting graphics but is only somewhatlarger than DOS, if the character-font library is not counted.One of the biggest resource burners in PCs are the "modern"operating systems, which are all patterned after the obsoleteconcept of "multi-programming," invented for CPU time-sharingback when CPU costs were prohibitive. Indeed, all computerchips, CISC or RISC, are patterned after the CPU concept, whichdates back to the mainframe. The combination of obsolete processoroperating-system design approaches has combined to keep costshigh and memory requirements large.What the industry needs is a design approach that weighs processorand OS design as an integrated whole. The United States lackstechnical leadership of the caliber needed to pull off sucha bold strategy. In China, where bloatware does not quite suitthe economy, there is more opportunity for an entrepreneurto implement such a grand vision. But luckily for the UnitedStates, China tends to blindly follow America's lead.Still, you might sound the warning that the United States couldlose its computer leadership, just as it lost earlier leadershippositions in such industries as clothing, footwear and TV sets.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Data BlasterBy:Jay Knutson, niwot@csn.net, via the Internet"The Broadcast PC is on the air" [November, page 64] was aninteresting article. However, Niwot Networks, using its filetransfer kits (hardware and software), can move data over dialup telephones lines for one-fifth the price listed by DirectSatellite System/DirecTv. Our customers-the most modern printing,pre-press and magazine publishers-can deliver Mbytes on demandfor 11 to 20 cents/Mbyte. That is better than Syquest disks and Federal Express($28 to go, $28 to retrieve-meaning $56 for a 100-Mbyte disk).And it arrives in minutes, not the next day at 10:30.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Krill or Cetacean?By:John Amenyo, via the Internet"The World PC" [November, page 28] was an important and timelylook at the future of mainstream computing in the age of thenetwork. But several of the industry experts whom you reliedon for your conclusions demonstrated glaring examples of poorstrategic thinking. One could ascribe the lack of success ofthe videotex to such confusion among the supposed visionariesof the computing industry.You wrote of an "awakening hunger for information, entertainmentand connectivity." I hope that by "connectivity" you mean theneed and urge to participate in electronic communities. Ifso, I agree.But you then veer off in the wrong direction by advancing theopinion that "the potential of a machine that could satisfythat hunger at a price tag of a few hundred dollars is enormous."The leap to that conclusion is unwarranted. Total usage costs,not merely the cost of the access unit, are the real barrierto the Internet and Infobahn. The access-unit cost is easilyamortized. But the overall monthly costs of (remote) contentusage must truly fit people's budgets. That holds even moretrue for the developing countries.Another of your assertions that is not very useful is that "thereis disposable income, but it does not come in packages of $3,000per household. It comes-dearly-in chunks of a few hundred dollarsat a time." True enough, but the implications here are misleading.An assumed amortization schedule of $83/month is within therange of a typical household phone bill (including long-distancecalls). Further, for several generations now, marketers haveperfected ways of handling the "bulk vs. chunk" income problem financing, credit arrangements and lease/rent-to-buy options.It is a strategic delusion for a PC vendor selling into theInternet/Web market to rely on the following kinds of assertions "In [the] server-centric view of computing, a network of serversprovides the data: from bank accounts to document archivesto the latest movies and games. The servers also run the heavyparts of the applications. All the home computer does is run'applets,' which are fragments of software that do just enoughlocal computing to minimize the system's communications-bandwidthneeds.""One of the most important aspects of the $500 home computeris that it is inherently a networked architecture, not a standalonemachine. For this reason, the rules of the road are entirelydifferent from a standalone's. For starters, local storage . . . is an unwarranted expense. The network can store anddeliver any necessary data. It can execute all but the tinyapplets of all the applications. And it can do this for onlya service charge."That makes sense only if one assumes that in both the standalone(application/desktop-centric) and networked (server-centric)cases, the non-computing costs (i.e., the communication andinformation costs) are zero or insignificant. Not on Terra.Consider the matter from the consumer's viewpoint. Who willown the PC? Who will own the network/connectivity and accessservices? Who will own the content? How much will the "servicecharge" be-the "toll" that will have to be paid every timethe consumer wishes to do anything that is even mildly interesting?It is a fantasy on the part of minimalist World PC advocatesthat consumers will be satisfied forever with a "look-but-don'ttouch" approach to information consumption.In the same vein, music-on-demand, video-on-demand and interactiveTV will all fail if all the user gets to do is treat the InternetWeb like a giant jukebox in a honky-tonk bar. What if a userwishes to embellish and save the multimedia experience karaokestyle? A minimalist World PC would prevent that. People wantto pay to download and store copies of multimedia objects.One thing is clear: The consumer will have to pay somethingto somebody. The first question is how much. An even more importantquestion is to whom. Would information consumers find it morepalatable to pay the PC/software vendors, or would they rathermost of the money go to the networking/service providers? That'sthe crux of the issue.In your current daily life, which do you prefer? Do you liketo rent or lease things and pay for usage, or do you preferto buy and own them? Automobiles are very expensive, houseseven more so. But do most consumers prefers to own such items,or to lease or rent them?In my opinion, the strategic action needed to jump-start a socialrevolution rivaling Guttenberg's is clear: Use the on-rushingadvances in technology to drive down the total usage costsof travel on the worldwide information superhighway. That willrequire very low cost but full-featured access stations. Iwould strongly advise that the industry not proceed on themodel of the "PCjr," with crippled features and no frills.Industry experience has been that it has never worked, andnothing has happened to suggest that it now could be a successfulstrategy.I strongly believe the future of the PC for the Infobahn belongsto the "beast" you blithely dismissed: a "Pentium-powered homemultimedia PC, supplied with a huge disk and at least 16 Mbytesof DRAM, armed with specialized hardware for graphics, 3-D,video and even telephone calls."Who, after all, is the king of the ocean: the krill or the cetacean?Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. A Battery No-GoBy:Greg Smith, Ultralife Batteries Inc., Montvale, N.J.I have several comments on the "Batteries Aweigh" article [November,page 72], which was generally very good: The observation thatcycle life and environmental issues will be paramount considerationsfor OEMs is right on the mark. And the observation that lithiumion is likely to supplant nickel-based batteries, particularlyas its costs come down over time, is also accurate. But lithiumpolymer, meaning rechargeable batteries using lithium in itsmetallic form, should not be occupying so many column inchesat this stage of the game.Though lithium-metal is a battery maker's dream, it is not suitablefor rechargeable batteries. A lithium-metal battery's cyclelife is too limited (150 cycles), and the potential for catastrophicfailure is too severe. A particular problem is buildup of dendriticstructures on the lithium electrode, which eventually can piercethe separator and cause an internal short-circuit.The one-time leading proponent of lithium-polymer technologywas a company called Valence Technology. But Valence no longerpromotes the technology vigorously and has, in fact, made aneffort to switch to lithium-ion technology similar to Ultralife's.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Skinny or FUD?By:David Hunter, PC Product Manager, Spectron Microsystems, viaWell, the good news is that your "inside skinny" note ("Theinside skinny on native signal processing," October, page 58)apparently is well read-at least by the newsgroup contributors.The bad news is that your anonymous PC maker is either badlyinformed or specifically intent on misleading your readers.Spox is definitely a major component of NSP. In fact, all ofthe Windows 3.1 interfaces provided by IA-Spox are virtuallythe same under Windows 95. The only public changes that havebeen made are those that were absolutely necessary to supportfull 32-bit application programming interfaces.If you want more details, I'd be glad to forward a copy of aPowerPoint presentation I wrote last month. And if you reallywant to go into it, I'd be glad to send you a CD copy of ourlatest beta. Want to develop your own real-time signal-processingcode on the Pentium?So, do you think that anonymous fax could be a part of somebody'sFUD campaign?Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. CORRECTIONBecause of an editing error, a story in the October issue ofOEM Magazine ("Superdrives," page 62) incorrectly stated thatData General supplies RAID arrays to Digital Equipment Corp.In fact, Digital makes and markets its own RAID arrays. Weregret the error.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Servers in training -- Video servers are cutting their teethon training-on-demand applications, while waiting for the bigopportunities in consumer video-on-demand to appearBy:Tam HarbertAfter years of investing in video-server technology for elusiveconsumer TV applications, computer OEMs are pinning their hopeson the corporate LAN as the place to get some return on thatinvestment. The hot spot for servers today is in corporatetraining-on-demand applications, but so far, vendors haven'tbeen able to gain much of a toehold.Many OEMs are simply bundling their general-purpose serverswith video-networking software from third parties, in somecases as a place holder until they've completed developmentof new server software of their own. Some are developing hardwareas well. Redesigns are required, says Carl Lehmann, seniorresearch analyst at the Meta Group in Stamford, Conn., becauseof the rigorous requirements of tomorrow's high-speed, multimedianetworks for isochronous data delivery in real-time."In my opinion, the big OEMs are groping," says Ed Delaney,vice president of sales and marketing at Sea Change Technologies,a small vendor of niche video servers based in Concord, Mass."They have invested a lot of money to develop these serversfor video-on-demand, and they are sitting there, trying tofigure out how to sell them." Based on proprietary chips andbuses, the servers are too expensive for the corporate market,many observers believe.Software bundling has emerged as an alternative to what JimLong, president of Starlight Networks Inc., calls "brute forceby hardware." Based in Mountain View, Calif., Starlight isthe market leader in video-server software. The company focusessolely on the corporate enterprise market, producing clientserver software and networking middleware that allow videoto be sent over local-area networks. Hewlett-Packard Co., IBMCorp. and Sun Microsystems Inc. have all teamed up with Starlightto deliver video on the LAN.Long says the top applications for Starlight's products aretraining and education, with training-on-demand a particularlysweet spot. "Training is a line item in corporations today,"says Long. "They have to find innovative ways of keeping peopleup to date."Indeed, U.S. corporations spent $50.6 billion in 1994 on trainingfor 47.3 million employees, roughly $1,070 per employee, accordingto a survey conducted by Training Magazine. Training-on-demandshaves those costs by eliminating the time and money spentto send employees to off-site courses and to hire instructors.Training-on-demand is interactive: a user can pull a video offthe network when he wants it, rather than having to watch itwhen it's made available to him. Employees don't have to schedulehours at a time for training away from their desks. They doit at their convenience, right on the desktop. Moreover, studieshave shown that interactive multimedia training helps peoplelearn more effectively and retain more of what they've learned,according to Starlight research. Studies have shown that returnon investment is as high as 400 percent.Right now, OEMs must maintain at least two video-server strategies one for the corporate market and another for the consumermarket, says Dan Abouav, managing director of Hewlett-Packard'sInteractive Media Solutions Division, based in Cupertino, Calif."The requirements are different," he explains. "The numberof streams you have flowing from the server to the client isdifferent. But that will change over the next three to fiveyears. I believe that you're going to see solutions rangingfrom the PC all the way up to tens of thousands of streams,all basically using similar architectures."In an alliance announced at Comdex/Fall for providing networkedvideo solutions on everything from PCs to Unix workstations,HP and Starlight will sell preconfigured boxes through theirdirect and indirect channels for corporate enterprise applications.A new version of Starlight's NetWare-compatible video engine,StarWare, will be bundled with HP's servers, delivering MPEG1 video at 1.5 Mbits/s to as many as 100 simultaneous usersthat is, if the server is wholly dedicated to managing multimedia.The previous version could support only 10 concurrent users.An HP NetServer preconfigured with StarWare, supporting 50concurrent users and storing 20 hours of MPEG-1 video, willcost about $28,000.For its part, IBM is targeting training applications in thecorporate enterprise market by porting StarWorks, Starlight'sUnix solution, to its AIX platform for the RISC System/6000server. StarWorks for AIX works in conjunction with IBM's UltimediaServices client software, says John Unthank, program managerfor AIX multimedia marketing in the RS/6000 Division, basedin Austin, Texas.As for Sun, that company's Interactive Services Group, basedin Mountain View, announced a training-on-demand bundle lastOctober: a Sparcserver 20 preloaded with StarWorks for Sun'sSolaris operating system, along with MPEG-based video coursewarefrom vendors such as J3 Learning Corp., based in Minneapolis,and ITC, based in Herndon, Va.In a separate effort, Sun is also developing proprietary solutions,such as the MediaCenter server, which incorporates home-brewedsoftware and some hardware tweaks. Based on standard Sun hardware,the product is optimized for high-performance I/O and comeswith proprietary software that enables video to be treatedas a common data type in networks. The server runs only onFast Ethernet and Asynchronous Transfer Mode networks."We are trying to take Sun's basic hardware platform, add thesoftware expertise and a little bit of hardware in some cases,and turn it into a video server," says Beverly Ulbrich, directorof marketing and business development at the group. Ulbrichbelieves that MediaCenter technology will ultimately go intoboth consumer TV and corporate LAN markets. Sun received designguidance from its partners in the TV market, she adds, includingThomson Multimedia SA, the Paris-based company that is workingwith Sun on a digital interactive TV system using the OpenTVoperating environment.Sun is also working with Siemens Stromberg-Carlson, based inBoca Raton, Fla., and Scientific-Atlanta Inc., based in Georgia,to deliver turnkey broadband interactive networks. Sun willprovide networking expertise and video servers for the alliance'sInteractive Multimedia Xpress architecture, while system integratorSiemens contributes ATM technology and telecommunications systems,and Scientific-Atlanta provides set-top boxes, cable systemsand processing equipment."The exact same products will go into those spaces [consumerand corporate enterprise]," says Ulbrich, "although there maybe additional peripherals or software that we put togetherto complete a solution for a specific application area." Shenotes that the consumer and corporate products will be soldthrough different channels.Starlight dominates the market for video on corporate LANs today,but it may not be able to hold that position for long. Thirdparty bundling strategies will undoubtedly conflict with newsolutions that emerge from Starlight's big OEM partners. Inaddition, new, lower-cost video servers will arrive from lesserknown companies, such as the Network Connection, manufacturerof a server called Cheetah with integrated hardware and software;and Sea Change, which has carved out a 60 percent share ofthe server market for commercial-advertisement insertion inconsumer video-on-demand.Founded two years ago by Delaney and other former managers fromDigital Equipment Corp.'s Cable Television Unit, Sea Changeoffers a low-cost server platform that could be easily adaptedto corporate or other markets, says Meta Group analyst Lehmann.As for the Network Connection, the Alpharetta, Ga.-based companyalready does 25 percent of its business in the corporate trainingmarket.But the real threat may come from video-server software beingdeveloped by software powerhouses such as Microsoft Corp. andOracle Corp. "Those are the folks that could cause us troubledown the road," Starlight's Long admits.Not all server OEMs are enthusiastic about the corporate trackor training-on-demand. Some "just want to have video softwarein their bag of tricks," says Long. But as the corporate markettakes on ever more importance, any OEM that plays the servergame will have to sit up and take notice.Tam Harbert is a freelance writer based in Andover, Mass.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Tech law: Loose Lips Can Sink StandardsBy:Richard H. SternDell Computer Corp.'s recent run-in with the Federal Trade Commissionover the VESA Local Bus has rightly worried some OEMs aboutthe legal risks inherent in the increasingly informal processof developing standards. Until now, companies have felt freeto get together and agree on interfaces and protocols for newtechnologies without worrying about patent and antitrust issues.They assumed they shared an understanding that no group memberwould take advantage of the others by later enforcing patentrights over some key aspect of the spec. They also assumednothing they were doing would violate antitrust or trade-regulationlaws. The Dell case may have shattered those assumptions. Dell'srepresentative to the Video Electronics Standards Association,which promulgated VL-Bus, assured the group the Austin, Texasbased company had no patents on the technology he urged itto incorporate. But Dell did have patents. And when it demandedthat other PC makers license them or face litigation, the FTCstepped in.Ultimately, the commission took the side of free informationexchange, requiring Dell to open up its VL-Bus patents to allcomers. On the heels of this debacle, VESA is trying to buttressitself against a similar occurrence by having members signa conflict-of-interest statement. This agreement, which wasbeing revised at press time, states that all information exchangedat VESA meetings is confidential, and that no participant shallmake intellectual-property claims on the basis of it. In thisVESA is emulating the good example of larger, formal standardsgroups, such as the American National Standards Institute andIEEE.Many people in the computer industry consider formal groups,with their burdensome bureaucracy and time-consuming legalrequirements, too slow to keep pace with today's markets. Butthe Dell action showcases the legal risk developers run whenthey exchange information outside the protection of a formalstandards body. Three members of an informal, ad hoc groupmay take the resulting proposal to a formal standards group,while a fourth stabs the other three in the back by takingit to his patent lawyer.Of the three remedies to this problem, only one is practical.OEMs could draft broad technology cross-licensing agreementswith any companies they hold informal discussions with; butmany firms would be unwilling to sign. Equally unlikely, companiescould supply their engineers with blank intellectual-propertyagreements, to whip out for a signature should they find themselvesin the midst of a standards discussion.But there's a more realistic solution available. And it's asimple one. OEMs should be extremely selective about the peoplethey discuss emerging standards with, remembering that in manycases, the best advice is to zip your lips. If a serious standardizationeffort is posed, a written agreement on intellectual-propertyrights is an essential first step.Richard H. Stern practices patent and antitrust law at the Washington,D.C., firm of Ablondi, Foster, Sobin & Davidow. He may be reachedby fax at (202) 296-3922.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. The big picture: Jigsaw-puzzle integrationBy:Ray AldermanToday, computer companies must define themselves as either component suppliers or component in-tegrators, and many of theold in-dustry leaders are trying to be both, pushing them intoan identity crisis. The largest computer makers on the planethit the wall in the early 1990s and are in the process of reengineering themselves. For many years, Apple, Digital, IBMand others designed, manufactured and integrated all the componentsof a computer system in a seamless, vertically integrated model.The advent of standards-based hardware, software and communicationsdestroyed this model in the mid-1980s, and these companieshaven't fully adapted to the new market realities yet.What really happened was that Microsoft and Intel establishedthemselves as the component suppliers to the computer world,in spite of what Apple, Digital, IBM and other industry stalwartstried to do; and OEM manufacturers such as Dell, Gateway, PackardBell and others defined themselves as component integrators,who could stitch hardware, software and communications componentsinto cost-effective products faster than the old school couldexecute their vertically integrated product strategy. Consequently,the old market leaders were "disintermediated," or bypassed,in the value-added chain.It's taken five years, but the old computer companies are learninghow to be component integrators, too, in order to compete bythe new market rules. But the rules have changed in the meantime,with Intel redefining the role of the hardware-component providerby selling motherboards to OEMs, rather than just chips.The inherent problem with being a component integrator is differentiation Almost anyone can integrate standardized components into afinished product. When the components are virtually the same,the only differentiator is price. And since price is a functionof cost and cost is a function of volume, the ultimate differentiatorfor a large component integrator is volume. For the smallercomponent integrator, survival resides in specialization andsmall niches.But another change is on the horizon. It revolves around theconvergence of the television, telecommunications, teleconferencingand entertainment markets. Will the delivery platform for theseservices be the traditional computer or some new consumer product?Intel's native-signal-processing initiative is its first defensiveact to keep the PC platform as the delivery mechanism for allthese new entertainment and communications services.When component technologies are readily available, the onlydecision the integrator needs to make about next-generationcomputers is how they're packaged. Will it look more like aPC or component-based stereo equipment?Ray Alderman is executive director of the VMEbus InternationalTrade Association. He can be reached at exec@vita.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. The PRET-A-PORTER PC -- (Ready-to-Wear Computing)By:Jacqueline HenryA monitor that sits in a pair of glasses. A keyboard you wearon your arm like a bracelet or a watch. A computer that clipsto your belt of slips inside your shoe. The vision of the farfuture of personal computing steps outside today's gray boxesto a brave new world where "personal" is personal indeed. Inthis vision, computers become an extension of self, worn onthe body just like eyeglasses, jewelry and shoes--the readyto-wear PC. Calvin Klein and Ralph Lauren may not be showingon yet, but Reebok is taking the idea seriously. The sneakercompany is sponsoring some of the research in wearable computingat the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where a teamfrom MIT's Media Lab has cobbled together a prototype thatconjures up images of Maxwell Smart's oxford-shoe phone fromTV's "Get Smart," updated for the more casually clad '90s."The concept of power sneakers in intriguing," team memberThomas Zimmerman wrote in his MIT master's thesis, PersonalArea Networks: Near-Field IntraBody Communication. "Shoes aresomething that we always carry with us. For convenience, eachpair of our shoes could have their own [computer] insert."In a high-tech twist on family values, Zimmerman suggests that"at night when they are put in the closet, perhaps with ourspouse's and children's shoes, they could update each otheron the day's activities."Though the power sneaker may sound farfetched, the wearablecomputer has, in fact, been around for a while serving specializedniches, such as the military and certain industrial sectors.Though far from becoming a mass-market item-it's still toobulky, expensive and power hungry-the pr t- -porter PC is makingstrides toward the mainstream, thanks to advances in displays,voice-recognition software and other enabling technologies.Pioneering developers are weaving the fabric out of which tomorrow'sconsumer wearables will be stitched, even as academics in placessuch as the University of Oregon, Carnegie Mellon Universityand MIT delve into ways to use the devices, once here, to theirfullest potential."I think that each of us will carry an information appliance,as we [now] carry a pager or a cellular phone," says Zary Segall,head of the computer-science department at the University ofOregon. "We will be able to access information anyplace, anytime."The MIT prototype is a step in that direction. It packs a CPUand a pair of smart, battery-powered transceivers into an aluminumcase, measuring 3.76 x 4.8 x 1.48 inches, that slides intoa shoe like a Dr. Scholl's insole. It's far more than justMips and slippers, though: The system uses the human foot asboth a power source and a communications gateway."When you walk, you have all this power," explains Thad Starner,a graduate student and researcher at the Media Lab, referringto both body heat and movement as potential sources of energy."We're trying to recover some of that and use it to power yourcomputer." Starner estimates that of the 57-odd watts of energya person generates by simply walking, "we think we can recoverbetween 5 and 17 watts."The Media Lab crew has demonstrated its prototype operatingas a node in a "personal-area network," which uses the humanbody as the medium for computer-to-computer communications.In such a linkup, two suitably soled human beings could, forexample, exchange electronic business cards merely by shakinghands."When a woman and man [wearing these computers] are in closeproximity, particularly when they shake hands, an electriccircuit is completed, allowing a picoamp signal to pass fromthe transmitter through her body to his body to the receiver,and back through the earth ground," says MIT's Zimmerman. Oncethe circuit is established, the transceiver in the woman'sshoe would send a string of ASCII characters to the receiverin the man's shoe; his data likewise would take the footwayback to her."Wearable computers are going to change everything," Starnerproclaims. Baseball and football fans might wear one to a biggame or Super Bowl party, he suggests, calling up players'stats and settling barroom bets on the spot. Reporters coveringa trial might load their wearables with pattern-recognitionsoftware that helps them place names with faces, and then callup biographical data on a subject before they go in for aninterview."We could eventually get to the point where you've got a cigarettesized PC," says Scott Clark, business-development manager formobile information systems at Rockwell International Corp.'sCollins Avionics & Communications Division, based in CedarRapids, Iowa. "It will be inexpensive. It will be wireless.And people will literally wear it around the house."For this vision of the ubiquitous wearable PC to become a reality,the computer must become more "human-literate," says Segallof the University of Oregon. That means it must understandnot only speech, but gestures and eye movement and, on a moreadvanced level, even "sense" what the user needs. For instance,the wearable information appliance an airline maintenance workeruses might automatically bring up a schematic of the specific747 that has just landed and is taxiing down the runway."The challenge is how to come as close as possible to the understandingof human behavior and how this translates into the commandsof an information appliance," Segall says. Then you find ameans of transmitting this data "in a way that enhances theproductivity of whatever the user is doing."Neil Gershenfeld, an associate professor at MIT's Media Lab,pushes the idea a quantum leap further. Ten years from now,we will all be wearing computers, Gershenfeld said at an anniversarybash for the lab last October. Twenty years from now, we willimplant the computing devices we want into our bodies. And30 years from now, we will use genetic engineering to growthe devices we desire. From this angle, "Intel Inside" takeson a whole new meaning.Shoe phones and implants aside, just what is a wearable PC?Today it's most likely to be a belt-mounted computer poweredby a battery with a life of about four hours, along with aheads-up display integrated into a headband, helmet, gogglesor eyeglasses, plus some type of input device-an arm-mountedkeyboard, for example, or a head-mounted microphone for voiceinput. The addition of voice control is a must in some markets,where users need hands-free operation to do their jobs effectively.In terms of features, wearables have "everything that's in yourdesktop PC," says Clark of Rockwell, which makes a versioncalled Trekker. "Today, it's a 486DX [CPU]; tomorrow, it willbe a Pentium. We're taking your desktop and shrinking it down."Currently, companies such as Rockwell and Computer Products& Services Inc. (CPSI), based in Fairfax, Va., are mining verticalniches, producing wearable PCs for maintenance workers, firefighters,overnight-delivery companies and other road warriors. Thismarket is expanding fast. For example, Symbol TechnologiesInc. sold around 5,000 of its first-generation Gladiator systems,developed in 1992 for warehouse workers fulfilling orders fora large pharmaceutical distributor. The Bohemia, N.Y.-basedcompany has just landed an order valued at $15 million fromUnited Parcel Service for "well into five digits" of its secondgeneration Gladiator II."We expect there will be a sizable market for wearable computersin vertical industries, and by sizable we mean tens of thousandsof units a year," says marketing director Barry Issberner.Today's wearables don't come cheap, and manufacturers are preoccupiedwith driving down the price tag without stinting on features.Rockwell's Trekker, for example, is priced at $13,000. It boastsa tiny LCD screen-about 0.7 inch on the diagonal-coupled withan optical system that makes the displayed image seem as thoughit is on a 14-inch monitor positioned 18 inches from the viewer'seyes. "That lens system was a major milestone," Clark says.Without it, "people would get vertigo."A high-end unit from CPSI-a Unix machine that weighs less thanthree pounds and totes a 1-Gbyte hard drive and video accelerationcosts about the same. "People are not willing to pay an absolutearm and a leg for these things," Clark says. "We continue todrive prices down even though customers continue to demandmore in the unit. We're decreasing power, decreasing size,decreasing weight and increasing performance."Startup Phoenix Group, based in Plainview, N.Y., recently boweda computer not much bigger than a cigarette pack-3 x 6 x 1.3inches-for just under $4,000. Designed to be worn in a shirtpocket, the 12-ounce Hummingbird packs a 25-MHz 486SLC microprocessor,170-Mbyte hard drive, 2 Mbytes of DRAM and voice recognition.An arm-mounted keyboard is an optional accessory."We're working on an Air Force R&D contract to put the entirecomputer in a headband," says Phoenix president Richard Pandolfi."We're using chip-on-board technology to reduce the size andweight. It's the same technology used in many of our missilesystems."Like many of the makers of wearable PCs, Phoenix initially targetedmilitary applications but is now seeking new niches in an ageof defense cutbacks. Rockwell's Space System Division, basedin Downey, Calif., is adapting the computer-simulation andsensing technologies it developed for U.S. defense systemsinto wearable gear for the public-safety sector, hoping toequip police and firefighters with the latest in computingfashions. The same predictive tools and computer-modeling programsused to simulate a missile launch can track a moving fire frontand simulate how it will change in relation to wind, terrainand time, the company says."We envision that every emergency person-whether [facing] fire,flood or hurricane-will have such a computer on them to givethem access to higher levels of support and connect them withall of the resources and predictive tools that we have in thespace business," says Chuck Daniher, program director for conversionprograms at Rockwell.The utility industry is another potential market. Techniciansfrom the Long Island Lighting Co. (Lilco) are testing a systemjointly designed by Phoenix and defense contractor AIL Systems,based in Deer Park, N.Y., for servicing customers' gas burnersand monitoring combustion-control systems at the company'sown power plant.Instead of consulting thick manuals, explains Timothy J. Driscoll,Lilco's director of R&D, the technicians access digital "hypermanuals"on their heads-up displays, including diagrams and blueprints.If they need a part, they can request it via a link to Lilco'shost system. Instead of scribbling data on a clipboard andtyping it into a computer back at the office, they can recordtheir notes by voice and download them while still in the field.Besides size and power consumption, manufacturers have had toovercome other technical hurdles to get wearables to wherethey are today. The first challenge was reliable, rugged CPUs."This unit is bouncing on someone's hip while they're walking,"says Clark of Rockwell's Trekker program. "The hard drive inany desktop or laptop is not meant to be bumped around." Thatproblem was solved by using ruggedized casing and componentpackaging technology developed for the military.Voice recognition was also a challenge. "People don't realizehow far we've come with voice interfaces," says Edward Newman,president of CPSI, which has been licensing voice-recognitionsoftware from a third party but is developing its own technology."[These days] you train the system; you don't have to trainthe user. The system adapts to the user. It's a combinationof independent speech with on-the-fly training."Which is not to say voice systems are fully mature. "I stillthink the speech technology has a way to go," says Segall atthe University of Oregon. "We need continuous-speech recognitionsystems with a very high degree of accuracy and with a largevocabulary." Displays need work too, says Segall, predictingan evolution from direct-view screens to displays that projectinformation right onto the retina. "We need a type of displaytechnology which is amenable to humans," he says. "It's stilla ways out."On another front, vendors are enthusiastic about wireless technology,with Clark of Rockwell predicting that the headsets connectingto belt-mounted units will soon be untethered. "The first stepis wireless from headset to CPU. The next stage-which is actuallyavailable now-is a unit where you can pipe right into an existinglocal-area network." Trekker, he notes, can handle wirelessLAN cards; "in the future, I see this expanding into wide-areanetworks as well."Tim O'Neal has embedded infrared links into the latest versionof the belt-worn printer his company-O'Neal Product DevelopmentInc., based in Irvine, Calif.-develops for mobile workers.O'Neal says the InfraRed Data Association is just beginningto promote IR for wearables after initially focusing on highervolume targets, such as notebook computers. Though O'Neal hasonly sold 10,000 wired printers to customers, such as Hertz,in two and a half years in the market, he says business isheating up for the wireless versions.InterVision, based in Raleigh, N.C., is also exploring IR technology."We're working on a new version [of its wearable PC] that willincorporate an infrared camera on the other side of the helmet,"says president and founder Dan Glaser. "It doesn't block peripheralor forward vision, so you can see where you're going whileat the same time displaying infrared images." These can guidean emergency worker through smoke or at night. "We're alsoincorporating a radio link so all images can be piped backto a first-response team," says Glaser, who foresees many applications,from bomb disposal to tele-medicine.With vertical markets expanding nicely, developers can't befaulted for looking longingly at the consumer side. But noone expects to see a power sneaker of the MIT variety soon."I don't think anyone will be interested in wearable systemsfor anything but industrial markets for some time," says SymbolTechnologies' Issberner. "PDA players like Apple and HewlettPackard are still trying to determine users' needs; they arenot even worried about making their products wearable yet."Still, as some wearables, such as Phoenix's PDA-like Hummingbird,press into the market from above, so do developers in the corporateand consumer mainstream push from below. For instance, Motorolahas deemed its new palm-sized, 3.1-ounce Startac as a "wearablecellular phone." In October 1994, Timex Corp. launched a kindof wearable computer of its own-the Datalink watch, a DickTracy-style gizmo touted as "a personal organizer on your wrist"that can download information from a computer via a proprietaryprotocol. The device got a big boost last August, when MicrosoftCorp. launched a version of its Scheduler Plus applicationthat bundled the Datalink protocol software.Jan Mladek, who manages the Datalink group, says Timex had soldabout 100,000 of the watches as of August 1995. At $100 plus,"it's quite a successful product for a new concept at thatprice point," he says. However, Mladek acknowledges that thereare limits to what can be done in the form factor of a wristwatch;the current product has the equivalent of just 1 kbyte of memory.A 1-kbyte Timex at one end, a 1-Gbyte wearable Unix machineat the other. And way out in the distance, perhaps, a strangenew horizon where biology and electronics begin to merge. Somewherein the midst of all this, observers say, lies an industry waitingto be born.The only thing to come between you and your Calvins? Someday,perhaps, a computer.Jacqueline Henry, a freelance writer based in Holbrook, N.Y.,is on MCI Mail at 693-3096.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Weight watchers for wearablesBy:Jacqueline HenryDieting is as much of an obsession for the wearable computeras it is for your average supermodel. Symbol Technologies hasbeen slimming down for years. "Our first products [20 yearsago] used what were, in effect, car batteries on carts hookedup to adding machines that people used in grocery stores,"says marketing director Barry Issberner. "Over time, we turnedthat into something you could hold in your hand."In 1992 came the Gladiator, so called because its hand-, arm and belt-mounted components made users-warehouse employeesfor a big pharmaceutical concern-look like electronic warriors.Essentially a bar-code scanner with a 28-ounce computer, thesystem "was fairly elaborate to wear, with three separate piecesof equipment linked by six to 12 feet of cabling," says productmanager Robert Hurt.In January, Symbol was expected to launch Gladiator II, a singlebox, 9-ounce computer, powered, like its predecessor, by anNEC V25 chip and priced at $2,200 and up. Replacing the bulkyhand scanner for bar-code inputting is a finger-mounted unitthat Symbol employees refer to as a "Liz Taylor ring."InterVision has seen a similar evolution in its wearables. Nowon its sixth product generation, the company's first devicewas a belt-mounted computer based on an Intel 286 processor,with little internal memory, no expansion capabilities, a miniature101-key keyboard that had to be held and a battery life ofonly 30 minutes. The PC came in two boxes, each measuring 5x 7 x 2 inches; a third box was added for voice activation.Today's model, by contrast, weighs less than two pounds. Itcomes in a single box, complete with voice activation, lotsof expansion capabilities and a 640 x 480 VGA flat-panel screen.Weighing in at under 4 ounces, the display can be hooked toa headband, hard hat or firefighter's helmet, enabling thewearer to, say, bring up the plans of a burning building whilewalking through it, determining where the exits are and whetherdangerous materials are present."Most people think about products in terms of pounds," saysIssberner. "We think in terms of half ounces."Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. A wearable skids off the runwayBy:Rick Boyd-MerrittAbout four years ago, in a bid to raise its profile, a now-defunctpioneer of portables launched what might have been the firstready-to-wear computer. It was the brainchild of marketer KenDulaney, looking for a compelling spin for Grid Computer'snew GridPad handheld PC."We couldn't make our computers any more rugged, so we cameup with the idea of putting a strap on them," says Dulaney,now a research analyst at the Gartner Group Inc., based inStamford, Conn. "Then we designed a whole line of peripheralsradios and printers and so on-you could hook on a belt."To promote this strap hanger, "we staged a press conferenceat the Hotel Macklowe near the New York City garment district,"Dulaney recalls. "We hired this gorgeous model who came walkingdown the runway with this cape on. When she swung the capeaside, there was this big, brown, three-pound computer on herarm."This early experiment fizzled, the wearable GridPad floppedand the company was ultimately acquired by PC maker AST Research,based in Irvine, Calif. Many Grid designers fled to developersof vertical-market systems, such as Norand, Symbol and Telxon.And those who recall that first wearable seem a little embarrassedby it."It was all just hype to get some press," says Jeff Hawkins,a former Grid designer. And when counseling clients for Gartner,Dulaney tells them that wearables are solely for vertical markets."Other than pagers and cellphones, people don't want a lotof bulk," he says.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. The Interview: Carl YankowskiAs president and chief operating officer of Sony ElectronicsInc., Carl J. Yankowski is, in effect, the head of Sony's diversehardware businesses in the United States that generate some$8 billion in annual revenues. An MIT graduate with degreesin both business and electrical engineering, Yankowski is himselfa product of convergence. He has worked at companies as diverseas General Electric, Memorex, Polaroid, Pepsi and Procter &Gamble, and bubbles with ideas about how to drive Sony intothe heart of new, cross-industry markets. We spoke with Yankowskilate last year in his booth off the bustling show floor atComdex/Fall, where Sony tipped its long-anticipated plans tobecome a player in personal computers. The Park Ridge, N.J.based company demonstrated prototypes of workstation-classmachines that use high-speed serial interfaces (1394) to tietogether a suite of digital audio and video services and devices,thus playing PCs to Sony's home-court advantage.How do you define the consumer PC?A consumer PC would be something you would want to have in yourliving room or family room. It would be an appliance that wouldbe inviting and fun to use. Hopefully, it would have one switchto turn off the CPU and monitor simultaneously, which is somethingwe don't seem to be able to accomplish in the industrial designof what's out there in the market today.It's part of your stereo rack?Exactly. The content and the hardware would be somehow bundledtogether in a way that would make you feel this isn't justa box that lets you do other things-this is a box that createsnew things for you to do in its own right. It's a link betweenall the audio/video components and communications occurringtoday in the home. It's kind of like a melting pot.What are Sony's plans for getting into PCs?The reason we want to get into the PC business is to learn howto leverage our audio/video strengths into a PC line, whichwill gradually cascade over a whole landscape of appliancesand products. So it's not [so much] that we are entering thePC business as that we want to develop the landscape of wherecommunications, computer and audio/video equipment go. It'sa broader point of view than most of the people in this industryare taking.How does Intel fit into this vision?We think Intel has a lot of interesting technology, not justin their chips but in their Architecture Labs and their systemsskills. When you combine that with our strong A/V experience,it just makes sense for us to be in business together.Our relationship right now is simply a memorandum of understandingthat says we are going to develop exciting new products usingour technologies and their technologies, to be sold and marketedby Sony under the Sony brand name and marketing channels. Anythingmore specific than that we have yet to work out.What will the Sony PC look like?Exactly what we are working on is proprietary now. But you cansay that we want the Sony PC to have a unique look and feel.We want it to be fun. We want it to have a positive impacton changing people's lives, just the way the Walkman had apositive impact. We're planning to launch the first productsin the fall [of 1996]We think we are expert in combining different technologies fromdifferent disciplines. The Walkman was not an invention, itwas a combination of products already on the shelf. We madeour existing headphone technology stereo, married it to ourbusiness-dictation technology and got the Walkman.What do you think about the so-called $500 PC?I take issue with this fragmentation theory that is being spreadaround that says the computer industry is going toward largeor small PCs or networked PCs or personal digital assistants.There will be a whole landscape of products.John Sculley said PDAs will predominate. Some people at Qualcommsay that smart phones will predominate. People at Mtel willtell you that ultimately two-way paging is going to be thething. I think it is wrong to say that PCs, or this littlesurfer box, or the set-top box will predominate. I think itwill be a landscape of all these products living together.I think there will be a market for $500 PCs, but I don't thinkit will blow away other markets. It's [similar to how some]people said PCs would eliminate paper, but paper usage actuallywent up. It's too narrow and non-visionary to say some particulardevice is going to be the savior across a broad category ofconsumer applications. It never works out that way.How will TV and PC products merge?I think TV/PC products will go two ways for us. One, we willlook at interactive TV [as a means] to get to the Internet.We are looking at set-top boxes in an arrangement with Microsoft.And we think the 1394 [serial interface] will let us take digitalsignals from direct-broadcast satellites [DBS] and bring themto a computer, add value to them and pump them out to a wholevariety of devices [for video editing or storage]It's not just the video side, but also the audio side. Our 100CD audio changer is a good-news/bad-news machine. It's sellinggreat. You can put 100 audio CDs in one box and access anytitle or song, but you have to sit down and program everythingin manually. It takes forever. So why not scan in the numberof tracks and their length and sequence when you load the CD?Then [you can] automatically match that with a database lookuptable you downloaded from Compuserve or AOL, and you have allthe information about the content, the author, title, date,background video clips-whatever you want.You can do that in a nanosecond on the PC. So the PC becomesa lubricant to make the A/V easier. You can also think aboutthe number of remote controls you have in your home today tocontrol components in an A/V system. You can simplify thata lot by a digital line to the PC.What effect will this vision have on Sony's structure?We see a tremendous synergy here, and basically what we aregoing to do is decompartmentalize Sony. Traditionally, becauseof our strengths and roots, we were an A/V company, and No.1 in A/V. We plan to remain so. But when you look at A/V, computersand communications, the rich area is these crossovers, theseintersecting circles. This is a territory no one has put astake in. It is a high-margin, high-value-added, high-societyimpact area. That's where we'll add value.Is this philosophy borne out in how you are organizing yourPC design teams?We are having the PCs designed by the one industrial designcenter inside Sony.What about the electronic design?Right now in Japan, we are integrating [people from] the A/Vgroups as well as the business information-systems group, whichhas the most experience [inside Sony] in computers. We arehand-picking the best people and putting them together to makethese PCs happen. We'll do some of the work in Japan and somein the United States.Are you really "decompartmentalizing Sony," or creating a newcompartment for PC products?Both. You want to get people from different divisions to worktogether. You want to have a focus within a division, and youwant to have [separate] A/V and communications and computerdivisions. But the richest [market] area is the crossover.A month ago, I formed a telecom [group]. In that group I putour wireless-telecom group, which is partners with Qualcommon CDMA [code-division multiple access]. With Qualcomm, wecomanufacture-and are finalizing a joint agreement on marketingterminal sets to major systems suppliers. Our MagicLink [PDA]division and home portable-phone groups were also put in thatsector. And we are moving engineers to the United States, becausethe digital base of the home systems are overlapping even withina sector. That's decompartmentalizing.Then, in the beginning of [1996], I'm starting up a new businessdevelopment group [to oversee the] product-planning and priorityprocess, so we can develop crossover opportunities independentof any given business group by assigning resources of differentgroups to look at these opportunities. That's new for us. Thatwill also help us generate a whole new breed of innovativegeneral managers and engineers, because they are going to beexposed to so many more tools for developing products.I also want to create a new model for hardware/software systems,and I'd like to do that in the PC business, too. I'd like tocreate a model where the hardware guys get some percentageof the downstream revenues of the system. This [should be]a razors-and-blades model, [but] the equation is out of balanceright now.Hasn't there, in fact, been debate within Sony as to whetherit's a hardware or software company?Yes, and the answer is yes and yes. I don't think of myselfas running the hardware part of Sony.But you do.I do, but I don't think of myself that way.How do you think of yourself?I think of myself as coming at systems software and servicesfrom a hardware angle and leveraging that. The old Sony isbasically a big A/V unit, a little computer unit extrapolatedbasically from Trinitron [display] technology and a littlecomms, mostly by partnership from the outside. Then we hadpictures, music and electronic-publishing centers. The interactivityof these groups was not so great historically. Old Sony.The new Sony is an A/V unit [plus] much expanded computer andcommunications units. And I want to strike a tent peg in thecrossover areas. Our camcorders, for example, should have aninfrared link to our TV sets. Why not bypass the VCR?What about software?We have to have people in Sony Electronics who write software,whether it's firmware device drivers or integration software.Over the last two years, we've invested $7 million in our broadcastdivision for programming capabilities. That's how we [built]the Hughes DBS uplink station. It was a $50 million project,and $20 million of it was code.Also, we created a whole new concept when we took the hardwareside of A/V and the software side of content and made a Playstation[videogame] division. It's not just content or A/V. I feelownership for it, and I'm supporting it with logistics anddistribution. Ultimately, it helps Sony [generate] profit.That improves the overall ability for me to invest in new systemsconcepts as well.A third issue is distribution. We have to be savvy about differentforms of distribution into the home, such as DBS. We need partnershipswith telephony providers for [delivering] new features intoand out of the home.Sony is one of several DBS licensees. With the growing competition,will this still be a significant business for you?Yes, we will sell several hundred thousand pieces this year.As an industry, we risk making it too [much of a] commoditytoo fast. It's my hope we can work with DirecTv to open up[new service offerings]. For example, Sony has a gaming stationthat we'd love to see on DirecTv because we could develop tieins on the hardware side. That's the kind of differentiationwe need, or else you have a bunch of people competing on acommodity basis, and that's not good for the industry.What impact will digital TV have on your plans?As video becomes digital, we can manipulate the data and addvalue to it in terms of new appliances and applications. Ithink the Federal Communications Commission should mandatea date by which the industry should have decoders availablein TV sets for a whole range of digital-broadcast schemes.By that date, if the TV sets are ready, we should see applicationsdevelop.Is that likely to happen?I don't think it's a likely scenario, but it would be neat ifit would happen. I think everyone would hope we can get therevoluntarily. I think [digital TV services] will start to beturned on around the turn of the century.What's on Sony's agenda in terms of standards for digital TV?Our initial point of view is that we would like to see thosestandards generated voluntarily. But right now, we are hopingwe can get some guidance from the FCC in terms of dates bywhich to get those standards done. I think there's nothinglike the pressure of time and a commitment to force peopleto work together. Before commenting on which standard is betterthan others, I think we should just have a drop-dead date bywhich the industry should say, "OK, all the technology is outthere, we know we can do it, the government says we have tobe ready by this date, so let's get going."If you were FCC chairman Reed Hundt, what date would you set?1998, January 1. I think something like that is doable.Are you going to lobby the FCC to set such a date?This is something we are going to bounce off the ElectronicIndustries Association.In hopes they take that position to the FCC?Right.What will bring back the PDA?I don't think of it as a hardware business. I look at it asapplying a small, portable communications device to mostlydiagonal and vertical markets. I think we were a bit overzealousinitially as a team in saying that simply e-mail would sweepinglychange our lives. So we are still investing in this business.And now we have a second generation of the [MagicLink] hardware.Your PDA was designed as a horizontal consumer device. If you'regoing to reposition it as a vertical-market device, would itmake sense to get out of your relationship with PDA softwaredeveloper General Magic Inc.?That's always a possibility. But I think the Magic Cap OS stillhas some unique advantages. We've found that people in somevertical applications like the simplicity of the operatingsystem. For example, Visa is very interested in an electronicwallet, and you want to have something easy to use. Or youmight want to have an application for betting on the statelottery.I do wish, frankly, that Telescript [General Magic's smart networkingsoftware] was further developed in terms of its applicationcapability. I think it's in competition with [Sun Microsystems']Java for that distinction. I was just talking to the guys atNetscape today, and they said they wished there were more Telescriptapplications.We've radically improved our PDA hardware, and we are stilllearning about the systems solution. We aren't investing thatmuch money [in General Magic], and the money we are investingis valuable to me because the learning will apply to the PCworld, the A/V world, the telephone world. It's a generic investmentin a core competency for Sony. Ultimately, I think it willblend nicely with our smart phones, too.Where do you see the main wireless opportunities?In the United States, we feel CDMA, and PCS extensions of CDMA,are the major opportunities. But we also do business with McCawin TDMA [time-division multiple access]. Ultimately, therewill be a shakeout of some sort. But our strategy right nowis to keep a foot in each product and see where the marketgoes. And we also have a partnership with Mtel to sell anddistribute their pagers.I've been expecting to see Sony devices that would work withits two-way paging network.They're coming. That's part of the vision.Is there a danger the smart phone or pager will be the PDA ofthe telecom world?We'll have to find that out. In any event, people will needa terminal, and we are going to be experts in building good,compact terminal sets.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. PCs step into 3D -- The journey into the world of three-dimensionalcomputing will be a difficult one for PC makers, accordingto the publisher of the PC Graphics ReportBy:Jon PeddiePC designers preparing to take the plunge into three-dimensionalgraphics would be well advised to stick to the shallow endof the pool. The 3-D waters are treacherous for the uninitiated.Developers can't even agree on exactly what features make up3-D, nor come to any kind of consensus on 3-D architecture.Moreover, the designation is not monolithic: Applications thatuse 3-D vary greatly as to what sort of hardware accelerationgives them the best boost for the buck. And yet, virtuallyevery vendor of 2-D graphics silicon and software, as wellas several untested startup chip companies, seem to be stampedinginto the 3-D arena. It's a sudden rush, not a careful and thoughtfulmigration-never mind that the underlying graphics chips behindmany of these products have only recently been enhanced withvideo capabilities. Three-dimensional technology is not reallynew; 3-D has, in fact, been available in the PC market fornearly a decade, with two companies leading the pack: ArtistGraphics, the St. Paul, Minn. based pioneer in graphics boardsfor computer-aided design; and Matrox Graphics Inc., the Dorval,Quebec, developer that was first to market with a consumerlevel 3-D product. Until fairly recently, however, not muchsoftware could take advantage of 3-D. With prices for 3-D boardsstarting at around $5,000, sales have typically been in thetens of thousands of units, and few software developers couldjustify the investment required to support such niche deviceswith their applications. The market was left to a handful ofcompanies which implemented their 3-D rendering completelyin software, often targeting scientific, engineering or otherniche markets and running on workstations.Then, in the early 1990s, computer games grew more graphicallysophisticated, fueling a need for 3-D technology on the desktop.The rise of a graphics-intensive game market spurred developersto bring out several 3-D application programming interfaces(APIs) for the PC. With the door open, traditional 3-D appssuch as scientific visualization, CAD, modeling and renderinghopped on the PC 3-D bandwagon.The growing momentum is bringing new applications to the fore,including 3-D viewers and editors for the World Wide Web. Lowcost 3-D goggles are emerging for use with computer games.And even virtual reality is beginning to sound less like avirtual fantasy.The pressure is forcing PC makers to pick a 3-D solution todayfor systems they will offer next Christmas. These will needto evolve gracefully into 1997, when an industry-standard 3D approach may finally become clear. But while the market driversfor 3-D are locked in fast-forward, the technical details ofexecuting a clean implementation on today's PC architectureare stuck in slo-mo. The first problem is defining what, exactly,3-D is.The feature sets being offered in current and upcoming 3-D chipsare very diverse, and there is considerable controversy amonggames developers, API suppliers, analysts and controller manufacturersas to which should be required and which optional. Indeed,when people bandy about the term "3-D" with respect to hardware,they're often not talking about the same basic features. TheDirect3D API for Windows 95 that Microsoft is expected to shipin April could become a major market accelerator, and definer,of what 3-D is on the PC.The pace of competition among chip makers is another factor.If all the declared and undeclared chip makers enter the marketas forecast, the flood of product offerings could cause today'saverage selling prices to plummet. As volumes rise, startupand fabless chip providers could become non-starters if theydon't have manufacturing capacity lined up. There is no sparefab capacity this year.Generally, the top four features that make a chip 3-D are Zbuffering, color interpolation, texture mapping and renderingof 3-D triangles and polygons. These basic tasks can be furtherenhanced with various texture-mapping options and special renderingfeatures. Of course, some 3-D chips don't even offer all fourof the basics.Z buffering is the baseline. A 2-D graphics frame buffer hasan X dimension and a Y dimension. In a 3-D world, some drawingoccurs in front of and behind the existing 2-D graphics viaa third, or Z, dimension that provides a (roughly) real-timecoordinate comparator for each pixel in the frame buffer. Whena 3-D object is drawn, each new pixel's Z value is comparedagainst the Z value of the previous pixel. If the values vary,the new pixel is written from a Z buffer to the regular graphicsframe buffer.The depth of the frame buffer determines how much 3-D accuracya given rendering will have and how much the Z coordinate mustbe scaled to fit within the Z buffer. Typically, anything lessthan a 16-bit Z buffer will produce unsatisfactory visual results,but anything more is required only by high-end CAD and visualizationsoftware. The Z buffer also needs significant bandwidth toits internal memory if it is to support animation.To create realistic lighting and shading of 3-D objects, colorinterpolation is mandatory. In 2-D drawing, objects are flatshaded, meaning that each object is a single color. Color interpolation,also known as Gouraud shading, goes the next step, allowingfor a separate color at each vertex of an object. This providesfor more realistic lighting and on-the-fly shading of eachpixel.A 3-D hardware accelerator doesn't do much without some kindof 3-D building blocks, or primitives, to accelerate. The simplestprimitives are spans, which are horizontal sequences of 3-Dpixels. Some older 3-D devices only support spans, requiringsoftware packages to break down their polygons into these simpleunits.Beyond spans, the next step up is the triangle, then eitherquads (polygons with four vertices) or tri-strips (trianglestrips). Most up-and-coming 3-D chips offer triangles. An exceptionis the NV1 media-accelerator from startup NVidia Corp. of Sunnyvale,Calif., which supports only quads.After drawing Gouraud-shaded objects, the hardware's next taskis to apply a texture to a polygon. A texture can be a picture,a background or a pattern-basically, anything that can be storeddigitally. Some of the more capable 3-D chips even supporta "texture" that consists of real-time digital video.In a game such as Doom, all the walls, ceilings and floors aretexture mapped. The technique allows for the simulation ofa lot of detail in a scene without requiring lots of polygons.For example, looking down an endless corridor would requireonly four polygons-one for each wall, two more for the ceilingand floor-assuming they all had the proper textures mappedonto them. In the simplest form of texturing mapping, thiscorridor would probably be rendered rather poorly. The illusionof a corridor depends on perspective, but the texture wouldbe mapped orthogonally. That means faraway points-the mostdistant bricks in a brick wall, say-would appear to be thesame size as those nearer the viewer.To combat this problem, many texture mappers attempt some formof texture scaling or reduction, leading to several methodsof making sure textures aren't significantly distorted by themapping process. The most basic is called mip-mapping (fromthe Latin multium in parvo, or "many things in a small place"),a technique that requires several versions of a texture, eacha different scale. The next step up is bilinear mapping, whichuses a blend of the texels (texture-map pixels) of two mipmaps when an match is available. Trilinear texture mappingis more sophisticated, requiring three reads and one writeto load a pixel.As if that weren't enough, some manufacturers add a couple moretexture-mapping features. The first is perspective correction,which visually fixes the brick-wall-corridor mapping problem,and is usually combined with bilinear or trilinear interpolation.Also, some devices provide for "lit" texture mapping, allowingparts of a texture to be brightened or dimmed as it's mapped,based on theoretical light sources that may exist in a scene.Every 3-D chip or software developer wants some kind of marketdifferentiator. Thus, under the umbrella of 3-D graphics comea host of other advanced features, including visual effectssuch as fog and stipple masks, as well as anti-aliasing. Onesemiconductor company, S-MOS Systems, based in San Jose, Calif.,even offers a chip that serves as a geometry processor, meaningit can potentially offload the transformation, display listand lighting calculations that software normally performs ona computer's host processor.Except in some early chips-such as the Glint controller from3Dlabs Inc. of San Jose-these 3-D features aren't all typicallybundled in a single product. The trend is to package them withan accelerated VGA graphics controller or, even better, anaccelerated VGA chip with video-processing features-the socalled video-graphics controller. Here, digital video can combinewith 2-D and 3-D graphics acceleration for maximum visual impact.But some chip vendors, such as NVidia and another startup,Chromatic Research Inc., of Mountain View, aren't content toleave it at that. They also add high-quality sound capabilitiesto their chips.While pretty much all of the chips considered 3-D-capable offerZ buffering, color interpolation and some form of polygon drawing,not all of them offer texture mapping or the texture-mappingextensions that will be required by upcoming 3-D applications.Nor do they all offer backward compatibility to VGA acceleration.However, the convergence of these functions will be found inall of the survivors in this highly competitive market.With some sense of the terrain of features, the next questionis how chip makers implement these functions. Clearly, 3-Don a PC is different from 3-D on a workstation. The main differenceis the division of labor, commonly known as load balancing.On a PC, the CPU typically handles all of the geometry-relatedoperations. The rendering functions-that is, making the pictureslook nice-are typically done by the 3-D controller. But notall 3-D controllers do all the rendering functions; some leavea number of these tasks to the CPU. There are trade-offs involvedin balancing the functional loads between particular CPUs andparticular 3-D chips. A chip that offers excellent video capabilitiesmay not offer the most advanced rendering functions, and viceversa.There are also a variety of ways for a controller to handle3-D processes internally. The classic pipeline approach handlesone function in generating one scene after another. An approachcalled forward rendering can deliver extremely high pixel ratesbecause it does not require some memory-read operations. Yetanother approach, ray casting, enables lighting effects thatclosely model shadows and search lights in the real world.Some chips construct scenes out of triangle primitives, othersuse quadrilaterals and still others rely on tri- or quad-strips.All of these approaches have advantages and drawbacks. Theyall strive for a cost trade-offs in hardware, measured primarilyin memory usage and type of memory needed.No 3-D traveler's baggage is complete without a strategy foradvanced memory technologies. For instance, some 3-D chip designsdo not use a Z buffer, while others claim to need 1 Mbyte.Some use low-cost EDO (extended-data-out) DRAM, while othersuse higher-performance memories, such as Rambus, video RAM,window RAM and so on. The type and amount of memory have amajor impact on the cost of a total 3-D solution.One major implementation issue among 3-D controllers is thelevel of integration: of primary functions such as video control,accelerated VGA, rendering and digital/analog conversion; andancillary functions such as audio and interfaces for graphicsoriented input devices such as joysticks, trackballs and thelike. Here, generally, more is less. Some solutions come inthree, four and, in one case, five chips-not counting memory.Higher integration reduces board space, power draw and assembly,which saves on costs.Beyond feature sets and implementation strategies, designersmust consider their target applications. This isn't as straightforwardas it seems. Even though PC makers building in 3-D in 1996are all doing it for gaming applications, there are severaldistinct classes of games, and their demands on 3-D capabilitiesvary considerably.A fast-paced action game such as Doom does not need the highestquality scene rendering, for example, but it does need fastscreen updates and a high frame rate. On the other hand, interactiverole-playing movies such as Silent Steel don't need any 3-Drendering capabilities at all but do need the highest framerate and excellent video-handling features such as color conversionand scaling. Further, adventure-mystery games such as 7th Guestand Myst don't need either strong 3-D capability or high framerate, but they do need the greatest resolution and color range.Chip designers are aware of this diversity and try to pack asmany of these functions as possible into their controllersto accommodate the full gamut of apps. Meanwhile, developersare innovating a whole new generation of games.The 3-D controllers available today can roughly be grouped intofour categories: high-end, midrange, mainstream and low-end.Examples of super-high-end implementations are the Glint chipfrom 3Dlabs, which kick-started the 3-D processor craze; theRSD/100 chip set that Lockheed-Martin tailored for arcade games;the I128-2 from Number Nine Visual Technology of Lexington,Mass.; and the SPC1500 from S-MOS. These tend to have the highestperformance, the most features and-at typically more than $70the biggest price tags. They also tend to sport the largestpackages or use the most chips to create a design. However,these are the chips that come closest to delivering real workstationclass 3-D performance. Often chips in this category will notbe VGA compatible or will offer only minimal VGA-boot capability.A step down from these products is a class of 3-D controllersin the midrange. These high-performance chips generally arenot totally integrated solutions and carry price tags higherthan what's appropriate for mainstream silicon. Among themare the SST-1 from 3Dfx, a Mountain View startup; the Permediafrom 3Dlabs; the Mondello from Cirrus Logic Inc., the Fremont,Calif., chip maker; and products from Artist Graphics, BrooktreeCorp. and Matrox. Like their high-end counterparts, these chipsare often not VGA compatible or have only minimal VGA bootup capability.The much sought-after sweet spot of the market is the mainstreamentertainment portion. To be a contender in this segment, achip should be a fully or nearly integrated 3-D video-graphicscontroller. It should come in an inexpensive (i.e., plastic),"normal"-size package and tote a price tag of less than $35.Companies that are, say they are or think they are in thiscategory include ATI Technology Inc., based in Thornhill, Ontario,Cirrus Logic, NVidia and Samsung Semiconductor Inc., basedin San Jose.NEC and VideoLogic will debut mainstream 3-D controllers inMarch. S3 Inc., based in Santa Clara, Calif., offers its Vergechip for this category. Other players include startup Rendition,based in Mountain View, with its Verite chip set, and TridentMicrosystems Inc., also based in Mountain View, with its T3D9692. Matrox may push into this segment later this year.A few chips offer some, but not all, of the functions requiredin a 3-D controller. They include the T3-D2000 from Trident,the ET6000 from Tseng Labs Inc. of Newtown, Pa., and the YGV611612 from Yamaha, based in San Jose.Whatever the category, most 3-D chips will ultimately convergein the $20 to $30 price range and offer full texture mappingand support for accelerated VGA and video graphics, with anintegrated LUT-DAC-lookup table/digital-to-analog converterall in one device. Even as 3-D chip makers move toward suchproducts by integrating graphics features, graphics-chip makerswill converge on the same point by building in 3-D functions.At the end of the day, the PC developer is left with a complexmatrix of the particular needs of particular games, which mustbe matched up against the features and implementation stylesadopted by an increasingly wide range of 3-D controllers andAPIs. What's worse, there's no agreement among controller chipvendors on how to measure performance other than by their ownparticular test procedures.By the end of 1997, all mainstream graphics chips will includefull 3-D acceleration, and 3-D hardware support will becomea standard feature of systems and add-in boards. Just whatspecific features standard hardware acceleration will provide,how vendors will implement them and which vendors will emergeas the leading suppliers remain to be seen. The answers liealong the crooked road that leads into the third dimension.Jon Peddie, president of Jon Peddie Associates in Tiburon, Calif.,is the publisher of the PC Graphics Report. He can be reachedat (415) 435-1775 or via e-mail at jon@jpa-pcgr.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. DVD -- Driving the Vidoe DiskBy:Rebecca DayOpen just about any Business 101 textbook and you're sure toread about Sony's Beta VCR format in some chapter on businessdon'ts. The second and third editions might also touch on thatcompany's other big flop, recordable MiniDiscs, and perhapsdiscuss the case of Apple Computer, which proved during the1980's and '90s just how much market share you can lose witha closed architecture. In the end, of course, the widely supportedVHS VCR format won consumers' hearts, minds and pocketbooks,the compact disk became ubiquitous and IBM PC-compatibles soldlike semiconductors. The lesson: MultiFinder standards work.This lesson has not been lost on the two rival camps scramblingto bring to market a next-generation, high-density opticaldisk that could, in one fell swoop, replace the laser disk,videotape, CD-Rooms and audio CDs. Taking electronics historyto heart, Sony/Philips and Time Warner/Toshiba decided latelast year that instead of dividing the market, they will joinforces, creating a standard next-generation disk that willplay in any digital-videodisk (DVD) machine, whether it beDVD-ROM, DVD video, DVD audio or DVD interactive. Moreover,all these formats will be backward-compatible with previousversions of the CD standard.Such a DVD standard will surely fly-but how far, and how fast?Will the nascent technology simply emerge as high-density replacementproducts for the videotape, compact disk and CD-ROM? Or willDVD realize its potential as a true point of convergence betweenthe personal-computer and consumer-electronics industries?The consensus is that at least in its first iterations, DVDis likely to appear as souped-up laser videos on the consumerside and as capacious storage media on the computer end. Bothwill offer significant improvements over mature media thatare bumping against technological ceilings. But beyond that,all bets are off."Will computer companies learn how to design and sell the rightproduct?" asks Carl Stork, director of the Windows PC platformteam at Microsoft Corp., which is taking a wait-and-see stancetoward DVD. "Will consumer-electronics companies learn howto play in the PC market? I don't know which is the harderquestion."Innovative software will be a key ingredient to fully exploitDVD. "The DVD standard is a tool kit," says Robert van Eijk,director of CD-recordable products at Philips Electronics,the San Jose, Calif.-based arm of the Dutch consumer giant."The vehicle may be exciting, but we need to fill it with contentthat's compelling to consumers."Indeed, the opportunities afforded by the new high-density diskare enormous: memory capacity of 4.7 Gbytes/side-enough for133 minutes of movies on a side-plus variable-speed data transferat an average 4.69 Mbytes/second for image and sound, MPEG2 digital video compression, multiple audio channels and afile-management structure that's compatible with existing CDROM platforms.On top of all that, disks cost 80 cents or so a pop, which makesthe aluminum platter "cheaper than a book," says Guy Johnson,vice president of video-product management at Thomson ConsumerElectronics. "You can put lots of stuff on it, you can makethe medium cheap and you can still make money at it. You'regoing to see a lot of people get into this as a way to getinformation to customers."Having pushed CD-ROM technology pretty much to its limits, thePC industry is looking to DVD for a speed and density boost."DVD is going to be great for the computer world," says AlexDaly, vice president of marketing at C-Cube Microsystems Inc.,the San Jose-based maker of an MPEG-2/Dolby AC-3 audio/videochip that will serve as the engine for DVD. "We've gone from2x to 4x to 6x CD-ROM, and this becomes something like a 12xCD-ROM, with 4 Gbytes or more capacity."Technical specs, though, are "a little divorced from content,"Daly warns. "You're going to see the same old content you usetoday-Excel, Word, your organizer, whatever-sitting, perhaps,on a DVD drive. Or maybe you go out and buy a more robust versionof Encarta [the Microsoft encyclopedia] on a DVD disk thathas more multimedia."CD-ROM has maxed out after 10 years on the market, says JulieSchwerin, president of InfoTech Inc., the Woodstock, Vt.-basedmarket-research firm. "When you start spinning a disk at speedssix times faster than intended, you expose the disk to conditionsthat require it to be manufactured to much higher tolerances.If the disk physically performs near the limitations of thespec, then the error rate goes up, requiring error-correctioncircuitry to break in, which brings the disk speed back downto 4x speed. DVD is just a bigger CD-ROM," Schwerin says. "Andthat's good, because it means the DVD technology will havea long life."Consumer-electronics manufacturers, for their part, see DVDas a magnet to pull consumers into audio/video stores. "What'sdriving the consumer-electronics business right now is hometheater," says Craig Eggers, marketing manager for new productsat Toshiba America Electronics Corp., based in San Jose. "Andwhat home theater is about is reproducing the director's visionas faithfully as possible. DVD comes as close to that as anyother product ever introduced. DVD is the ultimate home-theatermachine," he exults.The advantages of the new high-density medium are easily measurablefor the consumer. Full-length movies can squeeze onto a CDsize disk along with five full-bandwidth channels of audioin several languages and with subtitles. Digital video enablesboth random access of scenes, which isn't feasible with sequentialaccess videotape, and the placement of supplemental informationon a disk, which isn't possible with the outdated laser disk.Further, DVD's MPEG-2 video compression makes room for boththe 4:3 aspect-ratio pan-and-scan formats used by the currentNTSC broadcast system and the wide-screen formats that moreclosely approximate the cinematic experience of a movie theater."The audio used in DVD comes as close to the best theatersyou've been in, and the video quality is capable of being asgood as the D-1 masters that all software is sourced from,"Eggers says.It all sounds great, but will consumers bite? And at what price?Most suppliers can't afford to be anything but optimistic.CD growth has slowed, VCR diffusion has topped out and thelaser disk is a 15-year-old format that has failed to excitemore than about 2 million video enthusiasts.Eggers points to a $200 million multivendor awareness campaignthat will put the letters "DVD" in front of consumers' eyescountless times before any product even ships to stores latethis year. A subsequent $200 million campaign will follow.Time Warner vows that at least 250 software titles will beavailable at DVD's launch, and RCA Corp. has boldly promisedto deliver mainstream-priced $500 players to stores by fall.RCA predicts that DVD will post first-year sales figures rivalingthose of the company's Digital Satellite System (DSS)Schwerin of InfoTech, on the other hand, believes market adoptionwill be driven by the PC side. She predicts that worldwidesales of DVD-ROM players will top 2 million units in 1997,outpacing DVD movie players by two to one. As a movie medium,"DVD faces the additional challenge of carving out a new placein the home-entertainment center with consumers who have heretoforestrongly favored recordable VCRs over superior-quality analoglaser videodisk," Schwerin says. InfoTech sees the DVD-ROMas the favored upgrade for PC-hardware manufacturers beyond6x CD-ROM drives, thanks largely to greater density and moreefficient channel modulation.Johnson at Thomson Consumer Electronics, the Indianapolis-basedparent of consumer giants RCA and General Electric, also expectsrecordable DVD-ROM products to hit the market in 1997, aheadof consumer DVD. Movie versions, he predicts, will be heldup, partly on account of resistance from Hollywood, which fearspirating of recordable digital titles.Johnson says the recordable DVD for computer applications willhave 2.6 Gbytes of memory, compared with the 4.7 Gbytes requiredfor a movie disk. "People will use recordable DVD for all kindsof things they use recordable disks for now: CD-E[rasable]or CD-R[ecordable]," he says. "This will replace all thoseformats."But simply replacing the CD-ROM and the VCR with beefier machinesmay not hold much promise for the mainstream market. In fact,some say that such a minimalist approach to DVD would demonstrateboth a waste of immense technological resources and a lackof creativity on the part of the converging industries.Rather, the key to DVD's scoring a big success is novel applications,says van Eijk of Philips Electronics. "Just generating a highdensity format for the sake of more capacity doesn't do much."The burden falls to content providers, says van Eijk, who expectsDVD content to evolve the same way CD-ROM content did."In the early days of CD-ROM, content providers took existingmaterial like databases and transported it to CD," he says."But what was the compelling reason for consumers to switch?"It was only when the CD-ROM imported motion, graphics and videothat it became exciting, van Eijk contends. Finally, more creativeimplementations, such as hypertext and hyperlink, took CD-ROMwhere consumers had never been before, integrating featuresthat took full advantage of the new format.Many would like to likewise push the DVD envelope to its creativelimits. Rather than using it to, say, add more video and soundclips to an existing product-for example, Microsoft's Cinemania,a CD-ROM about movies and movie history-van Eijk pictures aDVD movie disk that includes movie reviews and advertising.With such a disk, consumers might have to sit through a trailerbefore being able to access a review. "It's a horrible thingto say," he adds, "likening a DVD-ROM to a commercial."Van Eijk also sees great opportunity for user participationin a movie DVD. "It's a very interesting idea to combine movieswith games," he says. "You could put, say, a Terminator 2 gameon the same disk as the movie or its soundtrack." That kindof scheme could enhance revenues for movie-rental stores, hesays, winning converts at your local Blockbuster. "You mighthave to unlock the game with a code, for which users wouldsomehow be charged."Thomson's Johnson also sees great commercial possibilities inDVD. He envisions content-related shopping on a disk, withviewers, for example, punching in a code to buy a leather jacketfrom a catalogue that resides on the same disk as a Clint Eastwoodmovie. "Or you may take that disk and put it on your computerand do the shopping from the computer," he speculates. "Youcould also have a travel-destination disk for $1 or $2. Whereyou want to watch that disk I don't know. The office? The couch?It will play in our players and TV/DVD combination units, andon somebody else's game machine. The way people perceive what'sgoing to be on a disk today is going to be much different thanwhat this disk has the potential to be."The issue of whether DVD will be driven by the computer or theconsumer-electronics industry may be a moot point as suppliersin each industry edge closer to the other side. Products likeToshiba's TIMM, a multimedia TV and PC monitor, and the PCworld's plug-and-play initiative indicate rapid and inevitableconvergence.Last fall, Thomson showed a prototype of a 35-inch TV with SVGAresolution called Genius Theatre, described as a home-theatersystem with the entertainment features of a PC-complete witha wireless keyboard, a full array of surround-sound electronicsand speakers, and a six-disk CD-ROM changer. With the TV servingas a gateway to the Internet, Johnson says, a DVD would bea great host for a Web browser. He notes that much of whatcomes off the Internet is not real-time information, so itcould easily be downloaded onto some sort of recordable DVDfor access later.Downloading of information from Net to disk won't happen ina vacuum, of course. The pipeline into the home will have towiden in order to move the vast amount of data required forhigh-quality video and audio information. Daly of C-Cube Microsystemssees the cable modem as the enabler here. The last thing aconsumer wants is yet another box near the entertainment center,Daly says. Instead, he foresees a combination set-top box thatbundles audio, Web browser, video-compression decoding andmodem."By 1997, you're going to start seeing multifunction platformsemerge," Daly says. "You'll be able to play back a DVD, receivea DSS signal and even surf the Net. You have to do MPEG fora set-top box to receive digital cable or satellite signalsand for a DVD movie player. It would be more efficient to usea single component at the center of that and create the peripheryaround it."As hardware designers tout DVD's vast capabilities, the softwareindustry is sniffing around the technology as well. Stork atMicrosoft says it's too early to make firm commitments aboutDVD. "When CD-ROM drives first came out, they were more than$1,000," Stork recalls. "It took about six years until anysignificant amount of CD-ROM software became available. Ifthese [DVD] drives are inexpensive early, it will go to marketmore quickly and encourage more titles more quickly." But ifdrives are high-priced, the software will serve more specializedmarkets, Stork predicts."Early on, CD-ROMs were only used for reference materials andspecialized applications," he says. "It wasn't until driveprices got into the couple-of-hundred-dollar range that theirconsumer usage flourished. I would expect to see a similarkind of development here."Ultimately, Stork believes DVD invites a new kind of playerinto the home. "I think there's a new product opportunity herethat doesn't exist today but could in two to three years,"he says. Such a player would have a display about 30 inchesor larger for movies, the processing power of a PC for gamesand a TV tuner. "It could be the device you want in your familyroom that you use to watch broadcast TV or play videogamesand watch DVDs," Stork says. "You may not do much computingin the sense that we do computing on PCs today at all; youmay just be using it as an entertainment device."Will this convergence product come from the computer world,the consumer-electronics world-neither of which has much experiencein the other's domain-or a new industry altogether? Or perhapsa single convergence product isn't necessary at all. Consumersmight want several DVD machines, in different flavors: onefor the office, for example, one for the family room and aportable model for everywhere else."In the Far East, a lot is being done with convergence productsaround CD-ROM," says Philips's van Eijk. "But in the UnitedStates, we tend to buy multiple versions of the same thing.In reality, people buy three or four CD players for differentpurposes. [In that sense,] I don't believe DVD will be a convergenceproduct."Computer and consumer companies have shaken hands and now they'reall heading for their own corners. The battle for consumers'dollars has begun. But while vendors grapple with product issues,there are still a number of real-world questions that needto be answered."How do we package this, how do we describe this, how do wesell this, how do we get people to buy this?" asks Microsoft'sStork. "These questions are probably as hard as the technicalissues. It's a product nobody's asking for. Can [marketers]come up with something that's compelling? To us guys that buildproduct, we think they ought to be able to, but they've gota job to do."Rebecca Day is a freelance writer based in Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Will Hollywood back DVD as a censor?By:Rebecca DayThe final specs for the videodisk and PC-ROM versions of DVDwere barely dry when Miami-based startup Nissim Corp. announcedthe first potential application for the fledgling technology.In an early-December press release, CEO Max Abecassis saidNissim will build into its DVD players a "variable-content"capability that includes a motion-picture rating technology.Called Control, the feature will enable viewers to screen thecontent of the video, blocking children from viewing violentor sexual content.Hardware suppliers have touted parental-control capability asa selling point for DVD as a movie system. With Nissim's version,viewers could select a rating, such as PG-13, and program theplayer to skip scenes deemed beyond that level. Each disk wouldhave to be encoded with the appropriate information, and Hollywoodhad not commented on the system at press time. Abecassis ishoping public pressure will persuade the studios to considerit. "I'm hoping to inform the public about the technology,"he says, "and through their reaction, elicit greater supportthan I would ordinarily get from studios."The Control software, which requires about 100 kbytes of memory,is the first to look at a movie as a "videobase" of individuallyaddressable segments, Abecassis says. The exact digital locationof every segment in a DVD is identified and assigned a contentcategory and level of explicitness. The resulting data, referredto as a "variable content map," sends information to the playerthat can be used to automatically generate a playlist of onlyacceptable segments. "The essence of a DVD is random access,"Abecassis says, "and this system exploits that capability likeno other technology available."The concept would be one way for Hollywood to police itself,thereby staving off attempts at censorship by government orparental groups. At the same time, however, it gives userscontrol over a film's creative content, which is sure to drawresistance from the artistic community."Say you took out 'Schindler's List' on DVD and wanted to watcha PG version of it," says Guy Johnson, vice president of videoproduct management at Thomson Consumer Electronics. "StevenSpielberg's going to say, 'B.S. You're not going to take outmy scenes that I've worked on and mess with my creative content.'Hollywood has to go through some refining of how they're goingto handle this issue. I know for sure that a lot of directorsaren't going to want you to decide the rating level of a disk."Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Wireless LANs -- Not of this WorldBy:Barry PhillipsJust two years ago, companies selling wireless local-area networkswere ready to shoot the moon. Advocates predicted broad deploymentof untethered links in the corporate world by the end of thedecade. Their evidence: a nearly ready IEEE standard and awealth of new products any MIS Manager might find compellingfor the office of tomorrow. But today, it looks as though wirelessLAN technology might be lost in space. The IEEE's 802.11 standardis still "nearly ready." Insiders say it could take until theend of 1996 to fully nail it down. And though later this yearvendors expect to sell wireless PC-card LANs that poke alongat 1 or 2 Mbits/second for, perhaps, $350, desktop PC cardsfor 100-Mbit/s wired LANs have already dropped to $170. Whichoption do you think that forward-thinking MIS managers willchoose? "It's not a very compelling business proposition tosay we may be more expensive, but we're slower," quips MackSullivan, director of marketing communications at MountainView, Calif.-based Proxim Inc., a supplier of wireless-LANchips and boards.Apparently sensing a lost cause, National Semiconductor Corp.disbanded its wireless-LAN semiconductor efforts in early 1994.Motorola Inc. curtailed its high-profile push into wirelessLANs last September, when its licensed 26-GHz Altair systemdied a quiet death after failing to generate much heat in themarketplace. And startup companies pursuing breakthrough 10 and 20-Mbit/s wireless LANs have met with less-than-stellarresults so far.Instead of the broad deployment advocates predicted, wirelessLANs are making their greatest inroads in niche applicationsin the factory, medical center and warehouse. In car-rentalreturn, inventory-management and point-of-sale niches, forexample, users have an overriding need for cordless data connectivityand are willing to pay a premium for it."The biggest opportunity for us is where desktops don't existtoday, and there is a need for handheld systems," says AlanSoucy, vice president of personal systems for Zenith Data Systems(ZDS). That's a switch. When the Buffalo Grove, Ill.-basedcompany launched its CruisePad handheld terminal in June 1994,Soucy was targeting "corridor cruisers," executives who spendtime away from their desks and who would presumably welcomewireless terminals for tapping into the corporate LAN. CruisePadgives roving users a window into their desktops via a builtin wireless-LAN module, co-designed with Proxim, that uses2.4-GHz spread-spectrum technology.But by and large, those nomadic execs failed to bite. Soucyclaims that today, "a few thousand" CruisePads are in use,mainly beta units linking to Windows NT servers via redesignedsoftware. "In the corporate market, there has been a significantinvestment in the current [wired] infrastructure, and a lotof offices have performance-related requirements that are hardto break out of," he says. Soucy now tags vertical marketsin hospital and industrial settings as the prime arenas forCruisePad sales."If we are looking at replacing wired LANs in offices, that'sjust not going to happen," concurs Todd Smith, director ofproduct marketing for Aironet Wireless Communications, basedin Fairlawn, Ohio. "We [at Aironet] don't walk around the officecarrying this stuff-and if we don't do it, who will?" Nor doesSmith see wireless LANs becoming more attractive to the corporatemainstream any time soon. "Expenses for installing a wirelessLAN are front loaded," he says. "To get the first guy on-line,it's going to cost a lot of money for the coverage you need.Wireless LANs won't be a replacement, but a way to augmentwired LANs in places where that makes sense. So for the nextcouple of years, the business will all be in vertical [markets]."NICE NICHESThat assessment is quantified by Andy Prophet at AP Research,a Cupertino, Calif.-based firm that tracks the PCMCIA market."The current market for wireless LANs is just under 1 millionPC cards in 1996, growing to 2.4 million cards by 1999," Prophetsays. "Most of today's applications are in vertical markets,and I expect it to remain that way."But small niches can spell big sales, and companies like Aironetare thriving in vertical markets. Smith claims that since itsinception in 1991, his company has sold 300,000 radios forwireless LANs. A third of them went out the door in the last12 months, the vast majority to parent company Telxon Corp.,based in Rosemont, Ill., which makes scanners and ruggedizedcomputers for vertical markets.Proxim's business, too, is heavily skewed to selling OEM modulesto some 50 companies-such as Fujitsu Personal Systems Inc.,based in Santa Clara, Calif.-that integrate the parts intovertical solutions. Fujitsu is selling a wireless-ready 486based portable called Stylistic 500 RF, which runs Microsoft'sWindows for Pen Computing.Even though niches can be lucrative, many OEMs are still tryingto find a way into the mainstream corporate market, with itspromise of big bucks and long product life. According to BISStrategic Decisions, a market-research firm based in Norwell,Mass., there are 15.2 million in-building travelers-the corridorcruisers ZDS originally targeted-who could benefit from mobileaccess to their corporate LANs. And yet, wireless-LAN salesto the horizontal office segment are well under $100 million,says Joe Baylock, an analyst at the Gartner Group Inc., basedin Stamford, Conn.To broaden product appeal and tap into the corporate wellspring,OEMs are scrambling to improve the price, performance and standardspicture for wireless LANs. Niche users typically pick a singlevendor's solution from the hodgepodge of proprietary, incompatiblesystems operating within the 902-to-928-MHz industrial, scientificand medical (ISM) band. In the office, by contrast, interoperabilityof equipment is a paramount concern, and the dearth of wirelessLAN standards is an issue for both information-service managersand end users.To get into their servers, clients on a corporate enterprisenetwork need integration with existing Internet Protocol-basednetworks and applications. They also want support for ad hocnetworking, which enables them to interconnect on a peer-topeer basis. But the wireless-LAN industry has plodded alongfor years with no standards for media-access control (MAC)and physical-layer (PHY) interfaces.Pending IEEE 802.11 standards for 2.4-GHz wireless LANs arethe key to broader deployment, observers say. That's becausemany national and regional regulators-the Federal CommunicationsCommission and its counterparts around the world-have reservedthe 2.4-GHz frequency band for unlicensed use by wireless LANs.Most wireless-LAN radio development has therefore shifted upband from 900 MHz, the frequency used in earlier product generations.The 802.11 committee hopes to complete its work in mid-1996,but trudging the final mile to formal approval may take untilthe end of the year. Whenever it's finalized, the standardwill help bring wireless LANs into the mainstream by reassuringusers that the technology is solid."The main thing the standard does is put a floor under the technology,"says Craig Mathias, a principal at the Farpoint Group, a researchand product-consulting firm based in Ashland, Mass. "End userswon't necessarily buy wireless LANs because of the featuresin the standard, namely interoperability, which I have somedoubts about," he says. "[But the standard] legitimizes thetechnology."Unfortunately for end users, however, the 802.11 standard willinstitutionalize two incompatible radio-modulation schemesthat will be left to compete head on. In effect, customerswill choose between two types of "wire" for their mobile datanetworks: direct-sequence spread-spectrum (DSSS) and frequencyhopping spread-spectrum (FHSS)Though both systems offer bandwidth between 1 and 2 Mbits/s,the DSSS camp-headed up by AT&T, maker of the WaveLAN product,and radio-circuit supplier Harris Semiconductor-claims directsequence technology will have an easier time than FHSS takingwireless LANs to higher speeds. Direct sequencing spreads thesignal by combining high-bit-rate, pseudo-random code withthe data being sent; several channels, all with their own pseudorandom code, share the spectrum.With frequency-hopping technology, by contrast, discrete blocksof data go out on a large number of frequencies. The radiotransmits bursts of information, and the receiver follows thesame sequence of hops to recover it. The FHSS camp comprisesthe bulk of the wireless-LAN industry, including leading OEMssuch as Proxim and Xircom."We expect to see a shakeout in terms of the radio [approaches],"says Roland Fournier, product-marketing engineer at AdvancedMicro Devices Inc., based in Sunnyvale, Calif. "There willprobably be one standard radio in a year."The technical debate resembles the situation in digital cellularand personal communications systems, where the industry issplit between two high-frequency radio-access methods: codedivision multiple access and time-division multiple access.There, the public network carrier makes the technology decisionfor an entire geographical region; but with wireless LANs,users must confront the dilemma themselves when they choosewhich radio to buy. Not only are the two types incompatible,but they interfere with each other, knocking out the other'ssignals. Industry watchers say that placing a technology decisionon consumers' shoulders will confuse buyers and impede marketgrowth.Meanwhile, uncertainty about the finality of the 802.11 standardhas chip and card vendors hedging their bets. Chip maker AMD,for example, has opted to implement its MAC controller basedon a programmable part: the 80188 microcontroller. The resultingPCnet-Mobile MAC controller can support FHSS, DSSS or infraredinterfaces. "If 802.11 got pushed out for any reason, we wouldn'thave to spin new silicon," says Fournier. "PCnet-Mobile canbe reprogrammed to reflect any changes."For its part, Proxim hopes to challenge an expected rush ofinitial standards-compliant products running at the 1-Mbits IEEE spec with a proprietary 1.6-Mbit/s product. "We think[standards-based products] could be dead on arrival," Sullivansays. "The 802.11 group is basically building a product bycommittee. How many compromises have the 15 vendors on thecommittee made along the way?""Within the 802.11 standard, there are a lot of options," saysBaylock of the Gartner Group. "This is a key time for the formationof coalitions among OEMs. Certain groups of vendors will chooseto work together and select a subset among those options thatthey all can build to. We'll see implementation agreementswithin the 802.11 framework."Fournier of AMD predicts that updatable 802.11 network-interfacecards will emerge in mid-1996, much as updatable V.34 modemsappeared before that standard was formally ratified. Designerswill need to add flash memory, at a cost of about $10 per card,until the standard finally solidifies.So far, one manufacturer of 2.4-GHz transceivers for the wirelessLAN market has bought into AMD's chip solution. Pulse EngineeringInc., based in San Diego, plans to introduce a complete FHSSbased PC card that will sell in OEM quantities for $169. AMDis also supplying drop-in MAC silicon that works with the newPrism chip set from Harris, based in Palm Bay, Fla., a highlyintegrated four-chip RF subsystem for wireless-LAN DSSS radio.Prism is the first off-the-shelf DSSS radio solution aimed atlow-power Type II PC-card designs. A design still requirestwo external gallium-arsenide power-amplifier ICs to drivean antenna, but Harris is working to integrate these functionsinto silicon to further reduce power consumption. Besides moppingup more than a dozen ICs, the DSSS radio operates at up to4 Mbits/s-twice the rate of the fastest 802.11 mode.Samsung has adopted the Prism chip set as the basis of a 3-V,2-Mbit/s Type-II PC card for mobile computers announced latelast year. Aironet has also said it will use Prism for itsnext-generation wireless-LAN products.The availability of standard, off-the-shelf MAC silicon-expectedfrom multiple vendors in 1997-will have a beneficial impacton the cost, complexity and time-to-market of wireless-LANproducts. However, having two different radio standards makesit harder for the industry to consolidate behind a single PCcard design or access-point architecture. Once a single radiostandard does shake out, perhaps by 1998, the market may expand.As volumes increase, AMD predicts that the combined cost ofa wireless-LAN card and a port on a wireless access point willdrop from $330 in 1996 to $250 in 1998. By then, of course,a 100-Mbit/s Ethernet card could dip to below $100.The access point itself could become a fertile area for OEMsto differentiate and add value, says Bruce Sanguinetti, executivevice president of sales at BreezeCom Wireless CommunicationsInc., based in Carlsbad, Calif. He predicts that access pointsthe bridge to the wired network-will keep getting smarter,improving wireless-LAN functionality.BreezeCom's access points, based on a multicell wireless switchingconfiguration, support up to five users operating at 3 Mbitss, or a total of 15-Mbits/s of aggregate bandwidth. The company(formerly called Lannair) is sufficiently convinced of thestability of the 802.11 standard to already market wirelessadapters and access points as 802.11 D2-compatible.BreezeCom is not the only wireless vendor to have ventured beyondthe standard's 2-Mbit/s frontier. But the battle for bandwidthis not without its casualties. One high-profile startup, RadioLANInc. of San Jose, Calif., failed to hit a promised ship datelast September for a 10-Mbit/s wireless LAN, despite havingwon some big venture-capital bucks and a best-of-show awardat Interop in the spring of 1995. A second startup, WiLAN,has been aiming at an even loftier goal: 20 Mbits/s; but theCanadian company has shipped nothing to date.The IEEE itself is talking about a 10-Mbit/s 802.11 follow-on,and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute isworking on a 20-Mbit/s version, HiperLAN. Whether such standardsefforts or a startup's proprietary push will make the bandwidthbreakthrough for wireless LANs is still anybody's call. "Ourgoal is to get to 10 Mbits/s, but we don't know how long it'sgoing to take," says Smith of Aironet.According to Dave Bagby, a lead design engineer with AMD whosits on the IEEE 802.11 committee, the 1- to 2-Mbit/s speedlimit on most of today's wireless LANs is a result of the limitedbandwidth allocated by the FCC for unlicensed use. "The current802.11 PHYs had to account for FCC regulatory restrictionsin their design," he says. "If they allocate more spectrum,you could get a different answer. The issue is political, nottechnical."Several vendors who tinkered with wireless LANs in the 5-GHzspectrum managed to attain data rates of 5 to 10 Mbits/s. YetFCC power-output restrictions limited their usefulness, andmost of the high-frequency projects were abandoned. Accordingto Michael Rothenberg, president of BreezeCom, the industryis organizing to lobby for expanded spectrum allocations inthe 5-GHz range for unlicensed LAN operation. Widening thefrequency slots currently assigned in the 5-GHz range from1 to 5 MHz is seen as the key to the next bandwidth breakthrough.In the meantime, some vendors are focusing on bringing audioand video applications to wireless LANs. While many argue thatmultimedia support is an issue of raw data pipe size, specialprotocol options in IEEE 802.11 enable wireless-LANs to reservebandwidth and set up circuit-style connections for the guaranteedbandwidth multimedia traffic needs."The standard attempts to support time-bounded services," bothdata and voice, says AMD's Bagby. "To this end, there is afair amount of complexity involved with the portion of thedraft that handles what we call the point-control function."Digital Ocean, an OEM working in conjunction with AT&T, isdeveloping a wireless access point that implements point control,a function that can allocate bandwidth to support mobile multimediatransport applications. But given the status of wireless LANsin general, the idea of an untethered multimedia link may bea bit over the moon.-- Rick Boyd-Merritt and Loring Wirbel contributed to this story.Barry Phillips can be reached via e-mail at barryp@ico.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Infrared aims for the corporate LANInfrared (IR) data transmission may be moving beyond its nicheas a point-and-shoot medium for moving files between mobilePCs and wire-networked computers and printers. Companies suchas IBM, Hewlett-Packard and Sharp are trying to leverage thelow costs and new fast speeds of IR transceivers to help wirelessLANs gain a foothold in the corporate market.In April 1995, the three companies came together to supporta new 4-Mbit/s option to the existing InfraRed Data Association'sIrDA 1.1 spec. IBM's Microelectronics Division began offering4-Mbit/s IR components and LAN drivers early in the year, andExtended Systems incorporated them into an adapter board intime for Comdex/Fall. The Boise, Idaho, company's JetEyeNet+,connecting an IR-equipped notebook computer to a LAN, listsfor $425 and may sell for $295 on the street.IBM believes the ability to link to the LAN at these priceswill drive IR into corporate networks. But lower prices andhigher speeds aside, IR networks still suffer from an inherentlimitation, offering only line-of-sight connectivity. Uppingthe ante, NTT Data Communications Systems, a subsidiary ofNippon Telephone and Telegraph, has developed a repeater andPCMCIA card for an Ethernet-compatible, 10-Mbit/s IR LAN. Thecatch: its range is limited to 1 meter.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Multiplexing modemThe Sportster modem from U.S. Robotics delivers the appealingprospect of transmitting digital voice at the same time asdata or fax traffic. It complies with the Digital SimultaneousVoice & Data modem spec. An 8-kHz voice channel supports realtime telephony between modem pairs while sustaining a 19,200baud data or fax channel with compatible remote DSVD modemsystems. Call (800) Dial-USR.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Power designerThe McCAD integrated electronic design software from Vamp Inc.speeds the path from concept to schematic capture and printedcircuit-board layout, even generating a bill of materials.Modular software plug-ins allow it to add features at any stageof the design process. The package is for the PowerPC processorfor Power Macintosh and Common Hardware Reference Platformhost systems. Call (213) 466-5533.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Soft sound synthesisThe Yamaha Soft-Synthesizer YSS100GM brings software-based wavetablesound synthesis to a PC. The package permits the storage ofup to 1 Mbyte of wavetable sound samples in RAM, supportinga synthetic symphony of up to 128 samples and one drum kit.Features include a MIDI/karaoke function and user control panel.A Pentium 75 or faster host is recommended. Call (714) 5229330.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Fast Mac graphicsThe industry's most powerful video card for PCI-based PowerMacintosh and other PowerPC-based hosts is available in theform of Number Nine's Imagine 128 for PowerMac. Screen resolutionsto 1,600 x 1,200 are supported using 8 Mbytes of VRAM. Theboard handles 8-, 16- or 32-bit graphics calls in a singleinstruction, accelerating all Mac graphics functions. Call(617) 674-0009Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. No smoke, just mirrorsThe Digital Light Processing subsystem from Texas Instrumentsuses TI's Digital Micromirror Devices to transform tricolorreflected light into 640- x 480-pixel projection images forRGB data or analog video display. This high-resolution moduleis for rear-projection screens. The resulting display is freeof errors and aberrations that often plague alternatives. Call(214) 995-2011Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Sizing up JPEGC-Cube's Edit Pro card lets users evaluate the effects of motionJPEG compression by helping them rescale their source imagesto obtain an optimum video data stream. A Genesis GM833X2 scalingchip helps deliver JPEG imagery at maximum quality for C-Cube'spopular CL560 JPEG chip. This 32-bit PCI card handles 16-bitYUV 4:2:2 source video at rates up to 60 fields per second.Call (408) 944-6300.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Dream this: The Mainframe's Last StandBy:Portia IsaacsonIs the $500 network computer just a lot of noise, or is it theinevitable replacement for the PC? I think it's the mainframe'slast stand. The $500 "NC" was the brainchild of Larry Ellison,Oracle's outspoken president and chief executive officer. Theworld's second largest software company, Oracle leads the enterprisesoftware market but has failed to make significant inroadsin PC software. Besides being renowned for its mainframe andUnix software, Oracle is also known for testosterone overloadin the presence of Microsoft, its chief rival. Oracle's proposedNC client would replace the PC for users who are always connectedto a server and who run a limited set of applications. TheNC differs from a PC in that applications processing, exceptfor GUI display and user-input handling, is done on the mainframe,where all user data is also stored.If the NC can take application-processor cycles and file-storagemegabytes away from PCs and put them on mainframe or Unix servers,Oracle stands to gain market share at Microsoft's expense.The company has unabashedly stated that one of the most appealingfeatures of the NC is that it uses no "Wintel" parts.Mainframes have experienced amazing growth in recent years,driven by the explosion of PCs that suck data off enterpriseservers. But the trend has been to shift applications processingto client PCs while leaving the database on the mainframe,where it can be secured, backed up and shared. Nonetheless,PC applications processing is one step closer to distributedobject, information-bus software architectures, which enablemore choices in database location and implementation. Therefore,even Oracle's database-software sales could be in jeopardy.No wonder it wants to start a war to bring applications backto the mainframe.The main argument for Oracle's proposed NC is the Web, whichbegs for a very low-cost Web-access terminal. Applicationsare already being created for the Web or front ended with Webinterfaces, but Oracle would have us believe that Web applicationscan replace PC applications. But most apps will not be doneon a Web terminal, because they are too tightly connected tothe user interface to be replaced by a mainframe app connectedto a terminal by a slow wire.Which hardware manufacturer will take the risk to actually buildand market an NC? Given the specs and price tag, the ones thatwill profit in the NC scenario are mainframe and Unix-servervendors, which will sell more computers and disk drives tosupport the helpless NCs they control. Perhaps we can expectto see Sun and IBM start giving away NCs to help them sellmore big iron.Portia Isaacson is president of Dream IT, Inc., a Boulder, Colo.,based consultancy on emerging technologies and markets. Shecan be reached at 303-417-9313 or portia@dreamit.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Rainbow room -- A company spun out of the Massachusetts Instituteof Technology has devised a unique way to generate multiplecolors in miniature flat-panel displaysBy:Sunny BainsA slew of miniature flat-panel display chips now under developmentpro-mise to enable a range of high-tech gadgets, from inexpensivewrist-wearable computers and lightweight virtual-reality headsetsto sophisticated video pagers. Some minidisplay advocates furtherproject that future large-screen opportunities may not liein physically large displays but in high-resolution minidisplayscoupled with the appropriate optics to leverage them into TVs,computer monitors and projection display systems.With the minidisplays-many smaller than 1 inch in diagonal andwith resolutions as high as 1,000 dots/inch-pixel structuresand control electronics are built into a substrate using moreor less conventional semiconductor-fabrication techniques.The substrate may be glass, quartz, ceramic or a silicon wafer;the display medium may be a conventional twisted-nematic (TN)LCD, a more exotic LCD such as a ferroelectric or polymer-disperseddevice, an electroluminescent display, a field-emission displayor a tiltable-mirror technology.One problem minidisplay makers face is how to generate multiplecolors. A new approach to the multicolor dilemma is under developmentat startup Micro Display Corp. (MDC), a Berkeley, Calif., spinoff from work done at the Massachusetts Institute of Technologyby company founder Philip Alvelda. Alvelda's idea is to makemultiple colors an inherent part of the display structure itself.He has applied the approach to demonstrate a prototype 640 x 480-pixel multicolor LCD with a mere 4.5-mm diagonal.Though Alvelda is still putting financing together and doesn'texpect to have the first generation of mass-produced displaysout until 1997, he claims high interest from OEMs. "There isalmost a universal response that if we can make what we havedemonstrated in the lab at anywhere near the costs we predictfor volume manufacture, they will most definitely buy them,"he says. "As for naming specific clients, it's a little earlyto disclose. But we can say that a major PC manufacturer-thelargest one, in fact-is a strong partner in this venture andthat several VR-headset manufacturers are vying to be partnersas well."The opportunities for the new crop of displays are great, Alveldasays, but so are the challenges. "Lifetime and reliabilitymust be very good and well documented," he says. "You haveto be able to throw your pager across the room or leave iton the dashboard of your car in the middle of summer and stillhave some expectation of its working."This also means that new displays face a significant barrierto entry into these markets, where Motorola, for example, can'tafford to recall 3 million new pagers because of a problemwith material lifetime or stability."A BROAD FIELDAmong those in the mini game are a variety of Japanese LCD vendorswith small, high-density polysilicon thin-film transistor (TFT)active-matrix (AM) LCDs; Micron Display Technology Inc., ofBoise, Idaho, which has demonstrated a small FED display forcamera viewfinders; Planar Systems, of Beaverton, Ore., whichhas developed an AM electroluminescent (EL) display for headmounted display applications; Displaytech Inc., of Boulder,Colo., with its ferroelectric mini; Dallas-based Texas InstrumentsInc., with digital micromirror devices; and Kopin Corp., ofTaunton, Mass., which uses a proprietary process to form AMLCD circuitry on a conventional silicon wafer and then transferit to a transparent glass substrate. All confront the colorgeneration problem.With conventional AM LCD displays, such as those used in notebookcomputers, manufacturers lay red, green and blue filters overa trio of subpixels to give each pixel its multicolor capabilities.While that is fine for pixels that are one-third of a millimeterin size, proper alignment is extremely difficult for miniaturedisplays, given their small size and high density, some sourcessay. And as for multicolor displays such as FEDs, which makeuse of RGB phosphors, very small pixel geometries may strainthe limits of current phosphor-deposition technology, accordingto sources.A promising solution to the multicolor challenge may lie ingenerating colors temporally, rather than spatially, as inthe old "color wheel" model. Displaytech, for instance, usesa sequence of light pulses from red, green and blue light-emittingdiodes (LEDs) as the light source for its mini ferroelectricLCD. TI and Kopin are also pursuing time-sequential routesto crank multiple colors out of their miniature displays.One drawback to the temporal schemes, of course, is the needfor three times the frame rate to display the three monochromecomponents of an image sequentially in one frame time. A drawbackto the spatial color schemes is that dedicating three subpixelsto the three primary colors reduces effective resolution ofthe display by one-third.In Alvelda's microdisplay scheme, tiny diffraction gratingsare fabricated on top of the CMOS circuitry on a silicon substrateusing conventional fabrication processes. The grating associatedwith every subpixel acts like a tiny prism, spreading whitelight out into a rainbow-like spectrum. Though all the spectrain a triad of subpixels are identical, the gratings are designedso that the spectra emerge at different physical angles. Byusing a "window" to mask out all but one color band of eachspectrum, the three subpixels display red, green and blue light.The gratings of MDC's microdisplay are sets of grooves, reflectiveat the top and black at the bottom, which are easily builtinto chips during normal fabrication. Creating the offset colorbands is merely a matter of varying the groove spacing. Becausethe display's color capabilities are built in during microchipfabri-cation, the color chips require no more effort or expensethan monochrome ones.But Displaytech president Mark Handschy questions the advantageof MDC's approach. "The device has the appearance of beingmore monolithic because all the color generation is done onchip," he says. "But in practice, it's very easy to make red,green and blue switchable lamps out of LEDs. We're not worriedabout integration in that sense: it's not a practical obstacle."Alvelda counters that many potential minidisplay applicationsare somewhat constrained in their lighting possibilities, addingthat the white-light source in his prototype is just "a standard,garden-variety Maglite bulb from Radio Shack." In a virtualreality headset, he explains, the microdisplays could be positionedat the corners of a pair of glasses, illuminated by light sourceslocated in the ear pieces of the spectacles.There's a problem with such applications, though, in that thedisplays are really too small to be viewed directly, and goodmagnification optics, such as microscope objectives, are big,heavy and expensive. There's no point in a having cheap, highresolution screen if you can't afford the optics to view it.But, Alvelda, leveraging the IC technology on which his miniaturedisplay is based, claims to have crafted a solution to theproblem.MDC's answer is to build a computer-aided-design tool into theCMOS design software that allows for optical predistortionof the pixel array. Once OEM customers have specified the inexpensiveoptics they plan to use and calculated the aberrations thatthe imaging system will produce, the information is used todesign a pixel array whose shape is appropriately distorted,as well as the size and shape of the individual pixels. AnotherCAD tool randomly jitters the pixel position to prevent aliasing,or the unwanted Moir patterns that often can be produced byperiodic structures.Particular strengths and weaknesses aside, the miniature displaytechnologies have the potential to radically change the field.Alvelda says that in high volumes, the unit price of his displaycould fall to as low as $5. Though Handschy won't commit tonumbers that low, he does agree that silicon-based deviceshave the potential to be very inexpensive."It's fair to say that the dominant cost input is going to bethe cost of the silicon," he says.Sunny Bains is a technical journalist based in Edinburgh, Scotland.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Fault line: Fishing on the InternetBy:Andrew W. DavisJust when you thought it was impossible to say anything newabout the Internet, along comes a company with a novel announcementthat represents a true breakthrough in thinking, with far-rangingimplications for the technical community. At the recent DSPWorldtrade show in Boston, Texas Instruments Inc. introduced anInternet-based service called Online DSP Lab, a kind of virtuallaboratory available to users via cyberspace.If you have engineers using signal-processing products, doingembedded design or thinking about the next generation of multimediaperipherals, the TI announcement may change the way you evaluatevendors and use computer-based development tools. Today thereare four major corporate applications of Internet technology e-mail; publishing of product information, newsletters, pressreleases, advertisements and other marketing materials; givingand receiving technical support; and actual sales and distributionof products. Into this environment comes a new breed of fish Online DSP Lab.Here, any engineer or software developer with an Internet connectioncan access a computer to test and evaluate TI's DSP-applicationdesign and development tools. (The actual computers are locatedat the lab of DSPnet, an on-line DSP Yellow Pages run by DSPAssociates, which also runs the DSPWorld conference.) Userscan also compile, link and download code to lab computers todebug and benchmark their own software and TI's software-engineeringtools and new DSP chips. Being Internet-based, the virtuallab is available free, 24 hours a day, seven days a week toanyone, anywhere with Net access.The virtual laboratory is a strategic move. It lets engineersfamiliarize themselves with the company's software-developmentenvironment and even test their own code before buying thetools. This could give TI a competitive advantage in the eyesof the bench engineer.The availability of software-development platforms and DSP hardwarereduces or eliminates the need for customers to wait for loanerequipment. Managing loaners is a sales/support headache forboth the channel and vendors. And to the extent the facilityis used internally by engineering and marketing teams, they'relikely to develop even better tools.Suppliers who use the Internet will certainly have an advantageover other companies in the electronics OEM market, and thosewho show innovation and creativity are likely to have evenmore of an advantage. Creating an on-line laboratory is notexactly a slam dunk, and the resources involved are significant.But Online DSP Lab is an intuitive service that directly appliesavailable technology to the needs of a defined set of customers.Such trend-setter investments should keep us all on our toes.Andrew W. Davis, president of Wainhouse Consulting, in Southborough,Mass., can be reached at andrewwd@wainhouse.ultranet.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightOEM MAGAZINE via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996  Vol. 4 No. Back panel: Digital Cellular Takes Its TollBy:Herschel ShosteckFor six years, U.S. digital cellular has been hyped as the technologywave of the future. In truth, it is more a ripple than a wave.Digital cellular has been promoted in two flavors: TDMA (IS54/136), supported primarily by telecommunications giant Ericsson;and CDMA (IS-95), vigorously promoted by Qualcomm, an R&D companythat owns the enabling patents. Among the major infrastructuremanufacturers,Northern Telecom, Motorola and AT&T have committed to CDMA.TDMA has been slow to take off in the United States since its1992 commercial launch on Southwestern Bell Mobility's CellularOne System. By yearend 1995, TDMA users accounted for onlyabout a million of the United States' 33.4 million cellularsubscribers.TDMA's slow adoption has stemmed from the early illusion thatit could be simply "overlaid" onto the existing analog AMPSsystem by swapping a TDMA radio for an AMPS one. In reality,multipath issues degrade the timing of TDMA RF signals. Tocompensate, TDMA cell sites must be placed closer togetherthan analog sites, resulting in 30 percent higher cell densitythan analog-and thus requiring a complete re-engineering ofthe entire cellular system.MetroCel (now AT&T Wireless) announced a $150 million investmentin March for TDMA conversion in Dallas. Many cellular carriersthat are nominally committed to TDMA have been reluctant tomake a similar investment. But only when established analogcellular systems are properly reengineered to support TDMAwill they deliver adequate reception and find acceptance.CDMA cellular's path has not been much different. CommercialCDMA was originally promised to PacTel (now AirTouch) in January1994. As of yearend 1995, industry expectations of "true" commercialdeployment ranged from first quarter 1996 to late 1997 or beyond.CDMA was originally promoted as facilitating far fewer cellsites than conventional analog while providing far higher capacity.But the technology is cursed with the "near-far effect," orthe need to balance power from the cell site to all terminalsregardless of their distance from the cell. To overcome that,CDMA proponents may be compelled to deploy a cell density similarto that of TDMA, which could abrogate CDMA's claimed economicadvantages.Both digital technologies have claimed a capacity advantageover conventional analog. However engineering refinements havecontinued to improve the capacity of analog systems to farbeyond what was thought feasible in the mid-1980s. Those whofocus solely on digital cellular to the exclusion of analogthus may find a limited market for their products for a longtime to come.Herschel Shosteck is president and CEO of Herschel ShosteckAssociates, in Wheaton, Md.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-11IA059-000323-B026-105http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec53.html 205.156.212.5 19970114223434 text/html 310007HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:29:28 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:57 GMTContent-length: 309819Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec53.html Sample Issue Copyright UNIXWORLD via NewsNet July, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EDITOR'S THOUGHTS HOW WILL WE GET OUR GUIS? (572 words) INDUSTRY NEWS USL APPROACHES ITS RENDEZVOUS WITH DESTINY (566 words) ACE: A SHORT AND TROUBLED LIFE (353 words) THE ACE SHUFFLE (275 words) ORACLE'S VERSION 7 RELEASED (190 words) NCD FILES IPO, ACQUIRES GSS (192 words) DEC'S DECKED ON WALL STREET (239 words) SUN FORMS PC BUSINESS UNIT (219 words) COMPANY FORMED TO DEVELOP SABRE-LIKE SYSTEM (141 words) NEW OPERATING SYSTEMS FLOOD SPRING COMDEX IN CHICAGO (394 words) IBM-BULL AGREEMENT REAPS NEW WORKSTATIONS (181 words) IS UNISYS TURNING IT AROUND? (259 words) SOFTWARE AND SERVICE COMPANIES HAVE HIGHEST RETURN ON SALES (52 words) BITS (417 words) OVERHEARD (132 words) LIBRARY GOOD SOFTWARE IS MORE THAN CODING (1411 words) UNIX IN EUROPE STANDARD FARE, EUROPEAN STYLE (1877 words) PRODUCT OF THE MONTH SUN UNVEILS ITS FIRST MULTIPROCESSING DESKTOP (1014 words) COVER STORY GOING GRAPHICAL (3283 words) ON THE HORIZON (313 words) A FLOOD OF WINDOWS (253 words) STRATEGIES SUN BLOCK Its founder incinerated by giant rival Sun Microsystems, Solbourne Computer appoints a new seer. Can he see a way out of Sun's shadow? (1610 words) PROFILE THE WIZARD OF AUSPEX "You need someone to map between what the engineers know and what users can understand," -Bruce Nelson, chief technologist, Auspex Systems Inc. (1438 words) FEATURES SO, YOU WANNA LEARN ABOUT UNIX Because UNIX and easy-to-learn aren't two phrases you normally put together, we've compiled a list of eight top books to help you get started (2410 words) LIVING THE UNIX LIFE (222 words) PRODUCT REVIEW UNIX NETWORKS GIVE PCS TRUE POWER (3085 words) ITS IN THE CARDS (658 words) MORE APPLE TO UNIX CONNECTIVITY Uaccess veils UUCP's complexity in a Macintosh e-mail hub (638 words) LOW-COST GRAPHICS FOR THE MASSES The Maxstation is a cheap way for four users to access text and graphics-based programs on a SCO UNIX system (701 words) TUTORIAL THE POWER OF POSIX THINKING How to simplify porting to the portable system interface (3627 words) WIZARD'S GRABBAG ALIGNING COLUMNS, AGING PARAGRAPHS, AND NETWORK TIME PROTOCOL (3540 words) ANSWERS TO UNIX DATA TYPES, FILE TYPES, CONNECT WITH THE DOT (1991 words) NEW PRODUCTS HOW TO BUILD X TERMINALS AND COOPERATION (239 words) HOW ABOUT SOME COOPERATION HERE (354 words) BACKUP TO THE MAINFRAME (192 words) NEW PRODUCTS: BOARDS OPEN YOUR BOCA AND SAY MULTIPORT (81 words) PUTTING A SPARK IN THE PC (120 words) NEW PRODUCTS: COMMUNICATIONS SOFTWARE A FARSITE BETTER (121 words) UNIX MAIL CALL (101 words) NEW PRODUCTS: DATABASE SOFTWARE OFF DBASE (88 words) GOING INTO THE STUDIO (114 words) NEW PRODUCTS: IMAGING SCSI, NOT FUZZY (187 words) YE OLDE SCANSHOPPE (164 words) NEW PRODUCTS: NETWORKING HARDWARE WHAT A PERFORMANCE (171 words) ENTERING A NEW INTERPHASE (80 words) NOW PLAYING AT YOUR LOCAL XYPLEX (185 words) NEW PRODUCTS: OUTPUT DEVICES FEELING BETTERYET (131 words) LEAVING PRINTS ON THE NETWORK (206 words) NEW PRODUCTS: POTPOURRI MEET ME DOWN AT THE BAR CODE (250 words) POUR ME A FIFTH (90 words) I WANT MY UNIX TV (102 words) PUTTING YOUR FINGER ON IT (83 words) NEW PRODUCTS: PROCESSORS THREE OF A KIND (207 words) NEW PRODUCTS: SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS JUST THE FAX (201 words) GETTING THE SALESQ MESSAGEQ (202 words) NEW PRODUCTS: SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT STAND BY FOR DISTRIBUTION (124 words) HOW MUCH IS THIS GOING TO COST? (170 words) FILE THIS UNDER EZ (141 words) NEW PRODUCTS: SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION NOT MY FAULT TOLERANCE (127 words) NEW PRODUCTS: STORAGE UNBOUNDED ENTHUSIASM (154 words) NEW PRODUCTS: COMPILERS & DEVELOPMENT TOOLS Advanced Business Language Group Inc. offers RAP (rapid automatic (41 words) The Becket Group Inc. is offering S/REXX, a language patterned after IBM's (43 words) Edison Design Group has developed a C++ compiler that can be used as part (40 words) The Free Software Foundation has announced version four of its GNU (60 words) Iconic Software Inc. offers the Isicon programming language and Isicon/SI (32 words) James Anthony Consultants announces Jbase, a development tool for (33 words) Kuck and Associates introduces KAP for Sun Fortran, a preprocessor (30 words) NEW PRODUCTS: HARDWARE & SOFTWARE SUPPORT To Alliant Computer Systems Corp. FX/2800: Cogent Research Inc.'s Circl (24 words) TO APPLE COMPUTER INC. (20 words) TO APPLE MACINTOSH (20 words) TO DATA GENERAL AVIION (33 words) TO DEC OSF/1 (21 words) TO DECSTATIONS (17 words) TO DEC ULTRIX (21 words) TO HP 9000 SERIES 700 WORKSTATIONS (54 words) TO HP 700/RX X STATIONS (22 words) TO HP OPENODB (18 words) TO HP STORAGE SYSTEM (18 words) TO HUMAN DESIGNED SYSTEMS INC.'S X TERMINALS (30 words) TO IBM RS/6000 (85 words) TO NEXT COMPUTER INC. (42 words) TO NCR SYSTEM 3000 (18 words) TO ONTOS INC. (33 words) TO ORACLE'S RDBMS (20 words) TO SCO OPEN DESKTOP (18 words) TO SCO UNIX (57 words) TO SEQUENT COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC. (20 words) TO SEQUOIA SYSTEMS INC. (18 words) TO SILICON GRAPHICS (37 words) TO SPECTRAGRAPHICS' PC-XVIEW (24 words) TO SOLBOURNE COMPUTER INC. (20 words) TO SUN SPARCSTATIONS (159 words) TO SYBASE RDBMS (23 words) TO TADPOLE TECHNOLOGY INC. (24 words) TO UNISYS CORP. (24 words) NEW PRODUCTS: HARDWARE UPGRADES Cisco Systems Inc. adds the ability to filter information from Appletalk (25 words) INTERLINK COMPUTER SCIENCES INC. (26 words) RDI COMPUTER CORP. (27 words) XEROX IMAGING SYSTEMS INC. (43 words) NEW PRODUCTS: SOFTWARE UPGRADES Advanced Visual Systems Inc. adds a point-and-click interface, a geometry (46 words) COMDISCO SYSTEMS INC. (26 words) COMPUTERTIME NETWORK CORP. (44 words) CONCORD COMMUNICATIONS INC. (31 words) IMAGE BUSINESS SYSTEMS CORP. (38 words) INDEPENDENCE TECHNOLOGIES INC. (45 words) INFORMIX (28 words) INTERCON SYSTEMS CORP. (27 words) INTRACO SYSTEMS INC. (38 words) INTRIX SYSTEMS GROUP INC. (40 words) JYACC INC. (36 words) NATIONAL INSTRUMENTS (51 words) NEXT ADDS DIGITAL INSTRUMENTATION TECHNOLOGY INC. (31 words) ONTOS INC. (38 words) PERSOFT INC. (22 words) POSTALSOFT INC. (23 words) RSX TERMINAL SERVICES (43 words) STATE OF THE ART (30 words) SUNSELECT (41 words) SYBASE INC. (30 words) SYSTEMS STRATEGIES INC. (28 words) TIGER MEDIA (49 words) VERMONT CREATIVE SOFTWARE INC. (37 words) WAVEFRONT TECHNOLOGIES INC. (31 words) ZETACO INC. (40 words) NEW PRODUCTS: PRODUCT LINE EXTENSIONS To Advanced Logic Research Inc.: the EISA-based ALR Powerpro 486DX2/50 (52 words) TO DELTEC CORP. (26 words) TO HP (42 words) TO IOMEGA CORP. (33 words) TO MEGATEK CORP. (49 words) TO TATUNG SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY INC. (44 words) TO TELEBIT CORP. (28 words) WHAT'S NEW SCANNING FOR SCANNERS The scanner for your UNIX application isn't a commodity, yet-here's how toavoid paying too much for the wrong one (1976 words) STANDARDS RIVALS COMPETE FOR E-MAIL STANDARDS (1993 words) THE SERLIN REPORT METATOOL TO THE RESCURE (1141 words) CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7HOW WILL WE GET OUR GUIS?After Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh came out with a graphical userinterface (GUI), a lot of people suddenly discovered that they liked-evenneeded-computers. Seven years later, Microsoft Corp.'s Windows gave PCusers some of what Mac users get so excited about. Yet millions of peopleare stuck with archaic character terminals and character applications forPCs. If GUIs are so great, what's taking so long for us to get them?   When I visited the trading floor of the Toronto Stock Exchange thisspring, I didn't see what was so special about its GUI system. Not onlywere there no mice in sight, there weren't even any windows on the screen Iwas viewing. Then I discovered, as you can from this month's cover story,that graphical interfaces can take many forms. And, in most cases, the formthat provides ease of use leads to greater productivity.   For some UNIX techies, the resistance to GUIs is just reaction tochange. One of the best examples of the need for a GUI is desktoppublishing. Would you dream of doing desktop publishing on dumb terminals?Not so many years ago, thousands of UNIX users did just that. Using thetroff language they embedded commands in their text that were turned intotype by typesetting machines. Imagine having to print every time you wantto see what your work looks like!   Yes, troff on terminals is cheap-if you ignore the cost of hiring peoplewho know troff and dismiss the time it takes to proof a page, makecorrections, then reprint it. Techies may love troff, but business folksare made of more pragmatic stuff-aren't they?   Apparently not. In business, we have a wealth of tight-fisted managerswho count the cost of systems only in terms of hardware: "Get rid of ourterminals?" they might ask. "Why they work just fine. Besides, our peoplealready know how to use them." No doubt their predecessors were saying thesame about typewriters when word processors came along 20 years ago-andabout paper and pen before that.   Productivity, like other measures of efficiency, is not about costalone. It is also based on effectiveness. It is more effective to give ustools that are easy to learn than those that require extensive training. Itis more effective to create more functional applications if the interfacecan overcome the added complexity of these more powerful tools.   Certainly, GUIs have been hyped. Claims that they make computersintuitive and eliminate any learning curve are absurd. GUI applicationsneed a consistent "look and feel" that may be lacking in the world offreewheeling competition among open systems. And because software is acreative medium, there are poor GUI implementations even when strict styleguidelines are available. None of these is reason enough to delay, muchless reject, GUIs.   How will we get the GUI software and computers we need to do our workmore productively? First we have to be honest enough to admit that new waysof working with computers are more effective. We must be open to thechanges GUIs will put us through as users, as well as the power they willopen up to us. Most importantly, we must be willing to invest in the morepowerful computers that are needed to run GUI software-that is, if weseriously want to be productive.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7USL APPROACHES ITS RENDEZVOUS WITH DESTINYBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.After months of speculation, UNIX System Laboratories Inc. is close toreleasing its new family of UNIX products for Intel PCs. The new operatingsystems, code-named "Destiny," will have lower prices and betterdistribution than existing UNIX versions, and are designed to encourageresellers to customize the systems without creating incompatibilities. Whatremains unclear is whether the traditional high-price, high-margin UNIXreseller business is ready for a mass-market approach to UNIX.   The key to Destiny's potential success is that it's not just another PCUNIX, says Dataquest analyst Rikki Kirzner. For the first time, USL hasthoroughly analyzed its potential market and designed a product customerswant, she says. "They created a really profitable business model."   According to USL, the new operating systems will be available thissummer, and will be based on System V Release 4.1 ES, the enhanced-securityversion of System V Release 4. Destiny will run on most IBM-compatible PCswith a 386 or higher processor, four megabytes of memory, and a 60-megabytehard disk. Along with UNIX applications-which it runs using either an OpenLook or Motif graphical user interface-Destiny will also run PC DOSapplications in a "compatibility window." Destiny will be distributed andsupported as a shrink-wrapped product by Univel, the partnership betweenUSL and Novell Inc. USL would not confirm pricing or availability, butDestiny is expected to have a base price of around $300.   Does the world really need another version of UNIX for PCs? Destiny willjoin an already crowded PC UNIX market. The Santa Cruz Operation Inc.'s SCOUNIX and XENIX dominate the PC UNIX market with a 62% share; and SunMicrosystems Inc.'s Sunsoft division introduced Solaris 2.0 for PCs in May.These vendors are fighting for marketshare against non-UNIX systems such asIBM Corp.'s OS/2, and Microsoft Corp.'s Windows and the forthcoming WindowsNT.   For vendors and resellers, USL's business model includes making it easyto add value without creating incompatibilities. The base Destiny operatingsystem can be extended by adding modules from USL without recompiling thekernel. This encourages vendors and resellers to avoid recompilation-andthe incompatibilities it can create. To encourage retail volume, Destinywill be sold and supported through Novell's highly successful dealerchannel, as well as by USL and its licensees. The base operating system'sprice will also be closer to other high-end PC operating systems, such asOS/2, than it will be to typical prices for existing PC versions of UNIX.   USL's strategy may sound like overkill for the PC UNIX market, butKirzner points out that the stakes are much higher. USL is "the only onewho can compete against Microsoft" for the high-end PC operating systemmarket, she says. Destiny faces the huge installed base of MicrosoftWindows, as well as renewed competition from IBM's OS/2. USL's technicaladvantage comes from SVR4's highly stable code and the security features itinherits from 4.1 ES. By comparison, Microsoft's NT is likely to beunreliable for several years, and IBM's OS/2 suffers from a credibilityproblem with many potential customers, Kirzner says.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7ACE: A SHORT AND TROUBLED LIFEBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.The much-ballyhooed Advanced Computing Environment (ACE) initiative hopedto create a new standard centered around MIPS Technologies Inc.'s R4000RISC processor, but the only winners in the failed attempt seem to be Sunand Intel Corp. Sun continues to dominate the RISC workstation market witha 41% share, according to International Data Corp. And Intel will close theRISC performance gap this summer when it releases its next generationmicroprocessor now known as P5. The fractured RISC market has made Intellook like a safer choice.   RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, has been a popular chip inthe workstation world because of its high-performance ratings, which arealmost twice as fast as Intel's highest rated chip. Intel has slowly beenmaking headway, however. Its P5 chip will run at 100 million instructionsper second (mips), according to an Intel representative. Intel's fastestrated chip is currently the 50-MHz 486 DX, which runs at 41mips-top-of-the-line RISC chips exceed 50 mips.   By teaming together, ACE members hoped to move away from Intel'sdominance, gain marketshare in the workstation market, and set a new modelfor computing in the 1990s. It didn't work. Differing agendas and financialtroubles doomed ACE. Of the five founding companies, only one remains fullycommitted to the consortium. Reeling from financial troubles, CompaqComputer Corp. has moved away from any RISC development efforts. PC UNIXsoftware vendor SCO quit ACE's executive committee and suspended anyrelated development work. Digital Equipment Corp. has put its weight behindits own RISC chip, Alpha. And Microsoft has focused its efforts on Intelprocessors. Only MIPS, the RISC vendor that had the most to gain from theconsortium, continues to say ACE is alive. Yet MIPS' financial troubleshave lessened its role as a third-party provider, and Silicon Graphics Inc.recently purchased MIPS for $200 million.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7THE ACE SHUFFLEBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.When the ACE initiative was announced in April 1991, it was trumpeted asthe "broadest," "most extensive," "most dramatic announcement ever" in thecomputer industry. Now a year later the ACE initiative has fizzled.   Why are many users confused by hyperbolic vendor proclamations? A goodindication can be found in the topsy-turvy then-and-now comments regardingACE:-- Then: "With the Advanced Computing Environment as a firm, openfoundation, computer manufacturers, software developers, and customersalike can confidently take advantage of a new nonproprietarystandard."-Doug Michels, executive vp, SCO.-- Now: After stepping down from ACE's executive committee and suspendingits MIPS development efforts, Michels says, "We haven't really quit the ACEinitiative. You can't quit a state of mind."-- Then: "If I was at Sun right now, I'd be real worried: 20 majorcompanies have decided to build something around MIPS that has nothing todo with SPARC."-John Metcalfe, vp of Silicon Graphics Inc.'s entry systemsdivision.-- Now: "OSF was Scud I. We see ACE as Scud II."-Ed Zander, president ofSunsoft.-- Then: "We're very excited. We're going to be able to expand themarket."-John Paul, director of systems engineering for open systems atCompaq.-- Now: "If we couldn't offer a dramatic price-performance advantage witha RISC-based system-on the order of two to three times the performance ofIntel's X86 line-customers said, 'We don't want to switch.'"Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7ORACLE'S VERSION 7 RELEASEDBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.After 18 months of delays, Oracle Corp.'s Version 7 has been released.Version 7 is Oracle's database server for enterprise-wide computing, saysTim Negris, Oracle's senior director of corporate strategy. It will haveapplications within the database called triggers and stored procedurecalls. V7 is seen as a catch-up release by some analysts, because Oracle'scompetitors, especially its strongest competitor Sybase Inc., have hadthese features for almost two years.   "The significance of V7 is very favorable," says Elliot Prince, a vp atsecurities firm Oppenheimer and Co. Inc.   Although V7 will give Oracle a stronger position in the market, itsfinancial results have been relatively weak. In the third quarter ending inMarch, Oracle reported a revenue increase of 7% to $290 million from $269million in the same period last year.   Says Charles Phillips, a vp with securities firm Soundview: "V7 willgive Oracle more revenue momentum."Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7NCD FILES IPO, ACQUIRES GSSBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.In a move that brings the X Windows market closer to the PC industry, XWindows terminal supplier Network Computing Devices Inc. has acquiredSpectragraphics Corp.'s GSS Personal Graphics Division, a supplier ofsoftware that allows PCs to perform X terminal functions.   "It turns the X terminal and PC markets from being competitive to beingcomplementary," says Steve Auditore, president of the X Business Group.It's the first time an X terminal vendor has entered the PC market, hesays.   NCD has also filed an initial public offering (IPO), and was expected togo public in late May.   "NCD's done everything right so far," says Patty Chang, an industryanalyst with Dataquest. She says the GSS acquisition and the IPO are bothbeneficial to the company because they expand NCD's market penetration andadd cash for further acquisitions and research and development. "We expectthat NCD will be a continued success," says Chang.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7DEC'S DECKED ON WALL STREETBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.Financially troubled DEC, traditionally a technology-oriented company thatfrowned on marketing, has made a cultural flip-flop: DEC will combineengineering and marketing in the same business units so that it can reducethe variety of products it sells and bring new products to market faster.   The move comes after a $294.1 million loss in the third quarter, whichone analyst dubbed "the quarter from hell." DEC will cut its workforce bymore than 10% this month.   Analysts had predicted that DEC's new Alpha RISC chip would give thecompany a much-needed marketing boost, but the hype won't turn into profitsfor another year. Although the chip is rated at 150 mips, compared with the76 mips posted by other processors, it has not yet been widely released. Bythat time, some analysts say workstation leaders Sun and Hewlett-PackardCo. will have matched Alpha's mips performance.   "Why would someone sign on for a year-long gut-wrenching transition fromDEC's proprietary VAX line to Alpha?" asks Bob Herwick, an analyst withHambrecht and Quist. "No one has a big incentive to go with DEC. There's asense of disorganization, lack of focus, and long-term lack ofresponsiveness."Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7SUN FORMS PC BUSINESS UNITBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.Sun has a new business unit, called Sunselect, which is aimed at providingsoftware for integrating PCs with UNIX systems, says Carl S. Ledbetter,newly appointed vp at Sun and general manager of the new unit. Based inBillerica, Mass., Sunselect will offer three primary product lines: thePC-NFS family, a group of products that allow other platforms to takeadvantage of UNIX environments; the SunPC line of PC emulation products,which enable SPARC machines to run DOS and Windows applications; andNetware Sunlink, a software product that connects Novell Netware local-areanetworks to SPARC servers.   "Sun is trying to coexist with the PC environment," says Ken Ow-Wing,programs manager at research firm International Technology Group. Theannouncement has miffed some SPARC peripheral vendors because of the Sun PCproducts. It seems Sun told some board vendors that it wouldn't make itsown accelerator boards-but decided to develop them anyway.   This comes straight out of the "Idi Amin School of Business," says PaulCubbage, an analyst with Dataquest. "Sun doesn't understand it has tonurture the market."Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7COMPANY FORMED TO DEVELOP SABRE-LIKE SYSTEMBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.American Airlines and the CSX Corp., a railroad holding company, haveformed a joint venture to develop a system for trading companycommunications, which will be similar to the well-regarded Sabre System.The Sabre reservation system is the United States' most widely used airlinereservation network. The new computer software service, called Encompass,is aimed at shippers, consignees, forwarders, and other carriers. Encompasshas standardized on Uniface Corp.'s fourth-generation language (4GL)software, according to Anu Shukla, Uniface's vp of marketing.   American and CSX have each invested $10 million in the project. Thepotential market for the company is $1.6 billion.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7NEW OPERATING SYSTEMS FLOOD SPRING COMDEX IN CHICAGOBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.Comdex is typically a trade show for PCs and products, not UNIX. The springedition in Chicago was no exception, but the hottest products at the showwere operating systems that will battle for dominance as upgrades from PCDOS. Spring Comdex featured the public rollouts of new versions ofMicrosoft's Windows and IBM's OS/2, along with the first program thatallows most PC applications to work as X Window System clients. Inaddition, USL gave sneak previews of its desktop UNIX Destiny, and MarkWilliams Co. unveiled a new version of its UNIX clone Coherent.-- Microsoft had an entire floor in the McCormick Place complex dedicatedto Windows-related software and hardware. The company officially releasedWindows 3.1, a new version designed to avoid the system lock-ups that arereportedly common with version 3.0. The Microsoft booth also haddemonstrations of Windows NT running many different Windows applications.There's no word yet on when Windows NT will be available, but MicrosoftSenior Vice President Paul Maritz told show attendees the company doesn'tbelieve NT will be a viable product until 1994.-- IBM's long-promised OS/2 2.0 was finally available for the masses to"test drive." OS/2 will compete with Microsoft Windows: it runs on all386-based PCs, is priced roughly the same as Windows, and runs mostexisting DOS and Windows 3.0 application software. IBM demonstrated aforthcoming version that also runs applications requiring the new Windows3.1. IBM says its agreement with Microsoft prevented it from including thesame capability in 2.0.-- Quarterdeck Office Systems rolled out its long-promised Desqview/X, aDOS-based multitasker that allows users to run multiple DOS and Windowsprograms simultaneously. Of interest to UNIX users is Desqview/X's X-clientcapability: Desqview/X converts the character or Windows display into XWindows commands, so that an ordinary DOS or Windows PC program can bedisplayed across a network on the screen of an X terminal or workstation.-- Mark Williams Co.'s new version of its multiuser operating system,Coherent, will run shrink-wrapped applications written for SCO UNIX.Coherent 4.0 was slated to be available by June for $99.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7IBM-BULL AGREEMENT REAPS NEW WORKSTATIONSBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.The agreement between Groupe Bull and IBM bore its first fruit this monthwith the introduction of a new series of Bull workstations and serversbased on IBM's Power RISC processor family. While the move brings Bull intoline with important competitors in the French market, including HP and Sun,Bull still needs to clarify the value-added component to its monoprocessorRISC offering. The new DPX/20 systems, range in price from $16,600 to$158,500, and are little more than IBM RS/6000 workstations with a Bulllabel. The software available on the DPX/20 is Bull's new BOS/X version 3.2operating system, a modified version of IBM's AIX that includes support forBull peripherals.   These UNIX offerings constitute an attempt to regain lost ground in theburgeoning RISC workstation and server market, and recharge its stagnatingUNIX and open systems line.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7IS UNISYS TURNING IT AROUND?By:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.Strong gains in its UNIX systems and software products helped Unisys Corp.post a first quarter net income of $48.3 million, after a loss of $98.2million a year earlier. James Unruh, Unisys chairman and CEO, says "We'renot labeled as 'financially troubled' anymore, but we still have a long wayto go."   Despite Unisys' financial recovery, it is losing marketshare and overallrevenue growth. Revenue was $2.01 billion compared to $2.06 billion in thesame quarter last year. In an attempt to become less of a box vendor andmore of a solutions-oriented company, Unruh says Unisys will increase itsefforts in the software and service sector of its business. In 1990 serviceand software accounted for 30% of Unisys revenue. In 1991 it accounted for35%.   Some analysts still doubt Unisys' staying power, however. "The crushingdebt is still a long-term problem," says Harvey Hindin, vp with EmergingTechnologies Group. "It's like saying they're trying to climb out of amudpile-they could slip back down. Next quarter could be bad again. It'shardly something to get excited about. Nothing profound is going on atUnisys."   Although Unisys has dropped in influence, its financial turnaround hasbeen excellent, says Catlin Wolfard, ananalyst with Black and Co. Heexpects announcements this summer will help the company's financialpicture.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7SOFTWARE AND SERVICE COMPANIES HAVE HIGHEST RETURN ON SALESGraph: Software and Service Companies Have Highest Return on SalesWith the exception of service and PC companies, all groups of computercompanies are seeing lower returns compared to five years ago. Software andservice companies realized the highest returns in 1990.Source: McKinsey & Co., Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7BITSBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900.French electronics giant Thomson-CSF has agreed to license IBM's PowerPCtechnology. Thomson will manufacture versions of PowerPC microprocessorsthat meet military specifications, and will develop a real-time version ofPowerPC for workstations and computers that run OSF/1 and use the VME bus.   Roy A. Wright has replaced Rick Schrameck as RDI Computer Corp.'spresident of worldwide operations. Schrameck will remain active at RDI, aSPARC portable workstation vendor, as chairman of the board and CEO... JoeMenard, formerly DEC's director of product marketing for UNIX systems, hasjoined USL as vp of marketing.   Carol Bartz, Sun's corporate executive officer and vp of worldwide fieldoperations, is now Autodesk Inc.'s president, CEO, and chairman. JoeRoebuck is Sun's new vp of worldwide field operations... Oki ElectricIndustry Co. Ltd. and HP have made a broad-based agreement, which calls forOki to purchase $80 million worth of HP PA-RISC computers over the nextthree years; HP and Oki to cooperate in computer and telecommunicationsintegration; and HP and Oki to develop and integrate computer andtelecommunications solutions.   Texas Instruments Inc. has introduced a new multiprocessor machine, the1500 MP, based on Motorola Inc.'s 33-MHz 68040 processor...In an effort toexpedite the delivery of NCR Corp.'s Top End to multivendor sites,Independence Technologies Inc., an online transaction processing (OLTP)toolkit vendor, will port and distribute NCR's Top End OLTP software on theSun server, IBM RS/6000, HP 9000, and Pyramid's MISserver platforms. TopEnd will be available on Sequent and DEC platforms within the next year,says Dave Finlay, original equipment manufacturer manager for NCR's TopEnd.   William P. Lyons has been named president and CEO of Parcplace Systems,an object-oriented software company. Adele Goldberg, founder of Parcplaceand co-inventor of the Smalltalk language system, will continue as chairmanof the board of directors.   Unify Corp., a 4GL vendor, has hired Lawrence L. Howard as senior vp ofsales and marketing operations... Tania Amochaev, president of NaturalLanguage Inc. has left the company. At press time, she hadn't taken anotherposition...Sun has its new workstation in selected beta sites. The newworkstation reportedly has four times the performance of existingSPARCstations. The machines will be announced this December.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7OVERHEARDBy:Edited by Gary Andrew Poole with staff reports. Please send any breakingnews or comments to him at: uunet!uworld!garyp or garyp@uworld.com. Or callhim at 415-513-6900."One way of thinking about operating systems and applications is that we'rebuilding the plumbing and we're hoping that somebody makes the toiletseats." -Paul Maritz, senior vp, systems division, Microsoft.   "That's better than the reverse."-Joel A. Appelbaum, president and CEO,Univel.   "As far as I'm concerned Wayne Rosing vp of Sun Microystems Labs Inc. isthe father of the Macintosh." -Roger Ross, president and CEO of RossTechnology Inc.   "Let's not start a paternity suit."-Rosing.   "He looks like a journalist. He has that vacant stare." -SCO's DougMichels, regarding a baby.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7GOOD SOFTWARE IS MORE THAN CODINGBy:Editor-at-Large Walter Zintz is the Advisor Emeritus to Uni-Ops Books inBoonville, Calif.Software developers who fight wars over the merits of their favoriteprogramming tools agree on at least one point: while expertise with one'schosen tools is absolutely essential to building good software, it'snowhere near sufficient.   This month, I look at books that go into five different approaches tothe higher aspects of software construction. Between them they offer acornucopia of styles and techniques, with something for everyone working insoftware development.Programming as if People Mattered: Friendly Programs, Software Engineering,and Other Noble DelusionsBy Nathaniel S. BorensteinPrinceton University Press; 609-896-1344186 pages; 2 pages of ContentsISBN 0-691-08752-0 hardbound; $24.95Technical Level: Nontechnical or TheoristUnderstandability: Crystal ClearSummary: What user interfaces should beIn title, this book is about the human-to-software interface. Borensteinrefrains from dealing with the technical aspects of implementinginterfaces, however. Although he spends some time on semantics, he isprimarily concerned with the personal aspect: making interfaces suitablefor real human beings. Users are the main humans considered, but the bookfrequently looks at problems of concern to managers and customers, aswell.   This book's great glory is the author's implicit, but pervasive, notionthat the human interface extends through software; and that programs arejust ways that people tell computers what they should be doing. Combinethis with Borenstein's taste for doing what's "right," and you have a bookthat befits the first part of its title, "Programming as if PeopleMattered."   Part two of the title describes his approach. Borenstein frequentlyquotes authorities as remote and mystical as the Zen master Ikkyu and St.John of the Cross. His own writing style is full of passion: eager toconvince, sometimes agitated, even angry about botched interfaces and theproblems they've caused.   The result is a book filled with points to think about well before youstart coding menus or screens. Directly or indirectly, the subject is whatuser interfaces should do, and even what whole programs should do withregard to how they affect users. The text is bolstered with numerousquotations and references for further reading. Everything is told in aconversational style, replete with relevant anecdotes, which is what makesit an easy-to-read investigation of a complex and controversial subject.Building Quality SoftwareBy Robert L. GlassPrentice Hall; 201-767-5937369 pages; 10 pages of Index & ContentsISBN 0-13-086695-4 hardbound; $38.00Technical Level: Advanced to TheoristUnderstandability: LucidSummary: Better software without more managerial meddlingThis book's unique stance is that quality in software is not so much amatter for corporate quality control and quality assurance executives as itis for individual programmers and their supervisors. Fortunately for themental health of programmers and supervisors, the book's other majorprinciple is that software quality is very amenable to rational,technological techniques.   Glass covers a broad topic, and his definition of software quality goesbeyond reliability to include matters such as maintainability andsuitability for intended purpose. Glass' solution mixes practical theory,technology, personal and organizational practices, and advice on dealingwith the internal politics that inevitably cloud software engineering.   As befits a book about principles-rather than step-by-step instructionsfor a particular environment-Glass stresses his points strongly enough thatfew thorough readers will miss any of them. Reading it requires a technicalbent and substantial knowledge of how software development actually works,but doesn't require knowledge of math or any particular programminglanguage. Readers who find this level a little high will be encouraged byfrequent ironic anecdotes and a leavening of programmer-style humor. Thosewho wish for a higher level will welcome the extensive references to moretechnical writings.Illustrated CBy Leor ZolmanR & D Publications; 913-841-1631315 pages; 27 pages of Index & ContentsISBN 0-923667-21-0 paperbound; $29.95, $39.95 with diskTechnical Level: Advanced to ExpertUnderstandability: Almost Crystal ClearSummary: What to do with all the C you knowZolman is the programmer who wrote the first C compiler for amicroprocessor-the 8080 chip-back when so many other famous programmerswere saying it wasn't possible. I expect a lot from any programming book byZolman, and he succeeds with this book. He plays the Plato of programminghere, reminding us of all the things we know about C and then pointing outthe unavoidable consequences that most of us don't think about.   The target audience is programmers who have a pretty thorough knowledgeof C basics. This book details which tools should be used and how theyshould be used in various programming situations and, to a lesser degree,why other approaches that may look attractive are actually dead ends.Zolman concentrates on three difficult-to-master areas in C: pointers,string handling, and file I/O.   Except for a few pleasantries like the subhead "Spicy Searching,"Zolman's writing style is straightforward and matter-of-fact. Everything isclear, orderly, and complete for the level of programmer this book istargeted to. The explanations are a running commentary to realisticprogramming problems, and the points are usually brought up about wherethey should be-just after the reader begins to wonder what will be doneabout them.   There is a lot of code included to illustrate Zolman's points, almostall of which takes the form of complete and well-commented utilityprograms. Readers who favor hands-on experimentation can purchase the bookalong with a diskette containing the code. The programs are generally readyfor either a UNIX or a DOS environment; the major exception is that severalare DOS versions of utilities that come with UNIX. The book's listings arefor ANSI C, but the diskette also has versions rewritten for Kernighan andRitchie C. Zolman says he's tested all the code. Much of it has passed amuch stiffer test: publication in his "Illustrated C" column in The C UsersJournal.The Art of Technical DocumentationBy Katherine HaramundanisDigital Press; 800-344-4825 or 617-273-6473267 pages; 20 pages of Index & ContentsISBN 1-55558-080-7 paperbound; $28.95Technical Level: NontechnicalUnderstandability: Lucid to Crystal ClearSummary: More than you ever expected to know about documentationHaramundanis is a computer documentation writer who wants to tell otherswhat she's learned about the craft over many years. In the first fourchapters of her book, this works out well.   She covers the basics of technical documentation and of writing,workplans, document organization, and even career factors. The methodologyshe presents is a good one for most people-I've migrated to many of thesemethods myself over a decade of technical writing, and may adopt a few morenow that I've read her book. In just over 100 pages, she provides prettyextensive and readable coverage. She writes in a style that's an excellentexample of technical writing for non-specialists: clear because it's inplain language and to the point, easy to read because it's enthusiastic andconversational, and lively because her method and style change from chapterto chapter.   The remaining chapters are less even. Here, Haramundanis goes beyondtechnical writing into quasi-related disciplines: graphics, pageformatting, printing and binding, text editors, word-processing software,other software for writing, and computer hardware. Her knowledge of thesesubjects is spotty, and her opinions founder on her lack of knowledge.She's quite good at introducing and explaining several ways of diagramminglogical information including railroad diagrams, flow charts, andNassi-Schneiderman diagrams. But her knowledge of computer software isweak-a table comparing the features of several text editors has almost adozen errors in the vi column alone. Perhaps she felt a sense of inadequacywhile writing these chapters; her style isn't as buoyant here.   Things look up again in a series of appendixes that hold a glossary, twobibliographies, contact information for appropriate organizations, and alist of relevant or semi-relevant standards. All of this is remarkablyextensive, right out to a timeline chart of the historical development ofwriting.Book BriefMyths and Methods: A Guide to Software Productivityby David T. Fisher (Prentice Hall).Fisher explains the German SIABA methodology for efficient softwaredevelopment. SIABA combines requirements analysis with software structureanalysis. It's a rather technical system, and this is a fairly technicalbook.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7STANDARD FARE, EUROPEAN STYLEBy:Joshua GreenbaumThere's no better setting for a meeting on European open systems standardsthan Brussels, the capital of the European Community. It's not just becausethe European Commission took the lead in 1983 by mandating standards andopen systems for public procurement, a move that culminated in a now-famousdirective called 87/95/EEC.   It's that the dull, gray, no-nonsense Belgian capital is the perfectplace to hold court on the dull, gray, no-nonsense world of standards.   Cutting out on Europe's frequent standards meetings to sip beer inBrussels' Grand Place would also mean missing out on some fairlyinteresting and important developments. Like the similarly mundane U.S.interstate highway network that started under Franklin Roosevelt, theimpact open systems will have on Europe's commerce, trade, and publicadministration will be profound and lasting.   The initial impact of Europe's standards efforts is already being feltstrongly in the public administration, where 87/95/EEC and other directiveshave had a strong influence on the procurement and development of computersystems. These public systems are being designed to serve a new level ofconnectivity between countries that will form an electronic interstatehighway system for united Europe's increasingly automated societies.   The gray-suited public administration types who populate standardsmeetings see standardized technology as an important tool to smooth overthe differences in language and business culture that change at everyborder. From the processing of taxes across borders to the transfer ofsocial data between regional public and private entities, the EC is tearingdown the digital Tower of Babel, and it is using open systemsstandards-such as those mandated in 87/95/EEC-to do it.   There is strong sense of purpose about the role of open systems in thepublic sector. As stated in 87/95/EEC, the EC must take into account "theeconomic importance of the roleplayed by standardization in contributing tothe creation of a Community market."   And to achieve these goals, the EC is promoting standards-lots of them.Which means lots of meetings, and lots of gray suits.So Where Are the Users?Although the meetings are well-attended, a corporate user in the audienceis as rare as a sunny day in Brussels, which begs an important question:How well is the public sector leading the private sector into open systems?It's obvious that, in the long run, the groundwork started in Europe'sstandards meetings will build a technology foundation for public andprivate users. But how fast this transfer will happen, and how much theprivate sector will be able to look to the public sector's standards andexperiences for guidance, is far from clear.   The answer may be obscure, but the problems with using the public sectoras a private sector bellwether are obvious.   The creation of open systems standards is a slow and ponderous process.The gray suits move at a snail's pace, their work is infinitely detailed,and many say none of it is accomplished with anywhere near the speedrequired to make it useful to a competitive, free market user.   While technologically sophisticated, the standards world can hardly becalled technologically advanced. Its draft standards often concerntechnology that has long been in use as de facto standards, and the gaggleof standards committees have few answers to the pressing needs of users whoare trying to plan truly advanced systems within a five- or 10-year timeframe.   Most of all, there's a built-in irony in the conflict between privatesector users and standards groups. It's essential that these usersparticipate to give the standards some universal appeal, but it's hard toget the users involved.   At a conference held last spring in Brussels for the launch of theEuropean Procurement Handbook for Open Systems (EPHOS), a standards textfor networking and file transfer technology developed by the EC, users werefew and far between. Across town on the same day, the launch of somethingcalled the Process to Support Interoperability (PSI) was underway.   PSI is a certification process set up by an industry group called theStandards Promotion and Application Group, or SPAG, which is comprised ofsuch leading European companies as Alcatel Alsthom, BritishTelecommunications plc., Groupe Bull, and Ing. C. Olivetti and Co., as wellas IBM Corp. and Digital Equipment Corp. Here too, gray suits ruled andnon-government types were in short supply.   The gray suits at both meetings spoke long and eloquently about therelevance of public standards work to private industry, and both groupsacknowledged the need for private sector input. But their reasoning for thelack of that private sector presence seemed specious. According to theEPHOS organizers, a major reason is that few users have the technicalexpertise to participate at the level EPHOS is working on. On the otherhand, the governments, under legal pressure from 87/95/EEC and local laws,have to have at least some expertise.   "Much of the reason we have chosen to focus on the public sector is thatwe can get at them," says Ken Thompson, chairman of the Commission's PublicProcurement group, only half-joking. "It would be our wish to broaden theinput. But many private sector users don't have the necessary specialistson staff. It's not their job when brewing beer to become specialists ininformation technology."   There are other reasons. It's expensive to run around attendingmeetings, especially for private companies in the midst of a Europe-widerecession. And especially when many users state privately that the wholestandards business is the scope, function, and raison d'etre, of thehigh-priced bureaucrats that the taxpayers in Europe pay so dearly for: Whowants to pay to watch the watchdog?   Exactly what gets standardized when is also a major factor. The factthat the gray suits who brave the Belgian clime to fight the standards warsare hardly in the vanguard of technology forms another vicious circle forthe promotion of standards in the private sector. Standards by definitioncan't be vanguard or even avant-garde: rear-guard is more like it. Askanyone why they specify Posix, and you will get a decidedly cover-your-rearanswer.   But leading-edge technology-which often translates into leading-edgecompetitiveness-is not the scope, function, or raison d'etre of the graysuits. The most complex part of many public open systems procurements isthe systems integration involved: the technology is old hat.   This rear-guard approach is evident in a recent government procurementin the United Kingdom to be awarded this August called Osprey. By Europeanstandards Osprey is a large procurement, coming in at 23 million ($35million U.S.) for its initial phase, with more to come.Osprey: Ready for Take-OffOsprey is an effort to shoe the cobbler's children that was developed bythe Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)-the government group mostassociated with the promotion of technology to the private sector,particularly open systems-to automate its own geographically andstructurally diverse empire. Osprey proposes a truly open environment thattakes into account a mix of existing technology and a plethora ofstandards.   But Osprey is designed to contain virtually no leading-edge technology,and therefore takes no risks. Osprey is innovative in that it providesthousands of users with a highly configurable client-server environment,but it does so without any "gee-whiz" technology.   Despite being a techno-yawn, DTI's approach to an open office automationenvironment has a lot of potential use within the private sector, if not asa model, then as a guideline.   To come up with the Osprey specifications, the authors analyzed theworkflow in DTI, categorized the existing environment, surveyed user needs,and built a painstakingly detailed business model.   What these consultants describe in Osprey is a work environment withmany disparately located offices using a lot of different hardware andsoftware systems-some open, some not. It's an environment that probablysounds familiar to most corporate users.   The work Osprey hopes to accomplish is familiar, too. Osprey is aboutpushing paper and data around a service organization-a basic requirement atthe heart of any service sector company or the service department of alarge corporation.   A number of companies are said to be watching how the Osprey procurementgoes to see if it will become the model for public and private officeautomation procurement as its designers would like it to.Where is the Leading Edge?If your company wants to do more leading-edge work, where do you turn? NotBrussels.   One of the few users at the SPAG conference, Raanan Barzel, a systemsanalyst at the Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP), assails the SPAG's PSI workand the EPHOS standards as useful, but for an earlier generation ofproblems. The initial emphasis within both groups for relatively low-levelcommunications standards leaves Barzel dissatisfied.   "We have been addressing the wrong level of standards," Barzel announcedto SPAG's audience. "At the user level, communications shouldn't be aproblem. We want to move ahead to the applications," and to the database,object-oriented, and distributed processing standards, as well as a host ofother pressing issues for private companies like BNP.   Such needs leave much of the standards world far behind. But standardslike SPAG's PSI and EPHOS do have an important function, even if theysatisfy a vastly different level of technological sophistication. Althoughgovernment types like Thompson bemoan the lack of user input in thestandards process, the intended procurer or developer of a public system isnot necessarily a techie like Barzel, who has been using UNIX since thelate 1970s. In many ways, the whole idea of government standards works bestwhen users don't have to participate in, or even be aware of, the wholeprocess.Snapping Systems TogetherSpeakers at the two conferences also spoke of an ideal world inwhichgovernment users would be able to use standards to design open systems theway a child uses a Lego set. Choose the right size and color piece and snapit in: There's no need to understand how the snap works, or what went intobuilding the individual piece.   What's good for the techno-illiterate bureaucrat could be good forThompson's beer brewer: it should be enough to know how to brew good beerwithout having to learn to brew standards too. If the standards arewell-defined and a certification process like PSI works-every brandedproduct interoperates with every other branded product-the brewer canconstruct a system by choosing products from an open systems catalog. Aslong as the catalog is thick enough.   And right now it isn't. According to EPHOS and SPAG, the catalog islimited.   Even at its best, such a catalog would contain largely gray, colorlessstandards. The problem with standards is the blessing, and the curse, ofall creation: that which is created is always made in the image of thecreator. The European open systems of tomorrow, born from the gray,industrial meeting halls of Brussels, may end up as gray as the suitssitting in rapt attention at a discourse on X.500 standards.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7SUN UNVEILS ITS FIRST MULTIPROCESSING DESKTOPThe new SPARCstation 10 workstation represents Sun Microsystems Inc.'svision of desktop machines that progressively integrate more and more"peripheral" devices. The SPARCstation 10 brings together a half-dozenfeatures that have never been found in one place before. You can upgradethe CPU by swapping daughterboards. It has a built-in integrated servicesdigital network (ISDN) connection, along with Ethernet and twisted pair.Graphics capabilities are standard. And it's the first SPARCstation withfour SBus board expansion slots and a built-in parallel port for printers.   Not to say there aren't drawbacks. While the SPARCstation 10 is thefirst multiprocessing desktop system, the multiprocessing operating systemyou need-Sunsoft's Solaris 2.0-isn't scheduled to be out until later thisfall. If it's speed you're looking for, the single-processor SPARCstation10 just barely reaches the performance level of the low-end Hewlett-PackardCo. HP 9000 Model 720 workstation. And although the computer has four SBusslots, one of them is taken up with a board for 2- and 3-D graphics.   The fact that the SPARCstation 10 is not just another powerhouse forscientists and engineers is what differentiates it from the other machinesSun has introduced at the high end of its product line. On the commercialside, financial analysts doing lots of number crunching can use its desktoppower without off-loading to a compute server. On the development side, itsbuilt-in audio and ISDN port make it a logical, although expensive,platform for multimedia application programmers. Sun is also positioningthe SPARCstation 10 as a repository for network management information.   The workstation uses Texas Instruments Inc.'s SuperSPARC processor,which integrates all of the integer and floating point calculations-as wellas one megabyte of cache and the memory management features-into a singlechip the size of a silver dollar. The fastest HP machinehas only ahalf-megabyte of cache. According to TI, the processor can issue andexecute three instructions per clock cycle.   The processor also integrates the 64-bit connection to the Sun MBusslots. The CPU itself is on a detachable daughterboard called an MBusboard, and the peripheral slots accommodate SBus boards. The advantage isthat as semiconductor companies come out with faster SPARC processors, youcan simply lift out one daughterboard and plug in a faster one. TheSPARCstation 10 has two MBus slots so that with two processors and theSolaris 2.0 operating system, you get multiprocessing.   Having the CPU on a detachable daughterboard is not a new idea. DigitalEquipment Corp.'s DECstation 5000 machines offered detachabledaughterboards for its RISC CPUs a year ago. The difference is that theDECstation relies on a single processor vendor, the MIPS Technologies Inc.subsidiary of Silicon Graphics Inc., but you can upgrade the Sun CPUwhenever the SPARC processor vendors leapfrog each other with a newdesign.   For Nancy Battey, workstation analyst with International Data Corp.,this investment protection is key to the potential success of theSPARCstation 10. "It's a great investment story," she says, because usersget "a growth path for future capabilities, instead of locking you into onesystem with no room to grow."   The upgradeable daughterboard is not the only comparison betweenDECstations and the SPARCstation 10, though. DEC is making a concertedeffort to position its workstations as multimedia development platforms, asis Silicon Graphics with its low-end Iris Indigo.   The place where the SPARCstation 10 outshines the Indigo and the low-endHP Model 9000 Series 705 workstations is in upgrade capability, saysBattey. "You can upgrade the graphics on the Indigo, but that's it. You geta solution for today, but what about three years down the road when budgetsare getting cut" and you need a faster machine, she asks.   The SPARCstation 10 comes in four models: a 36-MHz uniprocessor version,a 40-MHz uniprocessor version with extra cache on the daughterboard, a45-MHz dual-processor version, and a 45-MHz four-processor version. Themachine can accommodate up to 500 megabytes of internal memory and up to848 megabytes of internal disk storage. By comparison, the high-end HPworkstation offers less internal memory (192 megabytes maximum) but moreinternal disk storage (2.6 gigabytes maximum). The SPARCstation 10 also hasa 1.4 megabyte floppy disk drive.   According to IDC's Battey, Sun's concurrent release of the SPARCstation10 and the SPARCserver 10 will place them snugly at the low-end of theservers and the high-end of the workstations, and will allow them to stealsales from both. According to IDC's estimates, 38.6 percent of Sun's 1991sales of 189,000 units were high-end SPARCstation 2 workstations andservers. "The SPARCstation 10 will make that percentage go up," predictsBattey.   The base price for the SPARCstation 10 starts at $18,495 for auniprocessor version; about $20,000 more for the dual-processor version;and $40,000 more for the four-processor version. For performance figures,Sun is using the revised SPECmark calculation, which splits performancenumbers into two categories: one to rate integer performance and one torate floating-point performance. Sun estimates the preliminarysingle-processor SPECmarks for the SPARCstation 10 to be between 40 and 50SPECmarks for integer performance, and between 45 and 55 SPECmarks forfloating-point performance.   The diskless low-end HP/Apollo 9000 Model 720 costs about $6,000 less,but it runs at 55.5 SPECmarks. Sun argues that its workstations provide"more balanced" performance spread between the CPU, cache, memory, disk,and network; that is, measuring more than just the CPU, as HP does.Although Sun still faces some daunting price and performance comparisonswith HP-the winner and still champion of SPECmark races-things can and willchange. SPARC-processor manufacturer Cypress Semiconductor is alreadywaiting in the wings with an even faster SPARC CPU.Sun Microsystems Computer Corp.,2550 Garcia Ave., Mountain View, CA 94043;415-960-1300.Photograph: Sun's latest workstation, the SPARCstation 10, comes in fourmodels and brings multiprocessing to the desktop for the first time.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7GOING GRAPHICALBy:Frank HayesAt the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSE), up to $1 million in stock changeshands every minute. Productivity is easy to measure-it's how fast a tradercan register a buy or sell order in the frenzied atmosphere of the exchangefloor.   It's all computerized, of course, but there's no time for keyboards, oreven mice. Instead, traders poke with fingers and pencils at graphicalmenus on one of TSE's 250 touch screens, then race away to make anotherdeal. "As an interface," says Wayne Fowler, TSE's director of technologyand network services, "it has been very successful."   "Ease of use" is a catchy phrase, but it's often hard to measure thebenefit users get from graphical interfaces-and to compare that benefitwith the extra cost of the workstations, X terminals, Macintoshes, orMicrosoft Windows software required to run them. For many informationsystems executives, graphical user interfaces are an expensive andunfamiliar new technology with uncertain advantages over the conventionalcharacter-based systems they replace.   Fortunately, many information systems people, including the ones weinterviewed, have already been down this road. They've adopted graphicalsystems in a variety of industries and applications to accomplish a varietyof goals. They now have the experience to know what's important in makinggraphical interfaces worth the extra cost and work in large computerinstallations.The Graphical RevolutionIf workstations and PCs were the wave of the 1980s, the 1990s are ridingthe crest of mice and menus. The numbers tell the story. Workstations withgraphical interfaces now make up more than half of all UNIX computers.Sales of X terminals that can run UNIX-based graphical interfaces aredoubling every year. On PCs, Microsoft Corp. says it has sold 10 millioncopies of the version of Windows it rolled out in 1990.   The first mass-market computer with a graphical interface, AppleComputer Inc.'s Macintosh, was introduced in 1984. Butneither the Mac norits imitators, such as Windows, were instant successes.   The problem was typical of new technologies: as long as the oldcharacter-based hardware and software did the job, customers didn't seemuch reason to replace them with graphical systems. And, as long ascharacter applications were selling, there was no reason for softwarevendors to invest in learning how to create graphic applications, so therewere fewer graphical applications for users to justify getting the hardwarerequired to run them.   It took until the end of the 1980s for graphical interfaces to become anunqualified success.   The most obvious elements of graphical systems haven't changed much overthe years: on-screen "windows" that can contain text or pictures, "pop-up"menus that can be used at any time, and a device called a mouse that allowsa user to choose by pointing rather than by typing.   What makes the Mac and its imitators user-friendly isn't just theon-screen pictures and the mouse, although those elements make the computerseem less forbidding to novice users. Much of any graphical system's powercomes from the consistency of the software applications. "Once you'velearned the first one, it's a lot easier to learn the second and thirdones. They're all alike," says Tom Wnuk, senior data processing officer atConnecticut Mutual Life Insurance Co.   Another benefit comes from multiple windows. Many information systemsdepartments have turned to graphical interfaces to replace desks full ofterminals, each connected to a different computer system. By networkingthose systems, a single workstation or X terminal with several windows canuse each window to replace a terminal-and information can easily be copiedfrom one window to another.   Still another advantage is something character terminals just can'toffer: on-screen graphics. As Jack London, director of the medical computerfacility at Fox Chase Cancer Center discovered, that can elevate thebenefit of a graphical system from simple ease of use to much greaterproductivity.   As for productivity, numbers are hard to come by. Academic experimentsin testing labs frequently claim graphical interface users learnapplications faster and use more kinds of software-but does that translateinto more productive work?   To try to find out the real benefits and costs of graphical systems, wetalked to various users who have put graphical interfaces to work inbusiness situations. They've learned the power and the pitfalls of thesesystems, and most are now convinced that the results-less training, betterapplications, and happier users-are worth the price.Bang for the BuckThe price was higher at TSE than it is at most other organizations thatturn to graphical interfaces, but TSE had a big problem to solve. Itshigh-energy traders had no interest in learning a computerized tradingsystem, yet TSE had committed to putting all transactions through acomputerized "book" to guarantee that all stocks were traded at the marketprice. According to Fowler, the solution was a step beyond conventionalgraphical interfaces-250 touch-screen terminals and PCs, all runningversions of a Motif-based trading application.   Fowler says it wasn't hard to get traders to use the touch-screensystem. "They just walk up to it and poke it with a finger or a pencil," hesays. A somewhat tougher task fell to TSE's information systemsstaff-writing the custom application that traders now poke at. Even thatdidn't require a major effort, Fowler says: it only took two or threeprogrammers working on the original program for less than six months.   Since then they've continued to tweak it, especially for speed."Windowing systems tend to be very slow," says Fowler; details such as abackground color or whether an on-screen button is shaded can make adifference in speed. Concentrating on details like these, TSE's informationsystems staff has squeezed response time to less than one second.   And even the touch-screens, which cost $2,000 more than an ordinary VGAPC monitor, are a comparative bargain, Fowler says. Using high-resolutionmonitors for mouse-based workstations would have cost $5,000 to $6,000each.   At the Fox Chase Cancer Center, a major cancer research hospital, thegoal was also ease of use, according to London. Doctors and nurses at FoxChase used a series of menus on character terminals to check patientrecords, but the system was slow and hard to use.   "They said, 'Why don't you just put Macs in everywhere?'" London laughs.The reason was cost: replacing each VT220 terminal with aseveral-thousand-dollar large-screen Macintosh would have been far tooexpensive, and the hospital didn't need full-scale computers-just graphicalterminals.   Instead of Macs, London turned to relatively inexpensive X terminals toimprove the system's usability-but the result was a new capability. "We dida little prototype, and showed it to the doctors," recalls London. "Theyasked, 'Can you do images?'"   Although some medical images, such as X rays, require scanning films,others-such as CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans and MRI (magneticresonance imaging) results-are already digitized. Today, the text ofpatient records and patient-related images are available on the system.Patient medical files don't get lost, and the images can be used by morethan one person at once-another big plus for productivity.   But if the graphical system cured a problem, the medicine wasn'tinexpensive. "The cost was in the migration programming effort," Londonsays. The programming staff had to shift from programming in Pascal on VMSto C under Ultrix, and had to learn the subtleties of using the X WindowSystem.   At Connecticut Mutual, the goal was to give easy access to informationto the customer service department. Customer service was labor- andpaper-intensive for Connecticut Mutual in 1990, which is when the companydecided to move to a graphical interface using Microsoft Windows.   According to Roger Thibodeau, chief engineer in the company's dataprocessing department, in the last 20 to 25years, Connecticut Mutual hadbuilt a variety of systems-all on IBM Corp. mainframes-for trackingpolicies. The menu-based systems required users to navigate through screenafter screen to track down the value of a single insurance policy, and thenwrite the information down on paper. Finding the cash value of a customer'shalf-dozen policies could leave the customer waiting overnight. And in somecases, waiting overnight would mean the value of the policies had changed,so the numbers were already out of date.   Rewriting the system from scratch was too expensive and, as Thibodeaupoints out, "There's a lot of intelligence built in those" older programs.Instead, Thibodeau's department developed an application called"Superinquiry." Now, users simply type in the customer's name andSuperinquiry automatically reads the screens from the mainframe queryprograms, adds policy cash values, and delivers the information to theuser's PC screen. That shortens the query time from overnight to less than30 seconds.   "The net productivity gain is enormous," says Thibodeau-and with thatgain, Connecticut Mutual is on target for paying back its investment in thegraphical system.Information Systems SolutionsWhile graphical interfaces can empower users, they're also good for helpingto meet more traditional information systems department goals, includingmore efficient software development, reduced maintenance and training forusers, and automating functions to cut costs.   DHL Systems Inc. provides the core information systems functions for theaffiliated companies that form the DHL Worldwide Express courier service.According to Deborah Gordon, DHL Systems' manager of development support,the company turned to UNIX workstations and graphical interfaces tointroduce computer-aided software engineering for developing newapplications and systems. That meant graphical interfaces not only forprogrammers, but also for documentation writers who used them to createmanuals, software librarians who used them to track versions ofapplications in development, and managers who used them to trackdevelopment projects.   The result was the expected improvement in productivity, but with anunexpected benefit for the programmers. The new tools, Gordon says, "aremuch more complex than any of the tools we had before." Without thegraphical interface, such tools would have been unusable.   "We are able to make more complex applications. It's quite formidable,"she says. On the other hand, Gordon points out, "You start needing someadditional skills within your company. You need some standards for thegraphics to communicate. Our documentation group emphasizes using themproperly."   At WMAQ-TV in Chicago, Ill. the decision to add Macintoshes for theadvertising sales department cut across the grain of corporate computingstrategy. The television station is one of a half-dozen owned and operatedby NBC Television Stations-and NBC is a solidly IBM shop, according to JoeHarris Jr., director of information technology for the stations NBC owns.   Harris faced a hard sell convincing his bosses that graphical computerswere a good idea. He finally convinced them that a graphical system wouldbe easier to learn and use by renting 10 Macs, loading them with software,and sending them to the executives' children. "Every single executive endedup liking the machine," says Harris-and now, the television stations heserves all have at least one Mac.   But Harris' goal wasn't child's play; he hoped the Macs would encouragepeople in advertising sales and several related departments to actively usethe system. Before the Macs, Harris says, information on advertising ratesand customers was available on terminals connected to a mainframe, but thesalespeople rarely used them.   "Now," says Harris, "it looks just like an Apple commercial," with thesales staff using the machines for creating sales presentations, preparingrate schedules on spreadsheets, and exchanging e-mail with ad agencies.   The network of Macs also promised to require less maintenance andtraining than conventional computers or terminals-a crucial item, becauseWMAQ didn't want the cost of a large on-site information systems staff. Theresult: only a month after training, WMAQ users were not only using theircomputers, but had also become largely self-sufficient, and no longerrequired Harris and his staff to answer most questions.   Eventually, says Harris, that will show up in the bottom line byjustifying the $250,000 investment with higher advertising sales and asmaller budget for technical staff. For the moment, though, it's too soonto measure the savings, he says.   Halfway across the continent, the New Yorker got similar results bypursuing a different goal. Pamela Older, vice president and director ofmanufacturing for the magazine, wanted to eliminate the large weeklytypesetting bills by computerizing-but without upsetting the traditionallook or the low-tech habits of the editors. Her solution was to use anetwork of Macs where they would do the most good-on the desks of editorialassistants and the staff that compiles the weekly cultural andentertainment calendar, "Goings On About Town."   Exactly matching the New Yorker's well-known look required customtypefaces and other extra costs, Older says, but the results are worth it:the $350,000 Mac-based system will save $1 million in typesetting costs inthe first year alone. As at WMAQ, Older says users now learn on their own.And now other departments, such as research, want Macs, too.Two for OneAt the Gradison division of McDonald and Co. Securities Inc., 60 brokersonce had two terminals on each desk. They would have had three, except thatone terminal did double duty through a special data switch that requiredusers to switch back and forth between two systems, according to JimHonerkamp, vice president and director of computer services for Gradison.   Today, X terminals let brokers see all of their work in individualwindows at once. "It's a huge improvement over our old environment," bothfor brokers and the computer staff, says Honerkamp.   Under the old system, brokers were often confused by how to use thedouble-duty terminals, and the data switch "required lots of babysitting,"Honerkamp says. Now, with everything on a single screen, brokers don't getconfused, and the information systems department spends less time solvingproblems with the brokers and the data switch. "We've been able to actuallyreduce our workload," Honerkamp says.   Eventually, Gradison wants to develop imaging applications, such assignature verification, but right now the applications are still text-only."In the real world," says Honerkamp, "environments are like we have:multiple proprietary hosts, with users who need information from all ofthem. Graphical interfaces can pile these things together very efficiently.It's the same old environment, just repackaged."   It's a similar story at the headquarters of the United Association ofJourneymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of theUnited States and Canada.   "Overall, the graphical user interface makes a lot of sense," says DonLipp, information systems manager for the United Association, a union whosemembers have specialties ranging from plumbing to heating and airconditioning, metallurgy, and nuclear reactor technologies. The union'sheadquarters staff has to keep track of 320,000 members, including theireducation, skills, and specialities. In the past, that required multipleterminals on each desk. Now, each user can get information on a UnisysCorp. mainframe, four UNIX systems, and a Novell Inc. Netware server-allthrough a single PC running Microsoft Windows.   Lipp says he put in extra effort to simplify and automate the users'log-in process so that the graphical interface and the PC network were easyto use and reliable. The result: even the least adventurous users now haveall the capabilities they once had through their multiple terminals, whilemore aggressive users have fewer limits on their access to information.The DownsideNot all of the information systems professionals we talked to weredelighted with the results of graphical interfaces. For some, the coststurned out to be much higher than expected. For others, the expense meantthey had to look for other alternatives.   Oregon Health Sciences University hoped to use PCs running MicrosoftWindows as administrative workstations connected to its IBM mainframe,according to Don Adams, microcomputer analyst at the teaching hospital. Theadvantage was supposed to be a much shorter learning curve fornon-technical users. But the biggest learning curve turned out to be forthe technical staff.   "Setting up these machines was very difficult," says Adams, "one and ahalf to two days for one machine to work reliably. The set-up program wasvery buggy and inconsistent." In the end, the staff had to write its owninstallation scripts. Adams expects the new version of Windows to workbetter, and he's considering IBM's OS/2 2.0 as an alternative. But untilthe installation and maintenance problems are resolved, Windows will onlybe on about 50 of the hospital's more than 800 PCs.   At PPG Industries, Information Services Manager Bob Brookes doesn'tdisagree that graphical interfaces can improve productivity-they're on thedesks of all his programmers-but he says the cost doesn't always make itfeasible for office workers.   PPG, a maker of automotive replacement glass, had users who neededaccess to two mainframe systems in its wholesale distribution branch.However, those users were already accustomed to switching between twosessions on their terminals. When the company shifted to a UNIX system, PPGopted for a similar screen-switching program instead of a graphicalinterface.   The chief reason: the cost of installing graphical PCs or X terminalsjust wasn't in the budget. "We knew about graphical user interfaces, butwith 450 terminals to replace, the cost was considerable," says Brookes.The less-expensive solution also reduced the disruption for all thoseusers-it's much more similar to whatthey're used to, Brookes says. WouldBrookes prefer a graphical approach? "If we could afford it," he says.Keys to SuccessGenerally, the investment in graphical systems appears to be worth it. Thekey to success is to plan carefully and go slowly when you go graphical-butgo.   Tackle the departments that will give you the most bang for your buckfirst, advises New Yorker's Older. Recognize that you can get a lot ofbenefit just from collecting several existing terminals onto a singlescreen, say Gradison's Jim Honerkamp, DHL Systems' Deborah Gordon, and theUnited Association's Don Lipp. Get users involved, and they'll come up withnew ways to be more productive, agree Fox Chase's Jack London and WMAQ-TV'sJoe Harris.   Their accumulated experience doesn't translate into proof positive thatgoing graphical will result in higher productivity. But their accumulatedexperience indicates that it is more likely that you'll be able to make agraphical system worth the investment.FIGURE 1: Pluses and Minuses of Going GraphicalPluses:+ Applications all work in similar ways, so they're easier for users tolearn, and require less training and information systems staff support.+ Multiple windows let users see all the information they need at once,and can cut the clutter of several terminals on a desk.+ Cut-and-paste lets users move information directly into documents,eliminating copying errors.+ Graphics can give easier access to non-textual data such as signaturesand medical images.+ Users are less likely to fight the system, and will use it moreeffectively.Minuses:- Up-front cost of hardware is higher than for character terminals.- Building custom applications requires learning skills in graphicalprogramming.- Setup and network management may be more complex than using dumbterminals.FIGURE 2: Of Mice and MenusOnly about 10 percent of existing desktop PCs use a graphical userinterface such as Microsoft Corp.'s Windows. On larger systems ranging fromworkstations to mainframes, about 10 percent of the new seats sold eachyear are graphics-capable.SOURCE: Microsoft Corp., IBM Corp.SOURCE: Dataquest, X Business GroupCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7ON THE HORIZONBy:F.H.The mouse has been a mainstay of graphical user interfaces since theirearliest days, but it may have competition in the future.   At the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSE), instead of clicking with a mouse,users make selections by tapping the screen with a finger or pencil. Thetouch screens are expensive, admits Wayne Fowler, TSE's director oftechnology and network services, but they're much easier for traders on thefloor to use than a mouse would be.   Pen computers try to take simplicity a step further by letting userswrite on the screen-and recognizing what's been written. The most popularpen computer is the Gridpad from the Grid Systems division of Tandy Corp.(Fremont, Calif.). Gridpad, which has been on the market since 1990, isabout the size of an encyclopedia volume; a user can print on the LCDscreen with a stylus, and the computer will slowly convert the image of theprinting into conventional screen type.   Other computer makers, including NCR Corp. and several Japanese vendors,expect to introduce similar machines this year. Microsoft Corp. hasreleased pen extensions for Microsoft Windows, and IBM Corp. hasdemonstrated an experimental pen computer that runs UNIX with penextensions for the MIT X Window System.   While pens may let users manipulate graphical systems more easily,another development on the horizon-so-called "prescient" userinterfaces-may necessitate even less manipulation.   A prescient user interface remembers how a user performs certain tasksand, using artificial-intelligence techniques, anticipates some of theuser's actions and provides information the user is likely to need. No suchproducts exist yet, but Apple Computer Inc. Chairman John Sculley has saidhe believes this style of computing would be a potent extension ofgraphical technology, especially for users who have trouble with even therelatively easy graphical systems of today.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7A FLOOD OF WINDOWSBy:F.H.By the end of 1992, a flood of new and improved graphical systems will beavailable for PCs and UNIX. On the UNIX side, vendors of X Window terminalsshould begin to use the most recent release of the MIT X Window System,release five, in products this year.   But it's the PC market that is seeing the greatest flood of products.This spring, four companies released new versions of their graphicalsystems almost simultaneously. Microsoft Corp. released version 3.1 ofMicrosoft Windows, that solved many of the problems of stability andreliability Windows users have complained about.   IBM Corp. launched OS/2 2.0, the new version of its multitaskingoperating system for PCs that can also run Windows programs. AlthoughOS/2's earlier versions, which IBM co-developed with Microsoft, failed tocapture the interest of buyers, IBM is now competing directly againstMicrosoft for Windows users-and competing hard.   Quarterdeck Office Systems Inc. (Santa Monica, Calif.) releasedDesqview/X, a new version of its multiwindow system that combines an XWindows terminal emulator and multitasking of character-based DOSapplications. Hewlett-Packard Co. announced a new release of its NewWavegraphical system, and The Santa Cruz Operation Inc. released version 2.0 ofOpen Desktop, its UNIX graphical environment.   Still in the wings are Microsoft's Windows NT operating system, which isnot expected to be available until next year, and the forthcoming Taligentoperating system from Kaleida, the joint venture between Apple ComputerInc. and IBM.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7SUN BLOCKIts founder incinerated by giant rival Sun Microsystems, Solbourne Computerappoints a new seer. Can he see a way out of Sun's shadow?By:Gary Andrew PooleThree years ago, Solbourne Computer Inc. wanted to be The Next GreatWorkstation Company. The upstart start-up had a better mousetrap and a verybig cheese investor: Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Being tiny,it could be nimble. Solbourne promised to unveil a workstation a full sixmonths ahead of Sun Microsystems Inc. that would better Sun's product inprice, performance, and service. Solbourne would become to open systemswhat Compaq Computer Corp. was to personal computers-the superior, andsuper-successful, alternative. But then Solbourne stumbled and trappeditself.   As Sun plodded closer and closer to the marketplace with its nextgeneration SPARCstation, Solbourne dithered. It had seven products invarious stages of development, including a superior file server. As founderand president, Doug MacGregor, a technical whiz, juggled limited resourcesto try to seize all of Solbourne's opportunities, the workstation began toslip. It didn't meet performance goals. Deliveries were moved back.Suddenly those six months were gone.   Reviewers in 1989 liked Solbourne's Series 4 SPARC-compatibleworkstation, particularly its proprietary bus and multiprocessingarchitecture, but it was barely cheaper than Sun's original. Today it playsa minor role in the marketplace, and at Solbourne itself, which has foundgreater success with its high-performance server.   Now Sun is introducing its own server. With nearly four times as manyworkers in its marketing department as Solbourne's full workforce of 220people, Sun seems poised to crush its tiny competitor.   What has Solbourne done to combat this potentially fatal eclipse? Untilthis spring, nothing. MacGregor struggled to eke a profit from thecompany's $70 million in annual sales, and says he was on the verge ofdoing so. But in April Solbourne abruptly fired MacGregor and named in hisplace Carl Herrmann, who had been vice president of internationaloperations. Equipped with an MBA from The Wharton School of the Universityof Pennsylvania and a background in marketing, the taciturn Herrmann sayshe will do a better job of selling what Solbourne builds, rather than buildanything new to sell. Solbourne has already scheduled the introduction ofanother server later this year, but research and development will otherwisetake a back seat to marketing.   If Solbourne's directors hoped their April bombshell would shock theirfoes, they are shell-shocked themselves. Herrmann is little known outsidehis company, and his first pronouncement, in an interview with UNIXWORLD,was: "I have helped develop the company's overall strategy. The change inmanagement does not in any way change Solbourne's strategic direction."   Herrmann's statement is all the more surprising because, as everyoneoutside of Solbourne itself seems to recognize, the company doesn't haveany strategic direction.   "Solbourne's products are technologically superior-I'm not impressedwith Sun's server line," says Tom Willmott of the Aberdeen Group marketresearch firm. "But there are serious questions about the future of thecompany. It's difficult for a small hardware company to compete against Sunin the same market niche."   Paul Cubbage of Dataquest is even harsher in his assessment. "Marketdynamics are against Solbourne," he says. "Does it matter who the newpresident is? I don't think so, unless he walks on steam."Walking on AirWhen Solbourne set out to conquer the workstation market, it faced somehurdles, but hot air wasn't one of them. MacGregor had solid technicalcredentials: One of the designers of the Motorola Inc. 68020microprocessor, MacGregor was working on his doctorate in computer sciencein Japan. In October 1987, Sun announced it would license its ScalableProcessor Architecture (SPARC) chip. Burning with desire to clone thetechnology, MacGregor approached Matsushita for funding and Solbourne wasborn. Matsushita owns 52 percent of the firm, with MacGregor and otheremployees holding the balance.   In January 1989 Solbourne introduced its Series 4 multiprocessingworkstations and a companion line of servers. In October 1990 it followedwith the S4000 workstation, its first uniprocessor model. But Sun'sintroduction of its own competing workstation, and its ability to trimprices and bully distributors into freezing out Solbourne, doomed theworkstations. Solbourne is now emphasizing its newest generation ofservers: the Series 5E, a family of symmetric multiprocessors. The 5E/800iis a network server that supports up to four processors for an officeenvironment; the 5E/900 Enterprise Server supports up to eight processorsfor computer rooms.   However, "No hardware company, whether it's $70 billion or $70 million,will survive if it doesn't add significant value to its hardware," saysShmuel Halevi, vice president of The Technology Research Group."Solbourne's trying to add software value, but how well it's executing isyet to be seen."   Just before MacGregor was sacked, Solbourne belatedly formed a softwarebusiness unit to focus on the development, distribution, and support ofsoftware products for building X Windows-based C++ applications. Thesoftware group is small-11 developers and four marketing and salespeople-but it has made agreements with Centerline Software Inc., ParcplaceSystems, and The Qualix Group, to help develop and distributeobject-oriented technology. But even this tentative step forward has comeat the expense of internal dissention.   "There has been some resistance from the hardware sales and marketingside," says George Kakatsakis, general manager of the new unit.Nonetheless, he insists, "We're moving toward the high-end, commercialcustomer, and they need this type of development environment."   Solbourne has indeed made gains in the commercial market, where itstechnical excellence is less important than it is with scientificpurchasers. Commercial sales have increased sixfold in two years, butremain just 30 percent of Solbourne's business. Here too, the companyremains a hardware player, and that has meant micron-thin profit margins.Solbourne officials claim the company will manage its first-albeittiny-profit this year, but only by cutting staff to the bone-Solbourne laidoff 10 percent of its workforce early this year.What Will Solbourne Market?Sun's new line of servers attacks Solbourne where it lives-in technology.Sun's new machines are based around the Viking chip, which promises to haveexcellent multiprocessing capabilities. Solbourne's symmetricmultiprocessing operating system has been superior to Sun's operatingsystem, but the Viking-based server could overcome any performance gaps. Ifthe chip delivers, Solbourne's only market-and only marketing-edgedisappears.   Hunkered down in his Longmont, Colorado, headquarters, Solbourne's newgeneral has met requests for information by shunting questioners to hislieutenants. Travis White, vice president of marketing, says, "We've hadgreat technology, but we've never articulated it. With Carl, we'll increaseour marketing push."   On the battlefield, that would be called a tactic, not a strategy-andit's a frail one. White's staff numbers 15, and while it recently embarkedon a direct mail and print advertising campaign to generate namerecognition, Solbourne might have done better to keep its wallet in itspocket and go courting its existing customers. Their loyalty is suspect.   "I have some serious concerns about Solbourne," says Russ Goebel, asystems analyst with Sandia National Laboratories, a research anddevelopment company for the U.S. Department of Energy. "If I had to make adecision today about buying a Solbourne machine I'd wait."   Goebel uses a Solbourne Series 5000 600 multiprocessing machine, butsays he's concerned about buying machines from SPARC-compatible vendorsbecause he says Sun "calls all the shots" and that's "dangerous becausetheir future is in the hands of one vendor."   And although Solbourne's fate will be decided in the U.S. market, itsnew president has spent most of his career abroad. Before joining Solbournelast year, Herrmann ran the Far East operations of Hong Kong-based AmphenolEast Asia Ltd., a worldwide supplier of cables and connectors for theelectronics industry. Before that he was managing director of the Singaporesubsidiary of Genrad Inc., a vendor of test and measurement systems forelectronic and mechanical products.A New Watch-Or a Death Watch?Analysts say Solbourne can probably coast on the strength of its fileservers for at least another year. Its emerging software products offer aglimmer of hope that the company can transform itself into a value-addedvendor, as well as a high-quality manufacturer. But replacing a technicalgenius with a marketer doesn't inspire confidence on that score. AppointingHerrmann to run the company at least postpones the other option Matsushitafaced before Solbourne acted-pulling the plug altogether.   "Matsushita is one of the most respected manufacturing companies inJapan," says Jeff Morgan, co-author of the book Cracking the JapaneseMarket, "but it's facing some tough economic times. It's scaling back itsoutside investments. Solbourne has to answer to Matsushita."   "The Japanese," he adds ominously, "will kill a company withoutflinching. They're very unsentimental."   Since Matsushita made its initial investment in Solbourne, the Japanesestock market has crashed to about half its former level. Although $60billion Matsushita dwarfs $3.6 billion Sun as completely as Sun dominatesSolbourne, the Japanese economy is tottering on the edge of recession andeven its biggest conglomerates are retrenching-especially in the UnitedStates, where investments from Rockefeller Center to Pebble Beach have gonesour. Solbourne represents an almost trivial investment when compared tothose glamour deals, but as MacGregor's firing makes clear-it doesn't passunnoticed.   For now, Solbourne Computer has been given a new lease on life. NewPresident Herrmann will wring as many marketing dollars from Solbourne'scash flow as he can, and he'll start making the calls. It's a sales mantra:"You make the calls, you get the business."   The market will be watching. Is Herrmann another Lee Iacocca? Or is heanother Willy Loman?Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7THE WIZARD OF AUSPEX"You need someone to map between what the engineers know and what users canunderstand," -Bruce Nelson, chief technologist, Auspex Systems Inc.By:Howard BaldwinONE WINDY DAY IN 1983, DURING one of his many South Sea sabbaticals, BruceNelson was driving on a two-lane highway between Cairns and Townsville onAustralia's northeast coast. Seeing a fallen tree blocking the road, hestopped to drag it out of the way. As he approached, though, one end of theobstacle slowly rose and hissed at him. It wasn't a tree. It was a 12-footpython stretched across the road, warming itself on the asphalt.   Unperturbed, Nelson grabbed the end that didn't hiss and wiggled it upand down until the python slithered off the road. As chief technologist forAuspex Systems Inc., a manufacturer of high-capacity file servers, Nelsonwould like to handle the computer industry the same way: just yank the tailof the marketing people and maneuver them out of the way of the customers.   Everyone knows someone like Nelson: a freewheeling know-it-all whowhizzed by on the way to fame, fortune, and founders' stock. Except forNelson, now 40, it hasn't happened. His friends expect great things fromhim, and compare him to Andy Bechtolsheim, the brilliant but mercurialcreator of the SPARCstation upon which Sun Microsystems Inc. has built itsfortune. But this Nelson guy is plugging away for a single-product servervendor, his third start-up firm in eight years.   He marches to a different drummer and scoffs: "I don't feel anycompulsion to meet their expectations. I compete largely with myself. Idon't compare myself to other guys who I see in industry or in privatelife." So why hasn't anything clicked for Nelson? "Sometimes I stick withthings too long. I think I'd be further down the road if I was lesscommitted and more mercenary."   What has Nelson committed to now? Stand back, vendors-he wants nothingless than honesty from an industry awash in hype. He wants customeradversaries to become customer advocates-even among Auspex's competition,which includes the server divisions of Sun, Silicon Graphics Inc., andHewlett-Packard Co.   If people expect great things from Nelson, and Nelson expects greatthings from the industry, perhaps it's because his first job out of collegewas at Xerox Computer Corp.'s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), where manyof technology's greatest ideas were born. He joined PARC after receivinghis master's degree in computer science from Stanford University in 1976.The technologies taken for granted today-mice, networking, laser printers,object-oriented programming-were being developed by the industry's mostcreative minds all around him. He alternated between PARC andCarnegie-Mellon University, where he got his Ph.D. in computer science in1981. At PARC, they joked that you could tell when the hyperactive Nelsonwas back for the summer because there were footprints on the ceiling.   With other researchers in PARC's computer science lab, Nelson definedthe technology known as remote procedure calls (RPC) that underlies thedistributed computing standards the industry will use in the 1990s. ButNelson does not benefit financially from the companies that have chosen touse RPCs because Xerox never patented it.   His PARC co-workers went on to found companies including 3Com Corp.,Adobe Systems Inc., and Metaphor Computer Systems Inc. Nelson left afterfive years at PARC to work for the Australian equivalent of the NationalScience Foundation, and then, starting in 1984, spent five more yearshelping to found two start-ups.   The first, Austek Microsystems Ltd., was a U.S.-Australia joint venture,for which Nelson had both engineering and marketing responsibilities. Heheaded up projects as diverse as computer-aided design tools and add-ingraphics boards. Today Austek builds cache controllers for PCs. That Austekand Auspex have such similar names is a coincidence that sometimes confuseshis friends: Austek is a conjunction of "Australia" and "technology," whileAuspex is the French singular of "auspices" and roughly translates as "agood omen."   Nelson left Austek in 1987 with 15 other employees in a "friendly"spin-off called Cogent Computer Corp. for which Nelson was vice presidentof strategic marketing. Cogent's plan was to build a PC that integratedgraphics, networking, and a Windows 2.0 interface-but the plan failed whenIng. C. Olivetti and Co. withdrew an offer of needed seed money.No RegretsDoes Nelson have regrets about the five years he dedicated to Austek andCogent? "It's not something I dwell on," he says, adding that he learnedsome important lessons-even great technical strengths won't overcomeweakness in sales and marketing, for one. "Sales and marketing areimportant," he now realizes, "even though it's not what I wanted to hearthen." That's why he considers marketing important these days-too importantto leave to marketing people.   But you can't write Bruce Nelson off as the personification of XeroxPARC-a sad reminder of what might have been. For one thing, Nelson is toointense to be dismissed. He talks fast. When Bob Lyon, vice president ofengineering for Legato Systems Inc., has been on the same dais as Nelson,he establishes the speed at which Nelson talks at one Nelson, and thensays, "I'm going to speak at 600 milli-Nelsons."   Nelson is very intense. The story goes that he went off to Australiawith a girlfriend, and a year later she came back proclaiming that shedidn't want to see Australia or Nelson for the rest of her life. He's alsoa mechanical whiz. Another ex-girlfriend, now married, says, "I still thinkthat when something's broken, I'll wait for my husband to leave town so hisfeelings won't be hurt, and get Bruce over here to fix it."   To some people, he's obnoxious-but Nelson is not a glad-hander, andthere's no b.s. given or taken. "People can see him as opinionated," shrugsa co-worker, "but the guy is so smart and thinks so fast. What comes acrossas abrasive is being real direct. He's a real fount of ideas and he has noqualms about sharing them."The Quest for Hypeless MarketingToday, at Auspex and in the industry, Nelson is trying to keep marketingpeople honest by whipping their tail up and down so that they get the heckout of the way of computing.   Privately held Auspex had 1991 sales of $40 million, and companyofficials say it will boost revenue 25 percent this year. It was the firstcompany to build a high-capacity file server, and one of the first tosuggest that servers should be engineered from the ground up, rather thanjust using a retrofitted workstation or PC without a monitor. As chieftechnologist, Nelson acts as the technical spokesperson for customers andat conferences for the file server manufacturer. He has his fingers in allphases of sales, marketing, and engineering, looking at everything frombenchmarking methodology to evaluating what he calls "make/buy/allydecisions."   Nelson is apt to stalk into a competitor's booth at a trade show andchallenge that company's claims. He insists he's found his rivals usingyear-old information to make Auspex look bad. And, he insists, he's just astough on his own salespeople. "One of my jobs is to be sure of what othervendors' products do so that our salespeople can be fair about sayingAuspex is better...When I find something egregious, like saying ourprice-performance is eight times better than an IBM server, I take itout."   One of the ways Nelson has tried to keep his industry honest is byorganizing Laddis. Named for its members-Legato Systems Inc., Auspex,Digital Equipment Corp., Data General Corp., Interphase Corp., and Sun-thegroup's benchmark measures network file system performance and has beenadopted by the System Performance Evaluation Consortium, otherwise known asSPEC.   "You need someone to map between what the engineers know and what userscan understand," Nelson says. "Laddis is a way to keep people honest acrossthe board."   This marathon talker, some of his colleagues insist, is also a goodlistener. Says Auspex President Larry Boucher, "Because of his objectivity,because he's there to help the customer, he winds up being a real asset."   In a reflective mood, Nelson gives a hint of self-assessment when hediscusses a one-time co-worker at PARC. "He's not yet an elder statesman ofcomputer science," he says. "He's one of the brilliant minds that'sremained in the background."   Like others that came out of PARC, Nelson is not yet famous, but hestill has time to achieve fame and fortune.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7SO, YOU WANNA LEARN ABOUT UNIXBecause UNIX and easy-to-learn aren't two phrases you normally puttogether, we've compiled a list of eight top books to help you get startedBy:Walter ZintzBringing novices up to speed on the UNIX operating system can be a ratherdaunting task. When UNIX's command-line prompt pops up on a terminalscreen, the question "Where do I go from here?" pops up in the mind of abefuddled new user. With a software system as powerful as UNIX, it'sunderstandable that beginners might be hard-pressed to quickly master itscomplexities when armed with only a set of inadequate manuals or poorlyorganized books.   Although friendlier interfaces are available for most of today's newersystems, they aren't of much help when it's necessary to fix a systemproblem or do work beyond the ordinary. There are also a significant numberof existing UNIX systems without graphical interfaces that requireknowledge of such arcane utilities as the vi editor, awk, and grep in orderto do the job. If you don't find the UNIX manuals very helpful, there aresome well-done how-to books that can help fill the gaps.   There are almost 100 books in print that introduce users to the UNIXsystem. The majority are for readers who have no experience with othercomputing systems, and hope that they can learn the basics of computingwhile learning the basics of UNIX. Most of these books are aimed at peoplewho just want to learn how to use UNIX for their own work, although thereare some good starter books for system administrators and programmers. Thisarticle will introduce you to what I regard as the eight best choices forlearning both computing and the UNIX system from scratch.   This collection covers UNIX versions from the early, but still muchused, Version 7 to the latest System V Release 4 (SVR4), as well as popularvariants such as The Santa Cruz Operation's XENIX and UNIX. These books arewritten for readers ranging from enthusiastic technical types to peoplewhose secret wish is that computers would just go away.   I won't pretend that non-networked systems and character-based terminalscreens are the future of computing-UNIX systems today feature tight-linkeddistributed computing and bit-mapped, mouse-controlled, windowed screens.No introductory UNIX book in print today covers such systems, however. Fornow, beginners on those advanced systems will just have to switch back andforth between any of the following UNIX books and the available network orGUI information sources.Introducing the UNIX Systemby Henry McGilton and Rachel MorganFor those who will use a UNIX system primarily for its text processingutilities, this is one of the two introductory books-the other being UNIXfor People-worth your time, and should also be considered if you want tobecome a proficient user without becoming a nerd. Although this book isbased on the older Version 7 of UNIX, introductory UNIX books just don'tcome any better.   The fact that this book starts from scratch and gives coherentexplanations makes it a good choice for even the true beginner. It managesto go beyond the basics to provide extensive coverage of text editing andtext formatting, as well as a good start on system administration and UNIXas a programming environment. There's even a solid introduction to shellscripts.   Despite the amount of ground covered, there is never any feeling ofbeing rushed. The authors have the knack of taking just a few words to saysomething clearly enough that it does not need to be repeated. The book hasa lot of information on the ubiquitous vi editor and its alter ego, ex, aswell as the ed and sed editors. Even with this ambitious list, the authorsmanage to go into enough detail that readers can become quite expert atonline editing. The same holds true for coverage of nroff, a crypticnon-WYSIWYG text formatter, the ms macro package for taming nroff, and thetbl preprocessor for creating tables.   There are no nasty surprises when you start to get down to work, either.The authors almost never forget to mention the exceptions to rules thatwould otherwise appear to haunt you in real-life use. And while no how-tobook is completely free of technical mistakes, this one comes amazinglyclose-better than any other introductory book I've encountered.   There is one detracting factor: this book is specific to UNIX version 7,with an extra chapter on some of the Berkeley UNIX extensions. Version 7 isthe direct antecedent of almost all UNIX versions presently available, butthe systems that use Version 7 or a clone today usually call it somethingelse. Current descendants have new or extended utilities that aren'tcovered, but the book is still hard to top for learning the basics of UNIXbefore getting into specific versions.   Don't confuse this book with Introducing UNIX System V by the sameauthors: the books appear similar, but are quite different inside.The UNIX Operating System, second editionby Kaare ChristianThis book is my choice for software developers who are brand new to UNIX,but knowledgeable about computing in general. This group of users will likethe book's slant toward UNIX as a programming environment, and theexplanations of why various aspects of UNIX are the way they are.   Shell programming and editing in vi are the techniques most thoroughlydiscussed. As for discussion of UNIX internals, it's mostly about the filesystem, the Bourne shell, and the kernel. There are also chapters onbenchmarking-complete with a benchmark shell script-and the relationshipsbetween UNIX, PCs, and DOS.   Beyond that, the book focuses on explaining approximately 100 utilities.But this book is a supplement, not a substitute, for the manuals-it mostoften restricts itself to peripheral advice on the best way to use aparticular utility, and comments on how and why the utility became what itis.   For an ambitious non-UNIX programmer, this book should be amplepreparation for The UNIX Programming Environment by Kernighan and Pike. Theordinary programmer needn't go that far: this book explains as much aboutUNIX for programmers as necessary.UNIX for Peopleby Peter M. Birns, Patrick B. Brown, and John C.C. MusterThis is the book that will rescue people who don't get along well withcomputers-it's written for people whose field of expertise is somethingother than computing. The book's pace is not too fast, no experience incomputing is assumed, and the tone is mellow and understanding throughout.Explanations are explicit and thorough, and frequent reminders reinforcewhat's already been covered.   This book's greatest strength is in its skillful presentation ofinformation. In the course of their varied careers, the three authors gotas far as Ph.D. candidacies in education and/or psychology, and they usewhat they've learned to make a dry, technical subject easier to learn.   On top of that, this is one of the two books I enthusiasticallyrecommend to people who want to specialize in the text-processing end ofUNIX use. In this area, the book improves on McGilton and Morgan's book incertain ways, such as dropping coverage of the obsolete ed editor in favorof the important troff text formatter. As for general UNIX use, it coversmost people's needs.   This book's 29 chapters-enhanced with various learning aids, andsupplemented by features such as "roadmaps" that demystify certain commandtransitions-make up a good basic education in UNIX. Readers who want to gofarther-without giving up the embedded learning techniques-can contact theauthors about the set of follow-on modules they've self-published.A Practical Guide to UNIX System V second editionby Mark G. SobellOne of the strong points of this book is that Sobell is not a UNIXcheerleader-he admits the system has problems as well as benefits.Nonetheless, he has written a fine book for fairly technical readers whowant both a text and a reference manual.   Sobell has made significant improvements since the first edition bybringing in topic experts to critique and sometimes rewrite chapters. Theresult is a well-rounded book.   First and foremost comes a text section that occupies almost two-thirdsof the book, and moves the reader pretty far along on everything ofimportance to users, as well as introduces the programming environment andsystem administration. Then, distinguished by black page-edge indexing,comes one of Sobell's specialities: reference pages for a large number ofcommands and utilities, complete with examples. Don't confuse these withthe official, cryptic man pages provided in UNIX documentation-these lucidpages are more like what the man pages should have been.   The book's technical level is rather broad. Thoughtful beginners shouldhave little trouble with the explanations, especially if they pay attentionto each chapter's introduction, summary, and exercises. Likewise, peoplewith considerable computing experience on other systems should not findthis book slow or pablum.Peter Norton's Guide to UNIXby Peter Norton and Harley HahnThis book is aimed at complete beginners, especially those who are seriousabout learning both computing and UNIX well. The authors make it clear fromthe start that using UNIX should be fun. They're right, of course, and noneof the other introductory technical UNIX books I've seen encourages thisfact.   The writing style is slow, engaging, and helpful. By the time they reachthe end of the book, readers will be at the upper apprentice level andwell-grounded in the basics. The explanations of the ASCII code are by farthe most lucid and complete I've encountered in any beginner's book onUNIX. Sidelights on UNIX history and philosophy are sprinkled throughout,which serves as another tool to keep the book from seeming dry.   The book includes frequent comparisons to DOS, which makes it a goodcandidate for those who are moving to UNIX from DOS. My only reservation isthat the number of technical errors is a little higher than usual amongthebooks on this list.Using UNIXby David W. Solomon, Tanya Rodrigue, Mark Schulman, Rosemary Colonna,Dennis Fairclough, and David H. LenderThis is a good choice if your company is only willing to buy one book onUNIX SVR4 for everyone in the company below the level of UNIX guru. Itstarts out talking to readers who don't know exactly what a computer is,and is filled with clear explanations, screen dumps, and otherillustrations.   The book never bogs down at the simplest level: well before themidpoint, the concept of file block sizes as they relate to space wastageand file fragmentation is introduced. The book provides frequentcomparisons to DOS, but you need not know that system to follow this bookeasily.   A reader choosing an introductory book for personal use might alsoselect this book. After the first few chapters, sections can be takenindividually, which allows you to dip into it as needed.UNIX System V Release 4: An Introductionby Kenneth H. Rosen, Richard R. Rosinski and James M. FarberThis volume's huge 1,228-page count is devoted to explaining just abouteverything about SVR4 except the guru stuff. After covering the usualbeginner topics in great detail, it goes on to specialized matters likesecurity, network administration, and running UNIX along with DOS. Theresult is a book with a lot to say to every serious reader, from thecomplete computer neophyte to the fairly advanced intermediate.   The writing is reasonably clear, although it is a little dry, andwritten at the right level for determined beginners or ordinaryintermediate users. The page allows plenty of room for extendedexplanations, sidelights, comparisons to DOS, and reference material. Myprimary reservation is that the frequency of technical errors is high. It'snot any worse than the average introductory UNIX books, but it isnoticeably below the standard set by the rest of the books in my topeight.Using SCO UNIXby Geoffrey T. LeBlond, William B. LeBlond, Sheila R. Blust, Wes Modes,and Ross OliverThis isthe book I recommend to people involved with XENIX and UNIX from TheSanta Cruz Operation. It's a very good book on UNIX with a lot ofSCO-specific information as a bonus.   This is the only book in my top eight that offers help with installingthe system software on a new computer. Another pleasant surprise is theinclusion of chapters on constructing filters, understanding SCO businesssoftware, dealing with uucp, and running DOS under UNIX.   The technical range is medium, and the writing accessible to fairlyastute beginners. After reading the entire book, the reader will be wellinto intermediate user status. Skimming is pretty safe because the authorsuse icons in the margin to draw attention to points that shouldn't beglossed over.   Those who like its style, but have other variants of System V, shouldturn to Using UNIX System V Release 3, which is also published byOsborne/McGraw-Hill and has essentially the same structure.Other ResourcesAlthough there are seminars and video courses galore available, some ofwhich are quite good, they are unnecessary when books like these areavailable. A judicious selection from among these books should get anybeginner off to a great start.Books That Get You StartedIntroducing the UNIX SystemMcGraw-Hill800-262-4729556 pagesCoverage*: Version 7,Bourne, vi/ex, nroffThe UNIX Operating Systemsecond editionWiley212-850-6000455 pagesCoverage: System V/BSD,Bourne, vi, noneUNIX for PeoplePrentice Hall201-767-5937528 pagesCoverage: BSD, C, vi, nroff/troffA Practical Guide toUNIX System Vsecond editionBenjamin/Cummings800-447-2226 or 617-944-3700700 pagesCoverage: SVR4, all shells, vi, nroffPeter Norton's Guide to UNIXBantam212-765-6500560 pagesCoverage: Any version,Bourne/C, vi, noneUsing UNIXQue317-573-2500693 pagesCoverage: SVR3.2,Bourne, ed, noneUNIX System V Release 4: An IntroductionOsborne/McGraw-Hill510-548-28051,228 pagesCoverage: SVR4,Bourne, ed/vi, troffUsing SCO UNIXOsborne/McGraw-Hill510-548-2805610 pagesCoverage: SCO, Bourne/C, vi, nroff*Coverage notes the specific versions of operating system, shell, editor,and text formatter that are primarily covered by each of these books.About the Author(s):Editor-at-Large Walter Zintz writes UNIXWORLD's "Library" column and is theAdvisor Emeritus to Uni-Ops Books in Boonville, Calif.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7LIVING THE UNIX LIFEBy:W.Z.While you're using one of the books discussed in this article to learn thetechnical side of UNIX, don't neglect the broader aspects of the system.   Over the decades, a tradition, community, and style have developedaround UNIX. The most pleasant way to introduce yourself to all this is topick up a copy of Life with UNIX: A Guide for Everyone by Don Libes andSandy Ressler, published by Prentice Hall.   Their book provides plenty of history, mixed with tidbits of gossip, aswell as guidance toward printed information, industry events, the Internet,services, and application packages. An abundance of contact information isprovided along with realistic evaluations of what's mentioned. There's achapter on how UNIX is faring in the larger world of general computing thatfeatures the cons as well as the pros of the UNIX system, and another thatfearlessly predicts future directions. Technical aspects of UNIX areoverviewed in three chapters.   Best of all, it's a no-pain, no-strain read. The writing style is breezyand buoyant. Even if I weren't involved with UNIX, I could see myselfreading this as an evening's diversion-it's more gripping than the averagepaperback novel. I doubt I'll ever see this book's equal as an entre into acomputer user community.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7UNIX NETWORKS GIVE PCS TRUE POWERBy:Darrin BrownOne of the most pressing needs for businesses today is to connect DOSsystems to high-speed UNIX networks. It's a marriage of opposites, but it'salso one of necessity-and one that has numerous products lining up at thealtar. So we looked at three major DOS suppliers of Sun Microsystems Inc.'sall-important Network File System (NFS).   Why is NFS so important for PC users? It, and the underlying TCP/IPnetwork transport mechanism, gives a childlike simplicity to sharing filesand running programs on remote systems. For DOS users, NFS is a no-brainer:anyone who can copy a file from one drive to another is an NFS champ.   We tested NFS and TCP/IP network software by FTP Software Inc. calledPC/TCP Plus, Sun's own PC-NFS, and 3Com Corp.'s 3Com TCP with DPA. We foundPC/TCP Plus to be the better performing product at $490, although the moreexpensive-up to $665-PC-NFS is the best choice for users of MicrosoftCorp.'s Microsoft Windows. The 3Com TCP product, while functional, fallsshort in working with the UNIX environment because of its leaning toward aDOS peer-to-peer network design.   We chose to review the FTP and Sun products because of their undeniablestature. For contrast, we chose 3Com's TCP because of the company's goodname in the DOS market. Other vendors with TCP/IP and NFS products thatcould have easily qualified for this review include Atlantix Corp.,Distinct Corp., James River Group Inc., Network Research Corp., NovellInc., Structured Software Solutions Inc., and Wollongong Group Inc.(Editors' note: We will review products from several of these vendors inthe future.)   In addition to NFS support, each of the reviewed products offers accessto remote computer systems and the ability to quickly and easily transferfiles from one system to another. PC/TCP and PC-NFS also offer an e-mailfacility. These basic functions allow people, not just computer systems, tointeract more efficiently.   Our test network consisted of a 66-MHz 486 system from Sprite Inc. (SanJose, Calif.), a 25-MHz 386 from Everex Systems Inc. (Fremont, Calif.), andan IBM Corp. PS/2 Model 70. A Sun IPC acted as the common server for thePCs running Sun's PC-NFS daemon. Also on the network were a Nextstationfrom Next Computer Inc., a SPARCbook notebook computer from TadpoleTechnologies plc. (Cambridge, England), a model 9000/710 workstation fromHewlett-Packard Co., and a TX100 X terminal from Visual Technology Inc.(Westboro, Mass.). We used thin coaxial cable-Thinnet-as our networkmedium.   Our objective was to determine which software product provides the bestNFS and TCP/IP service to a standard Ethernet network. We also consideredthe network interface cards that create the physical network connection,because they are essential to network communication. The PS/2 was includedin our network so we could test Microchannel interface cards in addition tothe 16-bit cards for the extended industry-standard architecture buses onthe Sprite and Everex systems. We tested cards and software alike under DOS3.3, DOS 5.0, and Microsoft Windows.The NFS AdvantageNFS was developed by Sun in 1984 to provide transparent access to files onthe network. Under NFS, designated directory hierarchies appear to be localto all connected systems. Importantly, the design of NFS gives users almostidentical file access performance-with up to a 20 percent reductionpossible-compared to local hard disk access. NFS also provides gracefulcrash recovery and supports network printers, plotters, scanners, and tapedrives, among other devices.   For open systems computing, the most important aspect of NFS is that itsupports multiple operating systems, including UNIX, DOS, VMS, and AppleComputer Inc.'s Macintosh. Transparent file access is enabled by allowingmultiple nodes on a network to become servers by sharing or exporting theirlocal file systems. These servers must be true multitaskingmachines-meaning they must be able to run several daemons simultaneously,such as nfsd, pcnfsd, and mountd.   NFS client systems mount the exported file systems and assign aseemingly local drive or directory name to the remote mount point. On ourtest DOS systems, we used a variety of drive letters. Allowing the clientto use its own naming conventions a strong point of NFS.   Crash recovery is straightforward. If the server goes down, the clienthangs if it is hard-mounted, or times out the connection if it issoft-mounted. In either case, when the server comes back online, it picksup where it left off. In other words, the server is stateless-meaning itretains no client state information. If the server crashes before sendingan acknowledgement to the client, the client retransmits when the servercomes up.   The ability to mount exported file systems lets you centralize all typesof information in common drives and directories. This saves time andeffort, especially when you are working with archives, backups, and generaldisaster recovery techniques, such as mirroring or data searching. If youuse a relational database on the network, you can access informationanywhere on the network in seconds.PC/TCP PlusFTP's PC/TCP Plus comes complete with option-rich commands and animpressive collection of networking utilities. PC/TCP Plus offers morecommands, and a more in-depth configuration and operation than the otherproducts reviewed-at $490 compared to the $665 for the three Sun modulesthat give you equal features.   The drawback to PC/TCP Plus is its complex installation andconfiguration procedure. PC/TCP Plus requires the network administrator tohave previous UNIX or NFS knowledge. The documentation doesn't helpmatters: We found FTP's manuals to contain many details, but overall, theywere poorly organized.   PC/TCP Plus is available for both DOS and OS/2 operating systems andcomes with FTP's NFS product, Interdrive. PC/TCP Plus supports bothpeer-to-peer and PC-to-multitasking system connections. It supports simplenetwork management protocol (SNMP), fiber distributed data interface,point-to-point protocol, serial line internet protocol, X.25, LAN Managerover Token Ring (IEEE 802.5), TCP/IP over Class 1 Ethernet (DIX), Class 11Ethernet (IEEE 802.2 and 802.3), and IPX from Netware.   Configuring PC/TCP Plus relies on two major files: IFCUST.SYS, whichprimarily describes hardware and its associated base memory addresses andinterrupt assignments; and IPCUST.SYS, which contains internet protocol(IP) information and sets preferences and network defaults.Going RemotePC/TCP Plus support for remote connections is excellent. Performing aremote login on a PC/TCP Plus system is remarkably similar to using a UNIXworkstation. Because rsh and rexec are part of PC/TCP Plus' entourage ofutilities, we could use familiar commands to log into other systems.Conversely, Sun provides only telnet and single-command rsh service.   Beyond log-in sessions, utilities like rmt (remote tape manipulation),tar, and ddates give you an excellent way to backup and archive data on thePC to a network tape drive, optical disk, or file system; and to recordthese events for future reference and scheduling. The PC/TCP Plus inetcommand is also effective for displaying information about internet controlmessage protocol statistics, TCP connections, IP routing, and the AddressResolution Protocol (ARP) table if in use.   The daemon for PC/TCP Plus iscalled ftpserv. The big difference betweenftpserv and Sun's pcnfs daemon is that ftpserv lets you set up a PC to actas a server. This is a boon for PC users who want to share files betweenPCs without going through the UNIX server.   Included with the PC/TCP Plus package is a copy of the pcnfsd sourcecode and a makefile file utility to assist with the compilation of code.The instructions for installing the supplied daemon are vague butadequate.   We liked the way PC/TCP Plus uses the available memory on a PC. Byletting you dynamically unload the protocol stack-or other network relatedutilities in memory-you can use the memory-resident idrive program withoutrebooting the system when you want to turn it off.   Other PC/TCP Plus commands deserving honorable mention are: rloginvt andrlogingl, which support up to 10 virtual sessions; smtpsrv, an e-mailserver daemon that lets you use a PC as a mail server or gateway; and rcp,which lets you set the umask value from the command line. Additionally, FTPprovides an extensive collection of terminal emulators including VT52,VT100, VT220, and IBM 3270.   PC/TCP Plus is a diamond in the rough: its installation, configuration,and operability are not polished. PC administrators will also need to takea crash course in UNIX basics. However, PC/TCP Plus is an extremelyfunctional UNIX-like set of network tools for the PC-and it will appeal toUNIX administrators who have suddenly found PCs in their midst.PC-NFSEveryone in the UNIX community who knows networking knows of Sun's PC-NFS.And, in an attempt to maintain that market position, Sunselect beganshipping PC-NFS for DOS and Microsoft Windows in March.   We definitely like PC-NFS. It is a well-crafted product and has a decentMicrosoft Windows interface. We would have appreciated a more icon-basedaccess to some of its utilities, but what you get is exceptionallywell-designed and functional. All in all, PC-NFS is a close runner-up toFTP's product.   The base PC-NFS lacks two important features that youdo get with FTP'sPC/TCP Plus. PC-NFS does not support file transfer protocol servercapability for PC-to-PC access. This capability is needed for DOS users onthe UNIX network to transfer files directly to other DOS systems. WithoutFTP support, you must store the files you wish to share on the UNIXserver.   Another shortcoming of the base package is its lack of back-up ande-mail utilities, although it does have a basic messaging service. You canboost the usefulness of PC-NFS with two $125 add-on package that, amongother things, give you enhanced mail features and various terminalemulators.Solid SoftwareDespite Sunselect's pricing scheme, the overall PC-NFS environment offersmost of the features you need. The product's well-styled interface andexceptional documentation also give you a secure feeling that Sun knows PCusers-something you have to wonder about with FTP.   The DOS version of PC-NFS comes with most of the utilities you wouldexpect: ftp, telnet, dos2unix, unix2dos, finger, ping, rcp, and rsh, amongothers. Noticeably missing is the rlogin utility, and the available rshdoes not support a live login, which leaves telnet as the only loginchoice.   In the Microsoft Windows module, you are greeted with icons labeled Ftp,Telnet, Netstat, Messaging, and Ping. When you execute any of these, thefamiliar character-mode version of the program runs, except for Messaging,which has a Microsoft Windows interface. We found all the utilities to workeffectively.   What we really like about the Windows version is its full support fornetwork drives. The Window File Manager program, for example, prominentlydisplayed all our network drives at the top of its main window. By clickingon a drive label, we instantly received a graphical depiction of themounted file system on our server. Additionally, the Windows Print Managerprogram worked well on our network. PC-NFS printing functions includehigh-speed spooling to network printers and the ability to share local PCprinters with other network users. You can also use Windows to accessprinters via the Windows control panel.   PC-NFS uses several memory resident programs (TSRs), including SNMP;listener, a messaging program; pcnfslpd, a PC print server; and prt.com, anetwork printing program.   Version four of PC-NFS includes the source code, makefile, andinstallation scripts for version two of pcnfsd. The earlier pcnfsd daemon,which is still in widespread use, was designed to provide userauthentication and basic network printing services. The new daemon providesenhanced printing and user authentication services, as well as support forMicrosoft Windows. Sun provides detailed instructions on installing serverdaemons, including compilation instructions for PCNFSD on an IBM RS/6000.   PC-NFS is a polished, user-friendly product. Its installation andconfiguration routines work effectively for users of all levels. Thedocumentation is well presented. In addition, Sun has done an excellent jobwith its support of Microsoft Windows. PC-NFS's list price is too high,however, and as a result, we think it is best suited for sites justbeginning to install DOS-to-UNIX networking.3Com TCP3Com TCP, with 3Com NFS, offers easy installation, good documentation, andan impressive array of network commands. The product shows versatility byworking with different servers, including TCP/IP, NFS, Novell Netware,Microsoft LAN Manager, and 3Com's own 3+Open LAN Manager and 3+Shareproducts.   The versatility doesn't carry through to 3Com's TCP product,however-unless you're accustomed to using one of 3Com's server products.3Com offers many of the same UNIX-like networking commands, but its syntaxfor specifying options is unlike UNIX itself.   3Com TCP with DPA is available for both DOS and OS/2. It offers minimalterminal support, but we did like its Demand Protocol Architecture (DPA), aPC memory management feature. With DPA, you can load and unload the networkprotocol stacks from memory, which is advantageous when you need to free upmemory for other software, especially if you use memory-resident tools.   Installation of TCP is easy, but we didn't appreciate the four levels ofsubdirectories it creates. We also didn't like the product's assumptionthat we had the 3+Open LAN Manager. The software creates this directory ifyou choose install option one. If you choose option two, it creates adirectory for the Microsoft LAN Manager. Either directory adds anunnecessary 43 characters to the system path. At publication time, 3Cominformed us that Version 2.0 of TCP would correct these problems.   Lastly, we should note TCP runs under Microsoft Windows, but does notsupport the nfssetup, ping, arp, and tstat commands. These programs must berun in one of Microsoft Window's full-screen, character-mod windows. (Ifyou haven't had the experience, don't look forward to it.)   3Com's product is most successful in its general functionality, overalldocumentation, and compatibility with a wide range of networkconfigurations and protocols. But we found everything geared more toward apeer-to-peer network design that emphasizes coexistence with 3+Open LANManager, Microsoft LAN Manager, and Novell Netware.A Good MarriageLike a good marriage, the better the underlying mechanism, the smoother theexperience. Right now, with FTP's PC/TCP Plus and Sun's PC-NFS, you can besure you're walking to the altar at the right time. We think 3Com's TCPneeds a better UNIX orientation, but current 3Com users should stronglyconsider it.   When it gets to money, matrimony is a matter of bargaining positions.Each product is sold on a per CPU basis, so multiple copies can beexpensive, especially when compared to DOS products. On this score, even ifyou're getting a quantity discount, FTP is sure to score heavily.   DOS users might get frustrated with FTP's product because of itscommand-line orientation and complex configuration, but current UNIXadministrators won't mind. If you're looking for a simple marriage,consider PC-NFS without prejudice-it's the beginning of an exciting newinterface for NFS.   FTP's product provides the most extensive collection of commands,terminal emulators, and networking utilities for command-line shops, andits DOS server capability is impressive. So if you have the know how, youwon't hear any wedding bell blues.Photograph: Sunselect's PC-NFS 4.0 includes graphical browsing featuresthat give users access to all resources on the network.Review HighlightsCONTACT INFO: 3Com TCP, 3Com NFS    3Com Corp.    5400 Bayfront Plaza    Santa Clara, CA 95052-8145    408-764-5000 or 800-638-3266+ Good functionality and documentation.   Offers support of both DOS-to-DOS and DOS-to-UNIX LAN configurations.- Product difficult to configure for a UNIX network.VERSION 3Com TCP 1.2, 3Com NFS 1.0SYSTEMS Intel-based PCs.LICENSING Per CPU.PRICE$350.SUPPORT 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. EST, toll-free.CONTACT INFO: PC/TCP Plus    FTP Software Inc.    26 Princess St.    Wakefield, MA 01880    617-246-0900+ Most features, UNIX-like.   Lets you load/unload protocol stack to optimize memory usage.- Best suited for installation by experienced user. Rough around theedges.VERSION 2.05SYSTEMS Intel-based PCs.LICENSING Per CPU.PRICE$490.SUPPORT 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. EST.CONTACT INFO: PC-NFS    Sunselect    a Sun Microsystems Inc. business    2 Federal Street    Billerica, MA 01821    508-671-0596 or 800-334-7866+ Simple installation and configuration.   Supports Microsoft Windows and remote printers.- Base package lacks variety of terminal emulators.   No unloading of the protocol stack.VERSION 4.0SYSTEMS Intel-based PCs.LICENSING Per CPU.PRICE$415 to $665.SUPPORT 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. EST, toll-free.$tb (available on line)Features Table    3Com FTP SunProduct TCP PC/TCP Plus PC-NFSQuantity discount x x xRAM required (kilobytes) 640 256 640Hard disk (megabytes) 2 2 1.5Supports DOS 5.0 o x xRuns under Microsoft Windows 3.1 x x xUtilities:Install program x o xFTP server daemon o x oFile Transfer/Remote Access:Ftp x x xTftp o x oRcp x x xTelnet x x x   Rlogin o x oRsh x x xRexec o x oTerminal Emulation:Vt52 x x oVt100 x x xVt220 o x o*Vt320 o o o*IBM-3270 o x oTTY x x oNone (ANSI) o x oAdministration:Ping x x xArp x x xNIS Support x x xRPCinfo o x xFinger x x xNFSstat o o xNetstat x o xInet o x oRemote PC configuration o x oLocal hosts file x x xE-mail x essaging utility o x x* With additional x odulex = Yeso = NoSummary Scoreboard    3Com FTP SunProduct TCP PC/TCP Plus PC-NFSDocumentation ** ** **  Installation ** * **Configuration * * **Ease of use ** ** **Functionality * *** **Memory Management ** ** **Compatibility ** ** *** Fair** Good*** GreatAbout the Author(s):Darrin Brown is a CAD systems/network administrator for a largemanufacturing company in the Boston area.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7ITS IN THE CARDSBy:D.B.In the PC market, network cards are commodity items. Buying decisions canboil down to whether or not the vendor includes a T-connector in the box.We entered this fray to look at three vendors with established reputationsand products: 3Com Corp., Standard Microsystems Corp. (SMC), and CabletronSystems Inc.We compared 16-bit cards rather than 32- or eight-bit cards because theyoffer the best combination of compatibility, price, and performance. Wechose Thinnet cable cards for similar reasons: reliability, pricing, andconvenience. We could have chosen 10Base-T, but despite its compact designand superior convenience, we think Thinnet is a good choice for businesseswith small networks because of its low cost and technical merits.   We evaluated cards that support the standard PC industry-standardarchitecture (ISA) bus, as well as the Microchannel architecture used byIBM PS/2 systems.   The 3Com products are sold under the name Etherlink and are our firstpick because they provide the best installation and configuration software.The downside to the Etherlink cards is they are the most expensive-pricedat $425, compared to the $296 and $249 offerings from Cabletron and SMC.   The Etherlink 16 supports ISA systems and the EtherlinkMC supportsMicrochannel systems. Both cards include a boot ROM socket, 64 kilobytes ofon-board memory, simple network management protocol (SNMP) support, boththicknet and Thinnet connection, a Thinnet T-connector, and menu-drivensoftware for installation and configuration. The documentation oninstallation, diagnostics, error messages, and trouble shooting isimpressive.   The limited lifetime warranty for both products covers hardware andsoftware. Technical support is provided through dealers, Compuserve, fax,and a telephone hot line.   The Cabletron cards are called Desktop Network Interface (DNI) andsuffer from poor documentation. Model E2112 supports ISA and model E3112supports Microchannel. We also learned about several other models in thedocumentation because Cabletron crams the descriptions of six cards into asingle manual.   The DNI cards feature boot ROM, 16 kilobytes of on-board RAM, SNMPsupport, and thicknet and Thinnet connections, as well as 10Base-T (RJ-45)connections. The cards use LEDs to indicate power status, networkcollisions, and transmit and receive status. The software comes with Cmail,an unloadable e-mail utility.   No automated installation utility comes with the DNI cards, which meansyou must copy the appropriate files to your hard drive and edit the systemstart-up files. The board can be configured manually using switches andjumpers, or electronically with the packet driver configuration utility.   The DNI cards come with a one-year warranty. Free user support isprovided on a toll-free support line. Online support is available throughCompuserve, UNIX e-mail, anonymous FTP, and a 24-hour bulletin board.   Probably the most popular cards of those we reviewed are SMC's EthercardPlus cards, which sell for $249 and $349. The reason these are popular isSMC purchased the LAN communications business unit of Western Digital Inc.last year, and Western Digital's name had become synonymous with PC networkcards.   The Ethercard Plus products-the Elite/16 for ISA systems and the Elite/Afor Microchannel systems-come with the same basic features as the otherproducts. Both have boot ROM sockets, 16 kilobytes of on-board memory, LEDsthat signal transmit and receive, thicknet and Thinnet connections, and a Tconnector. Both cards are also software configurable, but have optionaljumper-based settings.   SMC has the most reasonably priced card of any major network vendor, andthere is a five-year warranty on the Ethercard Plus products. This is anice touch, but all in all, we still prefer the 3Com products because theyprovide the best installation and configuration utilities.Summary Scorecard    SMC SMC 3Com    Elite/A Elite/16 Etherlink backslash MCInstallation ** ** ***Documentation ** ** ***Performance ** ** **Warranty (years) 5 5 LifetimePrice$349$249$425    3Com Cabletron    Etherlink 16 E2112 E3112Installation *** ** **Documentation *** ** **Performance ** ** **Warranty (years) Lifetime 1 1Price$445$296$296* Fair** Good*** GreatCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7MORE APPLE TO UNIX CONNECTIVITYUaccess veils UUCP's complexity in a Macintosh e-mail hubBy:Andrew D. Wolfe Jr.It's hard to imagine technologies as disparate as the highly usableMacintosh from Apple Computer Inc. and the obtuse UUCP mail system.Fortunately, Ice Engineering Inc. has created a complete UUCP system forthe Mac that not only works, but is easy to use-Uaccess ($375) for networkservers, and Uaccesslite ($195) for network clients and standalonesystems.   With Uaccess, you can easily compose, send, and receive mail on aMacintosh. Uaccess supports the two common forms of UNIX mailaddressing-domain addressing (user@company.com) and UUCP addressing(!system1!system2!user). You can have any number of windows open to composeand read messages. To view a list of messages received, you open a mailin-box. Each message is marked by a small icon that indicates if themessage is a regular message or a reply, and whether it has been read,saved to a text file, or marked for deletion.   Uaccess operates like conventional UUCP by spooling mail and executingin batch mode after connecting to a remote system, but surprisingly it canalso answer remote UUCP calls in the background, turning the Mac into agenuine UUCP mail server. This places Uaccess ahead of DOS products such asUUlink from Vortex Technology (Topanga, Calif.).   Icons in a floating "Functions" window provide common mailmanipulations, including compose letter, reply, forward, and delete.Uaccess also supports Usenet news interchange, and lets you review, post,and follow up articles in a newsgroup in the same way you handle mail.Uaccess sends and receives files via UUCP. The user identifies source andtarget files through a series of dialog boxes and can select raw data, datawith newline translation, and Macbinary formats when sending.   Uaccess provides numerous file conversion operations, including Stuffitcompression and decompression, Macbinary and Binhex encoding and decoding,as well as DOS and UNIX conversion. It also provides the uuencode anduudecode translators used for sending and receiving binary data over UUCPnetworks. These translators are omitted from Uaccesslite.   Uaccess is easy, but tedious, to configure. You face 18 different dialogboxes, some of which you revisit several times, and it is often difficultto find the specific option you want. For example, to set the automaticdial option, you must wind your way through two menus and two dialog boxes.This causes you to rely heavily on the documentation. Fortunately, theuser's guide is comprehensive and well-indexed.   Uaccess turns Macintosh computers into full UUCP hosts, and can in factimplement a local UUCP network among Macintoshes using Appletalk, whilestill providing interchange with remote UUCP hosts via modem.Non-networked, or client-only, Macs can be outfitted with Uaccesslite, butin order to provide a gateway between Appletalk networks and outside UUCPsystems, you must buy Uaccess.   Flexible is the most concise way to describe Uaccess. Importantoperations have command-key accelerators, but the menus aren't clutteredaccelerator notations. Mail, news, and communications have their own menusand make the most common functions immediately accessible. Uaccess alsomakes use of Apple's "Balloon Help" to provide information about menus,icons, and dialog boxes. Uaccess also you to customize your mail operationsby attaching other programs to it.   All in all, Uaccess is a solid product that turns a Mac network into afull e-mail system that supports UUCP. You cannot use Uaccess to sendgraphics, as some Mac mail systems do, but Uaccess is nonetheless anexcellent way to achieve connectivity between Apple Macintosh and UNIXsystems.Photograph: Uaccess features include a floating functions window and usesicons to show the status of each mail message.About the Author(s):Andrew D. Wolfe Jr. is a software and systems consultant working in Salem,Mass. He can be reached via e-mail at 70740.2743@compuserve.com.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7LOW-COST GRAPHICS FOR THE MASSESThe Maxstation is a cheap way for four users to access text andgraphics-based programs on a SCO UNIX systemBy:Rick FarrisIt's a common problem-how do you network your accounting department orsecretarial pool without diving into a Novell Inc. network? Priced at $795for the central controller, plus $199 for each user module, Maxstation fromMaxpeed Corp. provides powerful incentive to choose the UNIX option.   At $1,595 for a controller card and four base units, a fully configuredMaxstation controller gives four users access to The Santa Cruz Operation'sOpen Desktop. You do have to settle for 720-by348-pixel monochromegraphics, however. And count on spending another $200 per user forkeyboard, monitor, and mouse. We found the aesthetics of a green-screen Xdisplay to be questionable, but the ability to display graphics means thatWYSIWYG word processing and simple graphics are available for the sameprice as an ASCII terminal. At publication time, Maxpeed was also slated toship a cover VGA model.   The Maxstation consists of a controller card that fits in your computerand up to four base units that resemble a terminal base. Up to fourcontrollers can be installed in each computer for a total of 16 Maxstationusers. Each base unit has connections for a keyboard, monitor, mouse, andparallel printer-all of which you supply. The mouse port is ageneral-purpose buffered serial port and can also be used to attach amodem, scanner, plotter, or even a traditional terminal.   Perfectly good terminals can be purchased for $400 or less, but theMaxstation has one feature that terminals can't match-graphics. Because theMaxstation emulates console graphics and uses PC keyboards, applicationswork exactly as they do on the console monitor. For instance, using SCO'sDOS emulator, a DOS version of Wordperfect Corp.'s Wordperfect can be runon the Maxstation, complete with graphical print-preview and function- andalt-key support.   What makes the pricing of the Maxstation so attractive is that itincludes the cost of the multiport serial card that would be required toconnect terminals to your system. Viewed in that light, an incremental costof $300 per user for graphics and full console support is outstanding. Youhook up base units with twisted-pair wire. The maximum distance a base unitcan be located from the controller is 400 feet.   The Maxstation does have its shortcomings. Unlike its competitors-FiberOptic Station by Sun River Corp. (Austin, Texas) and The Unterminal fromAdvanced Micro Research Inc. (San Jose, Calif.)-the Maxstation providesonly Hercules-compatible (720-by-348 pixel) monochrome graphics. And ifyou're not running an SCO product, you can forget about the Maxstation. Itis only available for SCO's UNIX, XENIX/386, and Open Desktop. TheMaxstation also requires that you provide your own keyboard ($50 to $100)and monochrome monitor ($75 to $100). Maxpeed also offers a $1,495Maxstation with eight ports to service 32 users.   One of the Maxstation's selling points is that it runs Open Desktop on aregular monochrome monitor. In our tests, it worked as advertised, butdon't plan having on more than two or three users use Open Desktop at thesame time. Each user runs a copy of the X server and the Motif windowmanager, and running three copies of each brings a 486 to its knees. On theother hand, on a 33-MHz 386 equipped with 16 megabytes of RAM, fourMaxstations easily ran Wordperfect in character mode.   The Maxstation is a good, inexpensive way to connect an accountingdepartment running multiuser financial software or a medium-sizedword-processing department. Management information systems managers inthese markets will be pleased with the Maxstation. Those looking for acheap replacement for X terminals need to keep looking, because several Xsessions create too big a drain on the central computer. But the Maxstationis a character-mode champ, by all means.Photograph: The Maxstation gives four users access to SCO OpenDesktop-monochrome graphics and all.About the Author(s):Editor-at-Large Rick Farris is a regular reviewer for UNIXWORLD and aconsultant working with high-tech companies in the San Diego, Calif. area.He can be reached via e-mail as rickf@uworld.com.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992   Vol. IX, No. 7THE POWER OF POSIX THINKINGHow to simplify porting to the portable system interfaceBy:John SovereignPosix, the portable operating system interface for computer environments,is the combined effort of several groups that want to standardize theinterface of the UNIX operating system. Posix pulls together the /usr/groupStandard, the X/Open Company's Portability Guide (XPG) System Interface(XSI), and AT&T Computer Systems' System V Interface Definition (SVID).Posix is also one of the few subjects that the open systems consortia, theOpen Software Foundation (OSF) and UNIX International, agree on.   The Posix interface is even appearing on non-UNIX systems, includingDigital Equipment Corp.'s VMS and Hewlett-Packard Co.'s MPE. Its popularityis due, in part, to its adoption by the U.S. government as FederalInformation Processing Standard (FIPS) number 151-1. The Posix systeminterface is also the cornerstone of the federal government's ApplicationPortability Profile. In the spring of 1991, the National Institute ofStandards and Technology (NIST) started certifying vendors' systems asPosix-compliant. The system interface has also been adopted by theInternational Standards Organization (ISO) as document 9945-1.   For software developers, the result of all this activity is aplatform-independent programming interface designed to support applicationportability. I will describe some of the new Posix system interfaces thatmay differ from the interfaces you are familiar with, and show you how tomake C-language applications more portable by using the new Posixinterfaces.The Royal Family of PortabilityPosix is actually a family of standards that has been under development bythe Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), aprofessional organization that promotes standards for hardware andsoftware, since 1985. The Posix activities are designated as IEEE Project1003. The base operating system interface is the first standard completedby the Posix committees and is referred to as 1003.1, or Posix.1. Otherstandards currently in progress address networking services, security,real-time extensions, and administration.   The Posix.1 interfaces are currently described as C language functionsand header files. There are Ada and Fortran versions of the Posix.1interfaces as well as a language-independent description that is currentlyunder development. Along with a C language-dependent addendum, thislanguage-independent version should replace the current, C-centric standardwithout changing the semantics of the interfaces described.   Posix.1 does not require that the C programming environment provided byan implementation comply with the ANSI/ISO C standard. Nor do the functioninterfaces and header files depend on any additions to the languageinvented by the C standard. Several of the C library functions defined byPosix.1 are the subject of the C standard, but the majority are based onhistorical implementations-System V and BSD, for example-and are notrequired to provide standard C behavior unless the implementation claims toconform to the C standard as well as Posix.1.   The operating system interfaces described in Posix.1 serve as the basefor the most recent versions of the application programming interfaces(APIs) developed by the open systems consortia: the XPG, SVID, and OSF'sApplication Environment Specification. Each of these documents describesadditional services outside the scope of Posix.1, but many are undergoingstandardization at IEEE and elsewhere.Using the Posix.1 InterfaceThe good news is, like any good standard, Posix.1 is based on existingpractice, and borrows functionality from System V Release 3 (SVR3) andrecent releases of the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD). Therefore,most application code that runs on any of the various flavors of UNIXalready conforms to the standard.   The Posix.1 standard is organized into 10 chapters or sections. Thefirst section provides an introduction and defines general terms used inthe standard; the second defines terminology and global constants used todescribe the system services. The remaining eight sections describefunctional interfaces. Most of the work done by the Posix.1 committee wasnecessary to resolve conflicts between the different flavors of UNIX, or toprovide backward compatibility where defects in the historical designsrequired changes. There are a few areas where the standard doesn't matchany existing interface. These are: Signal Mechanisms, Sessions and JobControl, and Terminal I/O Interfaces.   Before addressing these areas in more detail, I want to introduceanother important invention from the Posix.1 committee: the conformancedocument. Earlier standards did not require vendors to describe the detailsof their implementations, but Posix.1 defines such a document and itscontent.Using the Posix.1 Conformance DocumentReading standards documents is like reading ballot propositions-thelanguage is legalistic, stilted, and full of jargon and loopholes. Animportant aid is a conformance document. The Posix.1 standard requiressystem vendors to provide conformance documents to programmers and otherlaypersons. A vendor's Posix conformance document (PCD) must describe the Clanguage environment provided by the implementation, other optionalfeatures, and the behavior of the system which the standard allows to beimplementation-defined. While this information should be included in avendor's system documentation, the PCD should also be available from thevendor as a standalone document.   For example, Posix.1 does not require that implementations support aprocess' membership in multiple groups. This aspect is borrowed almostverbatim from the functionality introduced by BSD. The C-preprocessorconstant NGROUPSMAX defines the number of groups to which a process maybelong; an implementation must provide the value of this constant in theheader file  and in the PCD. FIPS 151-1 requires that NGROUPSMAXbe greater than eight. Posix.1 also provides the function sysconf to allowapplications to query the value of this and other system limits atrun-time.   If your application needs to use multiple groups to provide multiplelevels of security, it does not strictly conform to Posix.1, but may stillbe a "conforming application" if you provide information that describesthis dependency to users. Armed with PCDs from competing system vendors,you and your customers can determine which systems can support yourapplication.   Similarly, Posix.1 does not require that a system limit file names to aparticular length. But the standard does require all implementations tosupport file names of at least 14 bytes and to advertise the maximum numbersupported in the PCD, programmatically in the pathconf interface, and theconstant NAMEMAX defined in the header file , if the maximumnumber is fixed for all file systems supported by the implementation. Otherlimits may vary due to system configuration and, therefore, may be excludedfrom the header file. You must use the sysconf or pathconf functions atrun-time for these limits.   In this case, if your application requires functionality greater thanthat required by the standard-you need to represent file names up to 32bytes-Posix.1 does not consider this significant enough to warrantexception to the requirements of a conforming application. Your applicationshould determine if the limitation exists on the platform it is running onand provide a suitable work-around.   The first thing you need to know from a vendor's PCD is how to compileyour application in the system's Posix environment. Because most Posiximplementations are based on existing systems, the default applicationenvironment is probably designed to be compatible with older applicationsand may not be Posix compliant. On such a system, requesting the Posixapplication environment may be as simple as adding another library to thecommand line that you use to invoke the compiler or linker. Accessing thePosix environment should be one of the first subjects addressed in a PCD.SignalsPosix signals are based largely on BSD's signal delivery and receiptmechanisms. The principal advantage of the BSD model is reliable receptionof signals: the signal catching function is not required to "re-arm"itself, which avoids a potential race condition with another occurrence ofthe same signal. Posix.1 changed the names of the BSD interfaces to protectexisting applications which might depend on minor semantic changes. Posixsignal functions and analogues in the BSD model are listed in Table 1.   Posix has introduced a new function, sigpending, which identifies thesignals currently blocked from delivery and pending for the callingprocess.   All signal functions may operate on one or more signals by using a setof signals defined by the type sigsett. These signal sets have historicallybeen implemented as a simple integral bit mask, manipulated by a singlemacro, sigmask. To support potentially more complex implementations,Posix.1 introduced a group of functions to manipulate signal sets:sigemptyset, sigfillset, sigaddset, sigdelset, and sigismember.   An application must initialize any signal set with sigemptyset orsigfillset to allow flexibility in the definition of sigsett, andcompatibility with signals not defined by Posix.1. If an implementationdefines additional signals, they may not be present in a signal set thatwas initiated by sigfillset.   For example, your application may attempt to ignore all known signals byusing code similar to the following fragment:   for (i = 1; i < NSIG; i++)   signal(i, SIGIGN);   Unfortunately, this code is not Posix.1-compliant for two reasons.First, the constant NSIG is not part of the standard. If it is necessary tooperate on all Posix.1 signals at once, the sigfillset function should beused. Second, the signal function is not required by the Posix.1 standard.The signal function is defined by the C standard, but it may not be builton a reliable mechanism on some implementations.   If you wish to avoid using the more complex sigaction interface, thereis a solution: provide your own signal interface based on sigaction. Asuitable implementation is provided in Listing 1, which, strictly speaking,should be named something other than signal. The code uses a standard Cfunction prototype.   Regarding NSIG: a portable application cannot make assumptions about theunderlying implementation of sigsett. One method for achieving the sameutility in a Posix.1 application is to block all signals from delivery. Thefunction sigprocmask sets, modifies, and accesses the set of signals thatis currently blocked by the calling process.   Signal blocking is another feature of the BSD model that was not presentin early versions of System V. A block prevents a signal from beingdelivered, but if the signal is later unblocked, it will be delivered. Inother words, the occurrence of a blocked signal is "remembered," and anignored signal is forgotten.   While the signal set type and support routines provide more flexibility,they complicate the process of porting code based on the BSD interfaces.The small program in Listing 2 executes two processes that catch and sendsignals to each other using the Posix and historical BSD interfaces.   On lines 8, 27 and 51 of Listing 2, the macro POSIXSOURCE is used todistinguish between these two interfaces. This macro is used by the Posix.1standard to control name space pollution: it must be defined byPosix-conforming applications before the inclusion of Posix header files.When this macro is defined, the implementation must ensure that only theinterfaces defined by Posix.1 and standard C are visible to an applicationprogram.   If the program in Listing 2 was intended to be used only in Posix.1environments, to ensure that the proper name space is used, you wouldinclude the following macro definition at the very beginning ofthe program:   #ifndef POSIXSOURCE   #define POSIXSOURCE   #endifThe macro is conditionally defined because an implementation's C compilermay predefine it as a courtesy. There is no specification in Posix.1 of thevalue of this constant.   Note the initialization of the signal set using the function sigemptyseton line 30 of Listing 2, and its use with sigaction and sigsuspend on lines40 and 52, respectively. Also note the use of the type pidt as the returnvalue from the functions fork and getppid. In the BSD implementation onlines 11-13, the type of the signal catcher's return value has changed fromvoid to int. The structure and function sigvec will be substituted forsigaction, and the type int substituted for pidt.Sessions and Job ControlWhile Posix.1 has formalized the notion of sessions, this concept was basedlargely on the job control model introduced by BSD: a user interacts with acommand shell or other "job control-aware" application during a terminalsession, which may create and transfer control to different jobs, orprocess groups. In earlier versions of System V, each session correspondedto a single process group.   There is only one active, or foreground, process group at any one timein each session. If there is a terminal device associated with asession-the controlling terminal-the foreground process group has completeaccess to the terminal and receives signals from the terminal interfacegenerated by user input, such as interrupt and suspend.   Posix.1 was forced to resolve the name conflict between the System V andBSD definition of the function setpgrp. Semantics similar to the former andlatter are provided by the Posix functions setsid and setpgid,respectively. The setsid function creates a new session. The callingprocess has no controlling terminal and becomes the leader of this newsession and a new process group. Within its current session, the setpgidfunction allows a process to join another process group or create itsown-this Posix function has more restrictions than the BSD implementationof setpgrp.   Because most applications do not need to be aware of job-control signalsand operations, the Posix.1 committee decided to make provision of thisfunctionality optional. Unless your application requires job control, itshould be prepared for a system that doesn't support it. On such a system,the functions setpgid, tcgetpgrp, and tcsetpgrp may fail with the globalerror indicator errno, set to ENOSYS. In addition, sending or attempting tocatch or block one of the following signals will return an error: SIGCHLD,SIGCONT, SIGSTOP, SIGTSTP, SIGTTIN, and SIGTTOU.   If your application is a "job-control" shell, you should read thedetailed advice contained in the definition of the term in the rationale ofthe standard.   Remote terminal connections or file transfer programs need to beconcerned with sessions. These applications want an asynchronous device tobecome their controlling terminal, so that the hang-up signal will bereceived when the line is dropped. Unfortunately, Posix.1 did notstandardize a mechanism for processes to gain a new controlling terminal.   For most processes this is not a problem because they simply inherittheir controlling terminal from their parent. The first device opened by anew session leader, typically the getty/login process, traditionally becamethe controlling terminal for the process. While Posix.1 "blessed" thisbehavior, it does not require it-user login was deemed an administrativefunction outside the scope of this standard.   As mentioned earlier, a session may lack a controlling terminal; this isdesirable for programs, such as daemons, that operate in the background andshould not be affected by user actions at terminals. The setsid function isa simple interface to use for this capability. Daemons must stillfrequently send messages, especially errors, to some terminal device, suchas the system console, however.   Although the Posix.1 committee was reluctant to specify a mechanism toacquire a new controlling terminal, the standard provides a facility fordaemons that doesn't compromise the application's detachment from thecontrol of a terminal. A new flag, ONOCTTY, that prevents the device beingopened from becoming the calling process' controlling terminal, has beendefined for the open function. The following code segment demonstrates therelevant steps to set up a Posix.1 daemon's error output:   (void) setsid();   fd = open("/dev/console",    ORDWR ONOCTTY);   Because a Posix system is not required to provide a special file name"/dev/console/", this is not strictly conforming code.Terminal I/OThe general-purpose ioctl function has been replaced by a number ofcontext-specific services (see Table 2). System V did not support jobcontrol before Posix.1 was incorporated in Release 4. The ioctl argumentsthat correspond to the job control-related functions, tcgetpgrp andtcsetpgrp, are taken from BSD.   The termios data structure is manipulated by the tcgetattr and tcsetattrroutines. The name has been changed from the System V structure, termio, toprotect innocent applications on implementations that provide abackward-compatible terminal I/O interface.   Listing 3 shows an application that supports rudimentary, line-oriented,user input, and invokes the terminal I/O interface to ensure thatcharacters are "erased" when the keyboard erase character is received. Todemonstrate the relationships in Table 2, the Posix.1 interfaces areinvoked using macros that call ioctl, which could be used in an older,non-compliant System V environment.   In addition to the ioctl replacement routines, another set of routineshas been created to manipulate the baud rate stored in the termiosstructure. The routines-cfgetispeed, cfgetospeed, cfsetispeed, andcfsetospeed-get and set the input and output baud rates, respectively.Terminal baud rates are represented using an unsigned integral type,speedt, defined in . Listing 4 demonstrates how you might setthe line speed to 2400 baud in a Posix.1 and an old System V application.You must set both the input and output speeds, because an implementationmay support split rates under Posix.1.   The use of the function tcgetattr is important to establish the initialsettings of the termios structure. This is the only portable way to modifythe terminal settings, because an implementation may include additionalfields in the termios structure and may require certain values in thosefields. Systems compatible with older System V applications may provide afield that determines which line discipline will be enforced. PortablePosix.1 applications should not attempt to build termios structures fromscratch.Further ReadingI have covered the highlights of the Posix.1 interface and reviewed in somedetail the major changes in Posix.1, including signal mechanisms,job-control, and terminal I/O interfaces. A more complete analysis of thestandard's impact is included in two books published last year: The Posix.1Standard: A Programmer's Guide by Fred Zlotnick of Mindcraft, aNIST-accredited Posix testing laboratory, and published byBenjamin/Cummings Publishing Co. (ISBN 0-8053-9605-5); and PosixProgrammer's Guide by Donald Lewine and published by O'Reilly andAssociates Inc. (ISBN 0-937175-73-0).LISTING 1: A signal interface built on the Posix reliable signalmechanism.1  #include 23  void (*signal(const int signo, void (*func)()))()45  struct sigaction new, old;67  new.sahandler = func;8  new.samask = new.saflags = 0;910 if (sigaction(signo, &new, &old) == -1)11 return(SIGERR);12 return(old.sahandler);13LISTING 2: A simple program using the BSD and Posix signal interfaces.1  #include 2  #include 34 #ifndef NULL5 #define NULL 06 #endif78 #ifdef POSIXSOURCE9 typedef void handler;10 #else11 typedef int handler;12 #define sigaction sigvec13 #define pidt int14 #endif1516 pidt pid;1718 handler catcher(signo)1920 (void) kill(pid, signo);212223 main()2425 struct sigaction nact;2627 #ifdef POSIXSOURCE28 sigsett set;2930 sigemptyset(&set);3132 nact.samask = set;33 nact.sahandler = catcher;34 nact.saflags = 0;35 #else36 nact.svhandler = catcher;37 nact.svflags = nact.svmask = 0;38 #endif3940 if (sigaction(SIGUSR1, &nact, NULL) == -1)41 perror("setting SIGUSR1 handler"), exit(1);4243 if ((pid = fork()) == -1)44 perror("forking child process"), exit(2);45 else if (pid == 0)46 pid = getppid();47 else /* parent starts signal ping-pong */48 (void) kill(pid, SIGUSR1);4950 while (1)51 #ifdef POSIXSOURCE52 sigsuspend(&set);53 #else54 sigpause(0);55 #endif56LISTING 3: A demonstration of the Posix and System V terminal I/Ointerfaces.1 #ifdef POSIXSOURCE2 #include 3 #include 4 #else5 #include 67 #define STDINFILENO 089 /* fix-up arguments to tcsetattr() */10 #define TCSANOW TCSETA11 #define TCSADRAIN TCSETAW12 #define TCSAFLUSH TCSETAF1314 #define tcgetattr(f, p) ioctl(f, TCGETA, p)15 #define tcsetattr(f, a, p) ioctl(f, a, p)1617 #define termios termio18 #endif1920 int seterase()2122 struct termios t;2324 if (tcgetattr(STDINFILENO, &t) == -1)25 return(-1);2627 if ((t.clflag & ECHOE) != ECHOE)28 t.clflag = ECHOE;29 if (tcsetattr(STDINFILENO, TCSANOW, &t) == -1)30 return(-1);313233 return(0);34LISTING 4: Setting the terminal line speed using Posix and System Vinterfaces.1 int setspeed(fd)2 int fd;34 #ifdef POSIXSOURCE5 #include 6 struct termios t;78 tcgetattr(fd, &t);9 cfsetispeed(B2400, &t);10 cfsetospeed(B2400, &t);11 tcsetattr(fd, TCSANOW, &t);12 #else13 #include 14 struct termio t;1516 ioctl(fd, TCGETA, &t);17 t.ccflag = (t.ccflag & CBAUD) B2400;18 ioctl(fd, TCSETA, &t);19 #endif20TABLE 1: Posix Signal Functions and their BSD AncestorsPosix.1 Function BSD Functionsigaction sigvecsigprocmask sigsetmasksigsuspend sigpauseTABLE 2: Posix Terminal I/O Interfaces and their AncestorsPosix.1 Function System V ioctl Argumenttcdrain TCGETA, TCSETAWtcflow TCXONCtcflush TCFLSHtcgetattr TCGETAtcgetpgrp TIOCGPGRPtcsendbreak TCSBRKtcsetattr TCSANOW option TCSETA TCSADRAIN option TCSETAW TCSAFLUSH option TCSETAFtcsetpgrp TIOCSPGRPAbout the Author(s):John Sovereign works in the UNIX development group at Apple Computer Inc.,where he was responsible for the A/UX Posix implementation. He can bereached at jms@apple.com.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7ALIGNING COLUMNS, AGING PARAGRAPHS, AND NETWORK TIME PROTOCOLBy:Dr. Rebecca ThomasTom Barron provides a filter handy for aligning columnar data separated byspaces and tabs. Larry Ruane contributes a program that ages, andeventually expires, paragraph-oriented items in a text file, whichadministrators might find useful for automatically eliminating entries fromthe message-of-the-day file. Ed Vielmetti introduces NTP, or network timeprotocol, in response to my February 1992 request for time-serviceinformation. Enjoy.Ducks in a RowDear Dr. Thomas:My submission aligns text into columns, and consists of two nawk programswith a shell wrapper to invoke them Listing 1A. The first instance of nawkdetermines the maximum width of each input field and the second uses thatinformation to align the fields. String data is left-justified and numericfields are right-justified within the field width. User-specifiedintercolumn spacing can be used to override the default value of twospaces. The nawk programs assume that input fields are separated by blanksand/or tabs.Tom BarronNashville, Tenn.Part A of Listing 1 provides the align program, Part B some sample input,and Part C the output produced by align. In this case, you see oneshortcoming: the last "logical" field titled "Mounted on" is treated as twoseparate fields-thus the minus sign placeholders at the ends of theremaining lines. I find align especially useful when I have tabulated data and want toconvert the tabs to spaces. Generally, if you convert each tab character tosome number of spaces, even if it's eight, the columnar alignment is thrownoff. However, align does a nice job of lining up the result. Explanation of align operation. Line 6 is the dormant debuggingdirective documented in my April 1992 column. Line 7 defines the defaultintercolumn spacing to be two spaces, and Line 8 defines the correct usagemessage for invoking align. Lines 10-22 process command-line arguments. The "case" construct onlines 10-15 checks the argument count. If zero, nothing needs to be done.If one, line 12 assigns the supplied argument to the Spacing variable. Morethan one argument is a usage error, so line 13 reports the transgressionand the script terminates. Lines 17-22 check to make sure that the valueassigned to the Spacing variable is numeric. If not, line 21 issues thecorrect usage message and terminates the script. Line 25 sets a trap to erase the temporary files whenever the scriptexits normally or is interrupted by a signal. The first nawk program (lines27-47) scans its standard input, writes a copy to a temporary file forsubsequent processing, and creates another temporary file containing themaximum width of each field found in the input. The second nawk program(lines 49-89) uses the field-width data to process the temporary filecontaining a copy of the standard input. Line 29 splits each input line into array word on field separator blank,which corresponds to space or tab characters. If line 30 detects that thefield count for the input line is greater than the current maximum, line 31updates maxcount with the new value. Line 33 prints the input line tostandard output, which is redirected to the align$$out temporary file byline 47. Using $$-the process-id of the shell running the alignscript-makes the temporary file name unique. Lines 35-39 determine the maximum width of each input field: line 35scans each input field; if line 36 detects that the current field width isgreater than the maximum width seen so far, the maximum width value isupdated by line 37. The END-pattern action (lines 41-46) creates the widthfile: line 42 generates the unique name of the temporary width file (procidcontains the process-id of the shell running the program, which was passedto nawk on its invocation line, line 47); line 43 scans each field; line 44writes the maximum width of the corresponding field to the width file; andfinally, line 46 writes a newline. The BEGIN-pattern action of the second nawk program (lines 50-54) readsthe width file and places the values into the width array. The main portionof the program (lines 55-89) reads the input data stored in the temporaryfile using input redirection specified on line 89. Line 56 splits eachfield of an input line into a word array. Then the "for" loop encompassinglines 57-87 scans each field, assuming up to maxcount fields. Lines 58-86 specify a series of if-else clauses to determine the type ofdata in the input field, which is handled accordingly:-- If the field begins with zero (0), it is treated as the number zero, soa field containing 0% isn't treated as a string.-- Else, if the field is empty, insert a placeholder (a minus sign isused).-- Else, if the field evaluates numerically to zero value, treat it as astring. With nawk, zero added to a string gives zero.-- Else, treat it as a number.Lines 58-65 handle a special numerical case: If line 58 determines that thefirst character is a zero, then lines 59-60 print spaces to right-justifythe field contents within the maximum field width; line 62 outputs thefield value; and lines 63-65 add the intercolumn spacing. Lines 66-71 handle the empty field case: if line 66 determines that thefield is empty, then line 67 prints a minus sign (-) placeholder, and lines68-71 add intercolumn spacing. Lines 72-77 handle the case in which the field contains a string value:if line 72 determines that zero added to the field value is zero, then thefield was a string; if so, line 73 outputs the string and lines 74-77output spaces to left-justify the string within the maximum field width. Lines 78-85 handle the default case, in which the field contains anumber. If so, lines 79-81 output spaces to right-justify the number; line82 outputs the numerical value; and lines 83-85 add the intercolumnspacing. Finally, line 88 writes the newline end-of-line terminator. Portability Note. For some versions of nawk, the value of a variabledefined on its invocation command line isn't accessible within theBEGIN-pattern action. For such a case use the approach shown in Listing1D.Aging ItemsDear Dr. Thomas:Most UNIX systems display the file /etc/motd at the start of each log-insession. This "message-of-the-day" file typically contains announcements ofgeneral interest to the users of that system. A common problem with/etc/motd is that the notices become obsolete. Users become annoyed-orworse, confused-when they see an announcement on Monday that the machinewill be rebooted on Sunday, the previous day. Furthermore, users mayeventually ignore all messages if some become dated. System administratorsbear the burden of removing items from /etc/motd at the right time. The following filter Listing 2A uses either the new or old version ofawk to "age" items in a text file. An "item" is zero or more blank lines,followed by one or more non-blank lines, optionally followed by a line ofthe form expire integer. Here, integer is a "time-to-live" count for theassociated item. If the expire line exists, and the time-to-live count is zero, the itemis discarded and not written to the standard output. If the time-to-livecount is not zero, the script writes out the item and then the expire line,where the time-to-live count has been reduced by one. An item with noexpire line is written out unconditionally because it never expires. We use cron to invoke our filter to age items in /etc/motd every morningat 1:30 a.m. see Listing 2B. Our entry changes the directory containing themessage-of-the-day file, then runs age and stores the result in a new file,nmotd. Then we rename that file to motd so it will be displayed when a userlogs in. We use the && shell connective so the rename is only done if theage program exits successfully. Explanation of age operation. The first "if" clause (lines 6-14) detectsa legal expire line. If the time remaining in the second field ($2) isnon-zero, each line in this item is printed by lines 8-9, followed byanother expire line with a reduced time-to-live count ($2 - 1). The program takes advantage of awk's built-in NR, for record number,variable, which is initially zero and is automatically incremented beforeeach line is read. By resetting this variable at appropriate times, NRactually holds the line number of the current item, rather than the linecount for the entire input file. The second "if" clause (lines 15-19) detects the first line of a newitem when the previous item did not end with an expire line. The previousitem is written out by lines 16-17. Line 18 resets NR to one (1) ready forthe next line, if any, for the item, and line 20 stores the current inputline in the current item array, item. If the last item in the file doesn't have an expire line, theEND-pattern action on lines 23-26 prints the item.Lawrence M. RuaneNaperville, Ill.Listing 2C shows a sample section from the /etc/profile script file thatdisplays the message-of-the-day file for accounts that use the Bourne orKorn shell as their log-in shell. I replaced the cat command, normally usedto display /etc/motd, with an egrep command invoked to display anythingexcept the expire-directive lines. The regular expression pattern ismatched by all lines that begin with the string "expire" followed by one ormore space or tab characters, which are in the "empty" square brackets,followed by one or more decimal integers. The -v option directs egrep todisplay every line that doesn't match its pattern argument.Introducing NTPDear Dr. Thomas:In response to your request for information on alternative time services,here is some information on NTP, which is used to provide a distributedtime service for the Internet. A number of systems around the Net havedirectly attached radio clocks, and these servers use NTP to send out thetime to campus or network-wide time servers that in turn distribute thetime to individual user workstations. You can get online information about NTP via anonymous FTP from theInternet host louie.udel.edu (128.175.1.3). Look in the tree starting withthe /pub/ntp directory. The file /pub/ntp/doc/clock.txt contains an amazingamount of information on time-code receivers, NTP time servers, and otherdetails. The protocol itself is documented in the Request for Comments(RFC) publication number 1129, titled "Internet Time Synchronization: theNetwork Time Protocol," and available as a compressed Postscript file,/pub/ntp/doc/rfc1129.ps.Z. If your system or local-area network has a direct connection to theInternet, you can use the "ntp" software found in the /pub/ntp/ntp.3.4directory or the "xntp" software found in the /pub/ntp/xntp directory.Either package will get you in sync once you have located a nearby serverthat can provide you with the time. If you're not directly connected to theInternet, it's still possible to use this software to keep good clocks. Oneway is to build or buy your own radio receiver. Another is to use a timeservice such as the NIST ACTS dial-up service described in the February1992 issue. The clock.txt file noted above has these details. A mailing list, ntp@trantor.umd.edu (to get on the list send requests tontp-request@trantor.umd.edu) covers NTP, and comp.protocols.time.ntp, aUsenet newsgroup, is connected to the mailing list by a gateway. NTP is designed to distribute time information in a large, diverseinternetworked system operating at speeds from mundane to lightwave. Ituses a returnable-time architecture in which a distributed subnetwork oftime servers operating in a self-organizing, hierarchical, master-slaveconfiguration synchronizes the subnet's local clocks to national timestandards via wire or radio. The servers can also redistribute timeinformation within a network using local routing algorithms and timedaemons. The architectures, algorithms, and protocols that have evolved to NTPover several years of implementation and refinement are also described inthe RFC. The synchronization subnet has been in regular operation on theInternet for the last several years. It is described along with performancedata that shows that time-keeping accuracy throughout most portions of theInternet can be ordinarily maintained to within a few tens of milliseconds,even in cases of failure or disruption of clocks, time servers, ornetworks.Edward VielmettiAnn Arbor, Mich.Missing PersonsBapat Sudodh-please send me your current surface mailing address, phonenumber, and e-mail address.SubmissionsMail Bourne/Korn shell scripts, C and Perl programs, or tips to ease theburden of system administrators, programmers, and users to "Wizard'sGrabbag," UNIXWORLD, 1900 O'Farrell St., San Mateo, CA 94403; send e-mailsubmissions to uunet!uworld!grabbag or grabbag@uworld.com. Requests forsubmission guidelines should be sent to the same addresses or can bedownloaded from UUNET (domain name = ftp.uu.net; IP address = 137.39.1.9)using UUCP or anonymous FTPby retrieving the pathname:/usr/spool/ftp/published/unix-world/grabbag/README. If we print yourcontribution, you will be sent $50 within 60 days of publication.DisclaimerWe make no guarantees as to the materials published in Wizard's Grabbag.Any use of materials published in Wizard's Grabbag is at the sole risk ofthe user.Getting Grabbag Listings On LineCurrent online listings are available via dial-up access from Reiter'sSoftware BBS 604-576-1214 (300/1200/2400 baud), 604-576-6357 (USR HST9600), or 604-576-9867 (9600/19200 baud Telebit TB+ PEP protocol). Useaccount name uworld and password code4me. UUNET also archives Wizard's Grabbag listings. The listing files havepath name /usr/spool/ftp/published/unix-world/grabbag/19YY/monYY.Z, inwhich mon is the first three letters of the month (as in jan), and YY isthe last two numbers of the year (as in 89). Use compress -d (16-bit) tounpack the archive. U.S. users can download even if they don't have anaccount on UUNET-call 1-900-GOT-SRCS and log into UUCP-access account uucpwith no password. Callers will be charged 50 cents/minute connect time.LISTING 1: The align program can be used to align columnar datathat iswhite-space separated.A. Listing of the align script:1 :2 # @(#) align Filter to align stdin into columns and write to stdout3 # Author: Tom Barron, November 19914 # Revised by: Becca Thomas, February 19925 # Revised by: Tom Barron, March 19926 $DBGSH # dormant debugging command7 Spacing=2 # Default inter-column spacing8 Usage="Usage: $0 inter-column spacing count"9 # Process command-line arguments:10 case $# in11 0) ;;12 1) Spacing=$1 ;;13 *) echo $Usage >&214 exit 1 ;;15 esac16 # Make sure specified spacing argument is numeric17 if expr "$Spacing" + 0 >/dev/null 2>&1 ; then18 : # No problem, Spacing argument is numeric19 else20 echo "Inter-column-spacing-count argument not numeric" >&221 echo $Usage >&2 ; exit 222 fi23 #24 # Set trap to erase temporary files:25 trap 'rm -f /tmp/align$$* ; exit' 0 1 2 3 1526 # Get field width data and save stdin in temp file:27 nawk '28 # For each input line:29 count = split($0, word, " "); # div input line in word30 if (count > maxcount) # save the highest field31 maxcount = count; # count encountered3233 print $0; # write line to temp file34 # determine maximum width of each field position in input:35 for (idx = 1; idx <= count; idx++) # scan input fields36 if (length(wordidx) > widthidx) # wider field seen37 widthidx = length(wordidx); # update width value38394041 END42 widthfile = "/tmp/align" procid "wid";43 for (idx = 1; idx <= maxcount; idx++) # save widths to tmp file44 printf("%d ", widthidx) > widthfile4546 printf("n") > widthfile # terminate the width file47 ' procid=$$ > /tmp/align$$out # temp file to hold data48 # Now align the data using the field width information:49 nawk '50 BEGIN51 widthfile = "/tmp/align" procid "wid";52 getline widthline < widthfile # get the field widths53 maxcount = split(widthline, width, " "); # div width line in width5455 # Use the stored information in /tmp/align$$*56 count = split($0, word, " "); # div input line in word57 for (jdx = 1; jdx <= maxcount; jdx++) # for each field of line58 if ("0" == substr(wordjdx,1,1)) # special numeric case59 for (kdx = length(wordjdx) ; kdx < widthjdx ; kdx++)60 printf(" "); # right-justify number6162 printf("%s", wordjdx); # output number63 for (ldx = 0; ldx < sp; ldx++)64 printf(" "); # add inter-columnspacing6566 else if ("" == wordjdx) # field is empty67 printf("-"); # print place-holder68 for (kdx = 1; kdx < widthjdx + sp; kdx++)69 printf(" "); # fill out the field,70 # add inter-columnspacing7172 else if (0 == wordjdx + 0) # field contains string73 printf("%s", wordjdx); # print string74 for (kdx = length(wordjdx); kdx < widthjdx + sp; kdx++)75 printf(" "); # left justify str value,76 # add inter-columnspacing7778 else # field contains number79 for (kdx = length(wordjdx) ; kdx < widthjdx ; kdx++)80 printf(" "); # right-justify number8182 printf("%s", wordjdx); # output number83 for (ldx = 0; ldx < sp; ldx++)84 printf(" "); # add inter-columnspacing8586 # end of if-else clause87 # end of for loop scanning stored input lines88 printf("n"); # end-of-line terminator89 ' sp="$Spacing" procid=$$ < /tmp/align$$outB. Sample input data:$ dfFilesystem kbytes used avail capacity Mounted on/dev/sd0a 7573 5989 826 88% //dev/sd0g 119077 50460 56709 47% /usr/dev/sd0d 7573 1922 4893 28% /export/root/dev/sd0e 15331 15313 0 111% /export/swap/dev/sd0h 24061 24 21630 0% /home/yin$C. The result after passing the data in Part B through align:$ df -k alignFilesystem kbytes used avail capacity Mounted on/dev/sd0a 7573 5989 826 88% / -/dev/sd0g 119077 50460 56709 47% /usr -/dev/sd0d 7573 1922 4893 28% /export/root -/dev/sd0e 15331 15313 0 111% /export/swap -/dev/sd0h 24061 24 21630 0% /home/yin -$D. Alternate action to use if nawk can't access command-line variablewithin BEGIN-pattern action:50 BEGIN51 widthfile = "/tmp/align" "'$$'" "wid";52 getline widthline < widthfile # get the field widths53 maxcount = split(widthline, width, " "); # div width line in width54LISTING 2: A simple awk program filter can be used to "age" a textfile-that is, remove old entries and age remaining entries.A. Listing of the age program:1 :2 # @(#) age - filter to age items in a text file3 # Author: Lawrence M. Ruane, November 19914 #5 awk '6 if ($0 /expire / && NF==2) # if expire line7 if ($2) # and there is an argument8 for (i=1; i<=NR-1; ++i) # for each item line9 print itemi # output it10 print "expire", $2 - 1 # output updated expire line1112 NR=0 # get ready for next item13 next # get next input line1415 if ($0=="" && itemNR-1!="") # if line is blank, previous not16 for (i=1; i<=NR-1; ++i) # for each item line17 print itemi # output it18 NR=1 # get ready for next item1920 itemNR=$0; # store input line2122 # Print any remaining item:23 END24 for (i=1; i<=NR; ++i) # for each item line25 print itemi # output it26 'B. Sample "root" cron-table entry for aging the message-of-the-day file,/etc/motd:30 1 * * * cd /etc; /local/Scripts/age nmotd && mv nmotd motdC. A section from the system-wide Bourne/Korn shell /etc/profile start-upfile that displays the message-of-the-day file, /etc/motd, without viewingany "expire" directive lines:# Issue message of the day: trap : 1 2 3 # can only interrupt display of /etc/motd if -s /etc/motd ; then egrep -v 'expire +0-9+' /etc/motd # space,tab in brackets fi trap "" 1 2 3 # ignore further interruptsCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7DATA TYPES, FILE TYPES, CONNECT WITH THE DOTBy:Ray SwartzTo lead off this month, Bob Neuberger asks how to determine the data typeof shell variables. Actually, shell variables don't have data types, but Ireview arithmetic operations using the various shells. William Pinard wantsto know if the C shell has an equivalent for the Bourne and Korn shells'"dot" command. I explain the source command. Finally, Pat Concannon askshow to add new file types to the file command, and I provide an example ofhow to do so.What's Your TypeQuestion: Is there a way to determine the data type of a shell variable?Bob NeubergerSanta Clara, Calif.Answer: The quick answer is that shell variables only store characters andthat no numeric variables are provided by either the Bourne, C, or Kornshells. This appears to contradict the fact that both the Korn and C shellssupply operators for performing arithmetic manipulations on variables, butthe arithmetic operators only work on shell variables that hold numericcharacters, that is, digits zero to nine. The Bourne shell has no built-in numeric operators and relies completelyon the expr command. The C and Korn shells offer special built-inarithmetic commands, but they only work on integers. The Bourne shell only handles character data, and no facilities areprovided to deal with numeric data. If you want to add, subtract, multiply,divide, or take a modulo, you can use expr. In fact, a common Bourne shellprogramming command is a='expr $a + 1', which executes the expr command toadd one to the current value stored in a. The shell then assigns expr'soutput into a. The expr command fails if one of the arguments in anarithmetic statement is non-numeric, which includes non-integer values. The C shell takes a different approach by providing two differentvariable assignment operators: set and @. The set command is used to assignvalues to character variables, and @ is used to assign the result of botharithmetic and bitwise operations to a variable. The operators that can be used with @ are addition (+), subtraction (-),multiplication (*), division (/), modulo (%), right shift (>>), left shift(<<), one's complement (), bitwise or (), bitwise exclusive or (), bitwiseand (&), increment (++), and decrement (--). Personally, I've never neededto use bitwise operators inside a shell script, but the C shell makes themavailable. According to the C Shell Field Guide, by Gail and Paul Anderson(Prentice-Hall, 1986), the number of bits used to represent a shellvariable is usually the word size of the underlying computer (16 or 32bits). Even though the C shell has numeric operators, the results are stored ascharacter digits. Thus, rotating a value to the left 10 times won't changethe number of bits used, but will require more characters to represent thevalue. For example, if set a = 3478 and @ b = ( $a << 10 ), then b holds3561472. Incidentally, you have to put the expression $a << 10 insideparentheses to avoid confusion, because << is also a shell redirectionmetacharacter. To demonstrate how these operators work, I've written the mkbits C shellscript, which takes a number as an argument and then creates thecorresponding bit pattern used to represent that value. The mkbits scriptis shown in Listing 1A. Listing 1B shows mkbits in action. Current versions of the Korn shell (after June 3, 1986) offer the samearithmetic and bitwise operators as the C shell. Like the C shell, the Kornshell has a separate command for assigning the result of an arithmetic orbitwise operation to variables. The Korn shell uses let or doubleparentheses. Thus, let a=a+3 adds three to the current value of a. This canalso be written ((a=a+3)). Note that a $ is not required in front ofvariable names in let or ((..)) statements. The Korn shell equivalent tothe mkbits script is shown in Listing 1C. The Korn shell has an additional numeric feature, the typeset command,which lets you assign attributes to your variables. Using typeset you cancreate integer variables with the command typeset -i variable-name. Tryingto assign a non-integer to such a variable will result in an error. This isthe only instance where a shell variable has a data type.Going to the SourceQuestion: I often need to execute one of our script files that sets anumber of environment variables. Under the Bourne and Korn shells, I canuse the command ../filename, which executes the file's commands as part ofthe current process. This is required to make the environment variabledefinitions accessible.Is there a C shell equivalent to the Bourne and Korn shell's dot command?Attempting this under the C shell gives a "Permission Denied" error.William PinardAnn Arbor, Mich.Answer: The C shell was designed to have built-in commands that arecompletely incompatible with those of the Bourne shell, which greatlyreduces the problems associated with having both Bourne and C shell scriptson the same system. In most cases, the C shell fails if it executes aBourne shell script. The same is true if a C shell script is run by theBourne shell. This is the reason why the dot command doesn't work in the C shell. TheC shell uses the source command instead. Thus, instead of ../filename, usesource ./filename. A related point is why you get the "Permission denied" error messagewhen the C shell doesn't recognize the dot command. In this case, the Cshell sees the dot as the relative path name of the command you want torun. Because dot is a legal file name, the C shell tries to execute yourcurrent directory, but fails with the "Permission denied" message. Incidentally, because of the Bourne/C shell incompatibilities, you can'tsource a file that contains Bourne shell export commands. The C shelldoesn't use the export command and if it sees it, an error will result. Toset up environmental variables in the C shell, use the setenv command. Thesyntax is setenv environment-variable value. Note that no equal sign isused in the setenv command. As an example of usage, the command setenv TERMansi sets the TERM environment variable to ansi.Marking Your TerritoryQuestion: As part of an internal application, we've created a number ofcustom data files. I'd like to make the file command aware of them. Isthere a way to do that?Pat ConcannonChicago, Ill.Answer: The file command examines the first 512 bytes of a file and triesto identify what kind of file it is. It correctly handles directories,executable files, shell scripts, and ASCII files. The key to it is the/etc/magic file. The /etc/magic file has four tab-separated fields. The first field is aninteger offset into the file where you want the command to examinesomething. Field two is what you want file to examine. Your choices are byte,short, long, and string. The types byte, short, and long may be followed byan & and a mask value that is applied before the actual file comparison ismade. Field three is the value to use in identifying the file type. This canbe a number (octal values are preceded by 0 and hex values by 0x) or astring (C escape sequences allowed), which can be preceded by an optionaltest operator. The allowed test operators are =, <, and >. The = operatoris the default. Field four is the message to print if the described test is valid. Inmost cases, it is a string that describes what kind of file has been found.However, you can use a printf-style format string and the value found inthe file will be substituted for any format specifiers (%d, %o, %x, %c, %s,etc.) in the format string. If you need to perform several tests on a file to identify its typeexactly, you can add more tests by placing a > as the first character on aline. This tells file to continue testing. Listing 2A shows a line I added to my /etc/magic file that identifiesfiles with RAY as the first three characters. Such files are identified as"Ray's files." Listing 2B demonstrates that test. If file can't identify the type of file based on the tests in/etc/magic, it uses an internal set of heuristics to guess the "language"of the file. The guesses are based on the character frequencies and if thefile is executable. These guesses are often wrong.Going to the DumpIn response to the questions about hot keys, Patrick Combet, of Noisy LeGrand Cedex, France, suggests a method for reading keys off the keyboardwithout using C code. His solution is to use dd to read the keyboard aftersetting the terminal to raw mode with stty. His approach is shown inListing 3. He notes in his letter that the redirection of dd's standarderror is to suppress dd's "blocks in, blocks out" message.Guidelines for SubmissionsIf you have a question about using the UNIX system that you can't answer,send it to us and we'll try to help. Try to make your questions as generalin interest as possible and please, no questions regarding specifichardware or third-party application packages. State the UNIX systemversion, if applicable, for the question at hand. Send your questions toRay Swartz, "Answers to UNIX," c/o UNIXWORLD, 1900 O'Farrell St., SanMateo, CA 94403; fax them to 415-513-6986; or send them via e-mail to:uunet!uworld!ans2unix orans2unix@uworld.comPlease include your surface mailing address and telephone number.LISTING 1: The C shell provides several arithmetic and bitwise operatorsthat can be used in shell scripts.A. The mkbits script converts numbers into their bit patterns:1 #! /bin/csh2 if ( $#argv ) then # any arguments?3 set nbr = $argv14 else5 echo "Usage: $0 Number"6 exit 17 endif8 set bitpattern # initialize pattern to empty9 set cntr = 1 # initalize counter10 while ( $cntr != 0 ) # at end of bits?11 @ result = ($nbr & $cntr) # test single bit12 @ cntr = ($cntr << 1) # increment tester13 if ( $result ) then # bit set?14 set bitpattern = 1$bitpattern # yes15 else16 set bitpattern = 0$bitpattern # no17 endif18 end19 echo $bitpattern20 exit 0B. The mkbits script in action:% mkbits 347800000000000000000000110110010110% mkbits 356147200000000001101100101100000000000%C. The Korn shell version of mkbits:1 case $# in2 1) b=$1 ;;3 *) echo "Usage: $0 Number"4 exit 1 ;;5 esac6 a=1 # initalize counter7 while $a != 0 # at end of bits?8 do9 ((c=b&a)) # test single bit10 ((a=a<<1)) # increment tester11 if $c -ne 0 ; then # bit set?12 bitpattern=1$bitpattern # yes13 else14 bitpattern=0$bitpattern # no15 fi16 done17 echo $bitpattern18 exit 0LISTING 2: You can identify files using the file command and its datafile, /etc/magic.A. An entry that, when added to /etc/magic,causes the file command torecognize files beginning with the string "RAY" as "Ray's files":0 string RAY Ray's fileB. The file command finds Ray's file:$ cat file.testRAY$ file file.testfile.test Ray's file$LISTING 3: Reading the keyboard without waiting for return using dd.stty rawx='dd bs=1 count=1 2>/dev/null'stty -rawx now set to single character enteredAbout the Author(s):Ray Swartz is the founder and president of Berkeley Decision/Systems, aconsulting firm specializing in C and UNIX training. He has written twobooks on C and UNIX, and has produced several video training courses on Cand UNIX.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7HOW TO BUILD X TERMINALS AND COOPERATIONLSI Logic Corp. has come out with a dual-purpose board called the Racer XEvaluation Board, targeting original equipment manufacturers interested inX terminal manufacturing. The board, which comes with a MIPS-basedmicroprocessor manufactured by LSI, can be used in one of two ways: If youwant to develop your own X server software, you can use the Racer X as atarget system onto which you can download and debug software; if you wantto build a complete X terminal around the board, you can order it with AGELogic's Xoftware M300L X server. As well as two purposes, the Racer X board comes in two versions-one formonochrome X terminal development and one for eight-bit color X terminaldevelopment. The board includes four megabytes of dynamic RAM (DRAM)expandable to eight megabytes, and the color version has one megabyte ofvideo RAM. The board is 7 by 9 1/4 inches, and supports 25-, 33-, and40-MHz operations. It includes support for the requisite hardware features:keyboard, mouse, and Ethernet ports. Price for the 25-MHz Racer Xevaluation board with eight-bit color is $3,950, or $2,950 for monochrome;AGE's X server software is sold separately.LSI Logic Corp., 1551 McCarthy Blvd.,MS-D102, Milpitas, CA 95035; 408-433-8000.Photograph: LSI Logic's Racer X Evaluation Board is designed for developersof X servers and X terminals.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7HOW ABOUT SOME COOPERATION HEREThe long-awaited version of NCR Corp.'s Cooperation for UNIX arrives thissummer to bring UNIX-based server software to Intel Corp. PCs-Cooperationfor OS/2 is already available. The underlying concept, pioneered by AT&T'sRhapsody, is to have a multitasking operating system like UNIX on theserver and a single-tasking operating system like DOS on the desktop.Cooperation is actually a collection of 50 modules in four categories thatwork together to bring information from the network to the desktop. UsingCooperation's modules, developers can set up users' desktops to takeadvantage of the company's particular environment. The modules can be information access, user, application, and networkservices. Information access services include terminal emulation, transferprotocols, and multiple database access. The second category, userservices, encompasses the graphical desktop, including the clock,electronic mail, file manager, waste basket, and printer icons. At thislevel you can also link "objects" so that one file can be linked toanother; for example, a spreadsheet can be linked to a word processingfile, so that the document is automatically updated when the spreadsheet ischanged. Cooperation provides "application bridges" to more than 30 DOS andWindows applications so you can import and export data. While the user services are linked on the desktop, the applicationservices help programmers link applications across the network. Thesemodules also handle security and logging information for the systemadministrator. The fourth category, network services, handles theconnections between the NCR System 3000 servers and desktops usingMicrosoft Corp.'s LAN Manager 2.0, as well as between the local-areanetwork (LAN) and IBM Corp. SNA-based systems. Network services alsoinclude e-mail gateway facilities to a variety of proprietary systems viaSoftswitch Inc.'s software gateways. Costs for 16-user systems range from $18,120 for Cooperation and $1,133per user for a minimum configuration, to $44,710 for Cooperation and $2,794per user. Prices depend on software options and do not include operatingsystem software for either the desktops or the servers.NCR Corp., 1700 S. Patterson Blvd., Dayton, OH 45479; 513-445-5000.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7BACKUP TO THE MAINFRAMENew Era's Harbor backup software is designed to let you use an MVS-basedIBM mainframe as an archive and server for networks that incorporates PCsrunning DOS or OS/2 and UNIX workstations. The client computers can beconnected via 3270 emulation, TCP/IP, asynchronous protocols, or IBM'sadvanced peer-to-peer communication protocol. Harbor lets you do overnightbackups, recovery, select which version of a document you want restored,and check for non-standard files that may contain viruses. The software does incremental backups when activity is low, and offersusers the choice of which version to recover. The interface can becharacter- or Microsoft Windows-based. The data is stored on the mainframein compressed mode, after which it can be migrated to less-expensive media.Administrators can still use existing MVS data management and securitysoftware features. Price ranges from $25,000 to $90,000 for the mainframecomponent of the software, and from $90 to $260 per workstation, dependingon the number of workstations linked. New Era Systems Services Ltd., 710 Esso Plaza, East Tower, 425 1st SW,Calgary, AB, T2P 3L8; 403-237-6141.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7OPEN YOUR BOCA AND SAY MULTIPORTBoca Research has developed two inexpensive multiport boards, the BB1004with four ports and the BB1008 with eight. Both use first-in, first-outbuffering to allow for high speed transmission without data loss. Theboards are compatible with industry standard architecture (ISA) andextended industry standard architecture (EISA)-based systems running UNIXor XENIX, and are priced at $195 and $295 respectively.Boca Research Inc., 6413 Congress Ave.,Boca Raton, FL 33487; 407-997-6227.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7PUTTING A SPARK IN THE PCOpus Systems' SPARCard 2, a SPARC coprocessor board for IBM PCs andcompatibles, provides the performance of a Sun Microsystems Inc.SPARCstation 2. The 40-MHz SPARC processor is designed to turn a PC into adual-processing workstation that allows users to run DOS, Windows, andSPARC applications simultaneously. The SPARCard 2 is rated at 28.5 millioninstructions per second (mips) and offers eight megabytes of DRAM, on-boardEthernet, SCSI connectors, two SBus connectors, one serial port, and oneaudio port. An AT bus interface supports the PC keyboard, mouse, and floppydrive. The SPARCard 2 is priced at $4,145.Opus Systems, 329 N. Bernardo Ave.,Mountain View, CA 94043; 415-960-4040.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7A FARSITE BETTERDatabeam Corp.'s Farsite conversation software enables visualcommunications between Sun SPARCstation users. You can view, mark up, andexchange images on a shared screen while discussing ideas over thetelephone. Anything that you can display can be shared, independent of theapplication software.In connection with Farsite, Databeam offers the FG 100 LANtelecommunications gateway which attaches as a TCP/IP node. The gatewaysallow any Farsite LAN user to connect to telephone lines or digitalservices to reach other LANs or remote Farsite users. Farsite is priced at$995 per copy, and the FG 100 is priced at $2,495 per unit.Databeam Corp., 3191 Nicholasville Rd., Ste. 600, Lexington, KY 40503;606-245-3500.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7UNIX MAIL CALLPortal Communications Co. has developed new installation tools that make iteasier for Sun users to connect to the UUCP e-mail network. Portal's UUCPInstall Tool, Mail Install Tool, and Usenet Install Tool allow Sun users totransfer UUCP files, exchange e-mail, and access Usenet news. The UUCP andMail Tools are offered to all Sun users free of charge, and the UsenetInstall Tool is sold as a part of Portal's UUCP start-up kit, which ispriced at $595.Portal Communications Co., 20863 Stevens Creek Blvd., Ste. 200, Cupertino,CA 95014; 408-973-9111.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7OFF DBASEKnowledge Information Systems Inc.'s Qbase.exe, a Dbase-compliantdevelopment environment, allows the migration and distribution of Dbaseapplications into The Santa Cruz Operation Inc. UNIX V/386 platforms.Features include facilities for prototyping and testing, screen management,interactive development, and debugging. Developers can link Qbase and Cprograms into single applications without run-time licensing or royaltyfees. Pricing for Qbase.exe starts at $1,299.Knowledge Information Systems Inc., 1301 Highway 36, Hazlet, NJ 07730;800-472-7213 or 908-739-0968.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7GOING INTO THE STUDIOOntos Inc.'s front-end development tool, Ontos Studio, allows an Ontosobject database developer to build graphical user interfaces (GUIs) andstore the newly created interfaces in a database. Studio developers canconsequently re-use and share user interface components and applicationcode. Studio automatically supports database browsing, inspecting, editing,and navigation between objects, and allows a developer to easily movebetween development and testing of the application. Studio supports the XWindows environment with OSF/Motif, 386 and 486 PCs running SCO UNIX, andSun SPARC workstations. A single-user license of Studio starts at $5,500.Ontos Inc., Three Burlington Woods,Burlington, MA 01803; 617-272-7110.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7SCSI, NOT FUZZYFujitsu Computer Products of America Inc. offers a SCSI interface scannerfor document image management applications on Sun SPARC platforms. TheM3096G scans at a rate of 2.2 seconds per page and has an automaticdocument feeder that processes up to 50 documents at a time. It also offers11 1/2-by-17-inch paper handling. A couple of optional hardware features are also available. One featurelets you set the scanner to input pages on a line-by-line basis, so thatyou can account for variation in shading and image quality. It can alsoeliminate random black dots and has a filtering mode that adjusts to readentries written in ball-point pen more accurately. Another feature providesautomatic discrimination of line drawing vs. photographic art in a singlepass. It also lets you magnify or reduce from 25 up to 400 percent, as wellas improve black and white contrast. The M3096G SCSI interfacescanner with50-page automatic document feeder is priced at $6,720.Fujitsu, 2904 Orchard Pkwy., San Jose, CA 95134; 800-626-4686 or408-432-6333.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7YE OLDE SCANSHOPPEVividata Inc.'s Scanshop application program provides image capture forSPARC systems users. With Scanshop, SPARC developers only need to write asingle command line interface to control multiple scanners. Scanshop can beused as a standalone application or as an embedded image-capture utilitywithin other applications. It allows users to preview the image to becaptured using the GUI preview window within the Scanshop control panel.Brightness, contrast, and threshold can all be adjusted with slider controlbars. Scanshop can also save captured images in tagged image or Sun rasterfile formats. Advanced scanner features include a photo invert feature,which creates a negative of an image; a dither pattern upload/downloadcapability, which allows custom dithering patterns to be applied; and anauto-document feeder that adds batch-mode scanning capabilities. Scanshop'smodular design also allows you to incorporate customized features. Price is$695.Vividata Inc., 2020 Milvia, Ste. 414, Berkeley, CA 94704; 510-841-6400.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7WHAT A PERFORMANCEEmulex Corp.'s communications server, Performance 8000, provides connectioncapabilities with full redundancy and fault tolerance for 32 to 128devices. The Performance 8000 is available with "self-load" capabilities,which enable the server to connect online without downloading software froma host system. It also comes with a "network-load" capability, and supportsboth TCP/IP and local-area transport (LAT). Emulex has equipped the server with RS422 and RS423 interfaces, so thatyou put the server further from the serial device. The RS423 interfacelinks devices up to 400 feet from the server, and the RS422 interfaceallows a distance of 1,000 feet. The P8000 unit with RS423 interface ispriced from $11,600 to $23,285 for network-loading servers, and from$12,410 to $24,725 for self-loading servers. The P8000 with RS422 interfaceis priced from $11,700 to $23,685 (network-loading), and from $12,510 to$25,125 (self-loading).Emulex Corp., 3545 Harbor Blvd., Costa Mesa, CA 92626; 800-854-7112 or714-662-5600.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7ENTERING A NEW INTERPHASEInterphase Corp.'s Fiberhub 1600 fiber-distributed data interface (FDDI)network concentrator provides network connectivity for eight to 16workstations. The modular Fiberhub can be configured in two-port incrementsto expand the FDDI network. It supports any mix of fiber and copper networkmedia, as well as a simple network management protocol (SNMP) responseagent. Pricing starts at $13,995 for an eight-port configuration.Interphase Corp., 13800 Senlac, Dallas, TX 75234; 214-919-9000.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7NOW PLAYING AT YOUR LOCAL XYPLEXXyplex Inc. has introduced two networking products, multiprotocol localrouters and an Ethernet-to-X.25 gateway. The 3210 and 3710 multiprotocollocal routers handle both internet protocol (IP) and IPX traffic, but otherprotocols can be simultaneously bridged as well. The 3210 local router is astandalone device with two Ethernet connections priced at $3,695. The 3710is a board that you can install in a Xyplex communications chassis, and ispriced at $2,995. The 6025 Ethernet-to X.25 gateway provides TCP/IP and LAT users withaccess to X.25 wide area networks, and lets users of public and privatepacket-switched data networks connect to resources on the Ethernet LAN. The6025 includes a 3 1/2-inch floppy disk drive. Because the X.25 gatewayprovides a local connection from a host with an X.25 interface to aTCP/IP-LAT Ethernet LAN, it helps network managers can protect theirinvestment in older technology, according to Xyplex. The 6025 gateway ispriced at $4,995.Xyplex Inc., 330 Codman Hill Rd., Boxborough, MA 01719; 508-264-9900.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7FEELING BETTERYETOutput Technology Corp.'s Betteryet IV is a board and cartridge designed toincrease Hewlett-Packard Co. Laserjet printer speed and emulation options.The board plugs into the printers' optional I/O port, and the cartridgegoes into the left font slot (the font slot on the right side is stillfunctional). The product adds Laserjet III emulation to Laserjet IIprinters, Postscript emulation (which requires an additional megabyte ofmemory), the ability to switch between both emulations in a networkenvironment, and enhanced resolution of up to 600 by 300 dots per inch. Thecompany claims its product produces higher speed and output in bothemulations. Price is $999.Output Technology Corp., 2310 N. Fancher Rd., Spokane, WA 99212;800-468-8788 or 509-536-0468.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7LEAVING PRINTS ON THE NETWORKAn alternative to buying a printer that links to an Ethernet network is tobuy an adapter that links your current printer to Ethernet. Microplex'sM201 TCP/IP printer adapter lets you link plotters, printers, or otheroutput devices to the network. You can attach one parallel and two serialprinters to the Microplex adapter, which incorporates a 16-bitmicroprocessor and direct-memory access capability for better performance.The parallel port transfers data at 50,000 characters per second, while theserial ports operate at up to 38.4 kilobits per second and support Xon/Xoffprotocols. All three ports can output data simultaneously. One of theserial interfaces also acts as a console port so you can run diagnostics. The adapter includes software to configure the adapter's IP address andport parameters. Command-line utilities display printer status on anyconnected terminal or workstation. An interface to System V and BerkeleyUNIX spooling permits multiple host access to printers and spooling. Thehost software works with operating systems from AT&T, Digital EquipmentCorp., DataGeneral Corp., HP, IBM, SCO, and Sun. Price is $995.Microplex Systems Ltd., 265 E. 1st Ave.,Vancouver, BC V5T 1A7; 604-875-1461 or info@microplex.com.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7MEET ME DOWN AT THE BAR CODEBasis Inc. is working to simplify connecting UNIX systems to bar-codescanning systems. Its BIS/System consists of a set of programming modulesthat let users bypass special gateways that might have been necessary inthe past. According to Basis, you can transport scanned bar codedata-without intermediate devices-to networked databases where theinformation can be manipulated, filed, and printed. The Basis software cansupport up to 140 Intermec Corp. scanners or printing devices per host, andcan be used with SPARCstations, Tandem Corp. Integrity fault-tolerantsystems, and PCs running SCO UNIX. The modules can be used like building blocks. BIS/One is a C-basedapplication programming interface (API). BIS/Net is a networked version ofthe BIS/One API. BIS/SNMP adds SNMP capability to manage the devices. Thefourth module, BIS/X, provides an X Windows interface for graphicaldepiction of devices on the network. The software supports C-language SQLbindings in Oracle Corp., Informix Software Inc., and Sybase Inc.databases, among others. Initial license prices are based on largest classof machine on the network. BIS/One prices range from $495 to $1,295 for theinitial license, and from $195 to $695 for each additional user. Prices forBIS/Net range from $995 to $3,995, and from $295 to $995. Prices forBIS/SNMP and BIS/X range from $250 to $995, and from $75 to 250.Basis Inc., 5900 Hollis St., Ste. L, Emeryville, CA 94608; 510-547-5900.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7POUR ME A FIFTHThe 816-page Fifth Annual Computer Industry Almanac contains 1992information relating to technology-specific companies, conferences,publications, market research firms, online services, testing firms,standards organizations, public relations firms, and user groups. Other information includes market summaries on specific products, suchas X terminals and computer-aided design software, as well as a history ofcomputing, a collection of computer humor, and a 1990s technology forecast.Cost is $49.50 including shipping.Computer Industry Almanac, 225 Allen Wy.,Incline Village, NV 89451; 702-831-2288.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7I WANT MY UNIX TVBerkeley Decision/Systems offers two new videocassette courses: UNIX ShellProgramming and Creating Applications with UNIX Tools. The videocassettesare targeted at experienced UNIX users who want to learn how to createapplications quickly by using the text processing tools and the commandprocessing language provided within UNIX. According to BD/S, users canlearn how to create menu-driven databases, as well as accounting and systemadministration applications with the UNIX tools. Price for each course is$295, which includes a workbook and textbook.Berkeley Decision/Systems, 803 Pine St., Santa Cruz, CA 95062;408-458-9708.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7PUTTING YOUR FINGER ON ITVisage Inc. has developed a way to make any computer monitor respond totouch-input commands on the screen rather than on the keyboard. Unlikemonitors that are specially built to be touch-capable, the Touchmateproduct works with traditional monitors, and plugs into the computer'sserial port and sits beneath the monitor. According to Visage, Touchmatesupports monitors up to 19 inches. List price is $895.Visage Inc., 1881 Worcester Rd., Framingham, MA 01701; 508-620-7100.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7THREE OF A KINDThree semiconductor vendors introduced new processors to handle static RAMfor workstations. The NEC Electronics Inc. and Hitachi America Inc.processors are specifically for R3000 processors from MIPS TechnologiesInc. The Motorola processor can be used with its own RISC and CISC chips,as well as processors from Intel, SPARC, and MIPS. All three are designedtobe used as cache memory controllers for the processors, and to reduce thenumber of chips needed to build a cache. The Motorola MCM62110 is available in quantities of 1,000, priced at$32.60 each for the 17-nanosecond (ns) version, and $30.40 for the 20-nsversion. The Hitachi HM62A2016 is also available in quantities of 1,000,and is priced at $30 for the 14-ns chip and $27.50 for the 17-ns chip. TheNEC MicroPD46741 and MicroPD46710 are only available in quantities of10,000, and are priced at $65 each for the 12-ns chip and $33 each for the15-ns chip.Motorola Inc., P.O. Box 52073, Phoenix, AZ 85072; 512-928-7726; HitachiAmerica Ltd., 2000 Sierra Pt. Pkwy., MS-080, Brisbane, CA 94005;415-589-8300; and NEC Electronics Inc., 401 Ellis St., Mountain View, CA94039; 415-960-6000.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7JUST THE FAXA new division of Samsung devoted to software has inaugurated its firstproduct, Replix, a UNIX fax application. It eliminates the need for a faxmachine, and uses your computer as a sending or receiving device. You canfax documents directly from Postscript and ASCII documents, or e-mail.According to Samsung, you can also send faxes to multiple recipients andschedule faxes for later transmission. You can forward incoming faxes toother users through e-mail or automatic printing. Replix lets you build "phone books" for personal or departmental use,with easy selection of multiple recipients. The software also allows you toquery the system for the status of incoming and outgoing faxes. Runningunder X Windows with the Motif interface, Replix can be integrated withother X Windows-based applications. Replix runs on Sun, HP, IBM, PC, andSamsung computers running UNIX, and can transmit faxes to ASCII terminals.An Everex 24/96 D Class 2 fax modem is also required. Price starts at$2,395 for two clients, unlimited servers, one modem, and unlimitedcommand-line clients. Additional support is available in separatepackages.Samsung Software America, 1 Corporate Dr., Andover, MA 01810;508-685-7200.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7GETTING THE SALESQ MESSAGEQFollowing its BugQ and CustomerQ applications for handling softwareproblems and customer support, Quintus has developed two more workgroupapplications. SalesQ is for sales and contract tracking, while MessageQhandles telephone messages. According to Quintus, SalesQ can automate salesand lead tracking, direct mail campaigns, activity reporting andforecasting, and customer contract management. You can get a system that isalready configured, or contract with Quintus for further customization. Thelatter might include setting up rules specific to your business (forexample, no selling more product to a customer that hasn't paid invoicesconsistently), setting up communication to customers via e-mail or fax, orcreating ad hoc report generation capabilities. Price ranges from $50,000to $100,000, depending on customization and integration requirements. MessageQ handles telephone messages so that they can be sent by e-mail,kept in a database, or faxed to off-site locations where employees might betraveling. According to Quintus, it can be used as a primary or back-upmessaging system, or as a departmental system. Price ranges from $1,500 fora basic system to $5,000.Quintus Corp., 2100 Geng Rd., Ste. 101, Palo Alto, CA 94303; 415-813-3800or sales@quintus.com.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7STAND BY FOR DISTRIBUTIONGradient Technologies Inc. has released its application development kit,SysV-DCE, for people who want to build applications compliant with the OpenSoftware Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment (DCE). Developerscan use it to build applications running on PCs using UNIX System V Release4 (SVR4). The development kit encompasses all required DCE components,including remote procedure calls, threads, directory service, securityservice, and distributed time service. Price for the kit is $13,500, whichincludes one directory and one security server, and up to 10 DCE clients.Adding additional servers and clients to your system for other developerscost $2,000 per server and $275 per client.Gradient Technologies Inc., 577 Main St.,Ste. 4, Hudson, MA 01749; 508-562-2882.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7HOW MUCH IS THIS GOING TO COST?GE Aerospace has developed a version of its software price estimationsoftware, Price S, for PCs running UNIX. Originally available only onmainframes, Price S is designed to give software developers realisticschedule and cost estimates. It can also estimate the cost of developing,integrating, and testing related software modules into a single system. Tocalculate the projected cost of a software project, you only need sevenparameters, according to GE. These parameters could include be the size of the program (in bytes),the number of lines of code, the percentage of new code to be written, orthe memory constraints of the hardware. The pricing software can also takeinto account the percentage of the code that will be devoted to certaintasks, such as real-time input or math calculations. Cost of Price S is$17,000 per year for a single copy (site licenses are also available).General Electric Co., 300 Route 38, Moorestown, NJ 08057; 800-437-7423 or609-866-6559.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7FILE THIS UNDER EZSJT Software has developed a file manager for PC UNIX systems using SCO andInteractive UNIX SVR3. The EZ-File Manager is an interface designed to takethe place of the command line. You can launch an application simply byputting the cursor next to it, and you can execute commands for particularfiles by typing the command name next to the file name. The program keeps avisual history of previously typed commands and directories, and lets youcopy, move, delete, chmod, and chown entire directory structures. Forprogrammers, it updates directories regularly, so that when the compileprocess creates a new file, it appears on the EZ-File Manager interface.Running on EGA/VGA screens, the software costs $198.SJT Software, P.O. Box 3127, Stn. D., Ottawa, ON K1P 6H7; 613-824-4312.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7NOT MY FAULT TOLERANCE1776 Inc. has developed fault-tolerant software for PC UNIX systems calledMulti-Host that lets one system act as a backup for the other. When a faultis detected in the primary machine, the Multi-Host software automaticallyswitches activity over to the backup system. The two systems are linkedthrough an external SCSI bus. According to 1776, this "light fault tolerance" capability can bringhigh-availability to lower-cost systems. A lower-cost option requiresswitch-over to be handled by a human operator. Price of the Multi-Hostsoftware ranges from $1,990 to $5,980, based on system and configuration.1776 Inc., 8632 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Ste. 203, Los Angeles, CA 90045;310-215-1776 or 1776@cup.portal.com.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7UNBOUNDED ENTHUSIASMUnbound has developed redundant arrays of inexpensive disks (RAID) storagesubsystems for Sun, DEC, and Macintosh users that can manage up to 70gigabytes of data. The Raidstor systems can handle any of three RAIDlevels: 0 (disk striping), 3 (parity using a spare drive), and 5 (theability to replace hard disks on the fly). The subsystems use SCSI-2connections with up to 20 megabyte-per-second data transfer between thehost and up to 35 5 1/4-inch SCSI disk drives. Within the Raidstor systemis a 25-MHz Intel RISC processor that manage the disk arrays. The subsystems are available in both rack-mount and cabinetconfigurations. Software diagnostics are built in and an LCD readoutindicates disk failure. Ranging in size for 7.5 to 70 gigabytes, theRaidstor costs from $35,224 to $270,368.Unbound Inc., 17951 Lyons Cir., Huntington Beach, CA 92647; 714-843-1895.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7Advanced Business Language Group Inc. offers RAP (rapid automaticAdvanced Business Language Group Inc. offers RAP (rapid automaticprogram-maker) for programmers to generate Cobol source code for any offive platforms, including UNIX, DOS, OS/2, OS/400, and CICS on MVS(313-478-4130).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7The Becket Group Inc. is offering S/REXX, a language patterned after IBM'sThe Becket Group Inc. is offering S/REXX, a language patterned after IBM'sSAA-compliant REXX language, so that companies can use existing REXX codeon UNIX platforms from Sun, IBM, DEC, and Silicon Graphics Inc.(708-527-0091).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7Edison Design Group has developed a C++ compiler that can be used as partEdison Design Group has developed a C++ compiler that can be used as partof a native or cross compiler, and is compatible with the company's ANSI Cand Fortran front ends (201-744-2620).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7The Free Software Foundation has announced version four of its GNUThe Free Software Foundation has announced version four of its GNUdebugger, which offers the ability to do remote debugging over a serialline or Internet connection, a simplified command interface, support formore binary formats, and the ability to debug programs and core files thatuse SunOS and SVR4 shared libraries (617-876-3296).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7Iconic Software Inc. offers the Isicon programming language and Isicon/SIIconic Software Inc. offers the Isicon programming language and Isicon/SIscreen development system for developing program prototypes beforeimplementation in C or C++ (708-416-7938).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7James Anthony Consultants announces Jbase, a development tool forJames Anthony Consultants announces Jbase, a development tool forprogrammers to migrate Basic applications to UNIX and still maintain asingle source code file (44-0-442-23-5515).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7Kuck and Associates introduces KAP for Sun Fortran, a preprocessorKuck and Associates introduces KAP for Sun Fortran, a preprocessoroptimized for improving the speed of Fortran applications on SPARCdevelopment platforms (217-356-2288).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7To Alliant Computer Systems Corp. FX/2800: Cogent Research Inc.'s CirclTo Alliant Computer Systems Corp. FX/2800: Cogent Research Inc.'s Circldistributed computing programming environment (503-681-8910).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO APPLE COMPUTER INC. To Apple Computer Inc. A/UX: RSX Technical Services' Fxmail mailprocessing application (202-362-3094).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO APPLE MACINTOSH To Apple Macintosh: HP's C2454M 3 1/2-inch internal hard-disk drive(800-752-0900).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO DATA GENERAL AVIION To Data General Aviion: Data Access Language for SQL database access(508-351-4401); Kingston Technology Corp.'s four-, eight-, and 16-megabytememory upgrades (714-435-2600).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO DEC OSF/1 To DEC OSF/1: Cincom's Control Manufacturing manufacturing managementapplication (800-543-3010 or 513-661-6000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO DECSTATIONS To DECstations: ACC Systems' TRI/ACC token ring adapter (410-290-8100).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO DEC ULTRIX To DEC Ultrix: Xerox Computer Services' Chess MRP II manufacturingresource planning applications (310-306-4000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO HP 9000 SERIES 700 WORKSTATIONS To HP 9000 Series 700 workstations: Nth Graphics' Nth Portable GL forrunning Silicon Graphics' graphics library applications (800-624-7552 or512-832-1944); Procase Corp.'s Smartsystem software development andmaintenance environment (408-727-0714); Wavetracer Inc.'s Zephyr desksidemassively parallel computing system (508-635-9000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO HP 700/RX X STATIONS To HP 700/RX X stations: Dataram Corp.'s DR9700/RX memory expansionboard (609-799-0071).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO HP OPENODB To HP OpenODB: Information Builders Inc.'s Focus 4GL interface(212-736-4433).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO HP STORAGE SYSTEM To HP Storage System: HP's C2225A data-compressed DAT drive(800-752-0900).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO HUMAN DESIGNED SYSTEMS INC.'S X TERMINALS To Human Designed Systems Inc.'s X terminals: Morning Star TechnologiesInc.'s point-to-point communications software (800-558-7827 or614-451-1883).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO IBM RS/6000 To IBM RS/6000: Advanced Computing Support Center's Unitree file andstorage management (800-538-2272 or 310-815-4858); Cambex Corp.'s Certaintymodel 6200-90 2.1-gigabyte SCSI disk drive (617-890-6000); Gejac Inc.'sARSAP system accounting software (301-725-2500); Integrated ComputerEquipment's Openread Plus optical character recognition software(703-478-9478); Interface Data Inc.'s DX-6000 nine-track tape drives(617-938-6333); Talarian Corp.'s RTworks software development toolkit(415-965-8050).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO NEXT COMPUTER INC. To Next Computer Inc.: Cuillamartin Co.'s Cuillamartin Calculator Set,consisting of basic, scientific, and conversion calculators (708-223-5164);Point of View Computing Inc.'s Elegance clip art software (800-397-7055 or719-591-5320).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO NCR SYSTEM 3000 To NCR System 3000: Cogent's Circl distributed computing programmingenvironment (503-681-8910).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO ONTOS INC. To Ontos Inc.'s Ontos DB database: Centerline Software Inc.'sObjectcenter programming environment (617-498-3000); Parcplace SystemsInc.'s Objectworks/C++ development environment (415-691-6700).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO ORACLE'S RDBMS To Oracle's RDBMS: Peoplesoft Inc.'s PS/HRMS human resource managementsystem (510-946-9460).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SCO OPEN DESKTOP To SCO Open Desktop: Prior Data Sciences' Coreldraw graphics software(613-591-7235).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SCO UNIX To SCO UNIX: Gejac Inc.'s ARSAP system accounting software(301-725-2500); Process Software Corp.'s Compressnet 1.0-5 (800-722-7770 or508-879-6994); Web Technologies Inc.'s Datafiles/16 data compressionutility, Drive/8 and Drive/16 data compression device drivers, andDatalink/16 file transfer program (404-514-8000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SEQUENT COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC. To Sequent Computer Systems Inc.: DSD Corp.'s C-Plan project managementsystem (206-788-2358).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SEQUOIA SYSTEMS INC. To Sequoia Systems Inc. Series 400: Micro Focus' Cobol/2 compiler(415-856-4161).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SILICON GRAPHICS To Silicon Graphics: Kingston Technology Corp.'s eight- and 32-megabytememory modules (714-435-2600); Parity Systems Inc.'s magneto-optical disksubsystem and external CD-ROM subsystem (408-378-1000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SPECTRAGRAPHICS' PC-XVIEW To Spectragraphics' PC-Xview: Frontier Technologies Corp.'s Super-TCPfor Windows TCP/IP connectivity software (414-241-4555).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SOLBOURNE COMPUTER INC. To Solbourne Computer Inc.: Parity's external 5 1/4-inch CD-ROMsubsystem (408-378-1000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SUN SPARCSTATIONS To Sun SPARCstations: Antares Microsystems' SBus Serial-8 adapter andSBus SCSI-2 adapter (408-370-7287); Control Concept's Slimline 88 andSlimline II/88 removable drive subsystems (703-876-6444); Du Pont PixelSystems' PX/GL 3-D graphics library (800-542-1484); Fujitsu's VM2200-SRSWorkstation Printpartner (408-432-6333); Insignia Solutions Inc.'s SoftPC3.0 Windows and DOS emulation software (508-682-7600); Integrix Inc.'s SBusexpansion chassis with automatic configuration software and its SGX 120graphics accelerator board (805-375-1055); Momentum Data Systems Inc.'sDSPworks signal analysis software tool (714-557-6884). Parity's external 51/4-inch CD-ROM subsystem (408-378-1000); Perwill EDI Inc.'s electronicdata interchange software (800-969-3341 or 216-642-7565); StorageDimensions' SCSI and SCSI-2 hard drive subsystems (408-954-0710); WangtekInc.'s Qic/Sse and Wangdat Inc.'s DAT/sse 1/4-inch cartridge and DAT tapedrives (805-583-5255).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO SYBASE RDBMS To Sybase RDBMS: Performance Technologies Inc.'s Information View BaseSystem optical disk storage subsystem (716-256-0200).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO TADPOLE TECHNOLOGY INC. To Tadpole Technology Inc. SPARCbook: Metrix Network Systems Inc.'sNetmetrix network analysis and monitoring tool (603-888-7000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO UNISYS CORP. To Unisys Corp.'s U 6000: Corbin Willits Systems Inc.'s CWS municipaloperation management software (510-790-5600).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7Cisco Systems Inc. adds the ability to filter information from AppletalkCisco Systems Inc. adds the ability to filter information from Appletalknetwork zones in its multiprotocol routers (415-326-1941).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7INTERLINK COMPUTER SCIENCES INC. Interlink Computer Sciences Inc. adds token ring and network printersupport for its SNS/TCPaccess mainframe connectivity products(510-657-9800).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7RDI COMPUTER CORP. RDI Computer Corp. offers Helios Systems' Helioscom+ fax/modem SBus cardas an option in its Britelite portable workstations (619-558-6985).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7XEROX IMAGING SYSTEMS INC. Xerox Imaging Systems Inc. adds Tagworx software to its Scanworxdocument imaging system to allow users to pass text files that comply withthe device-independent standard generalized markup language standard fromcomputer to computer (508-977-2000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7Advanced Visual Systems Inc. adds a point-and-click interface, a geometryAdvanced Visual Systems Inc. adds a point-and-click interface, a geometryviewer, the ability to read other data file formats, and other features inversion four of its Application Visualization System (AVS) software forgraphics applications development (617-890-4300).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7COMDISCO SYSTEMS INC. Comdisco Systems Inc. enhances its Bones Designer 2.0 network designsystem with simplified graphical input and animated simulations(415-574-5800).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7COMPUTERTIME NETWORK CORP. Computertime Network Corp. allows users on any computer system tobackup, archive, or transfer files or SQL database tables acrossmultivendor UNIX and VAX/VMS networks with version 2.3 of its Archive SQLstorage management software (514-633-9900).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7CONCORD COMMUNICATIONS INC. Concord Communications Inc. adds the Who Tool to its Trakkerinternetwork monitor so operators can instantly identify which stations arehaving network problems (508-460-4646).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7IMAGE BUSINESS SYSTEMS CORP. Image Business Systems Corp. features improved document retrieval,support of dynamic data exchange, word processing integration, and enhancedbar-code interpretation in version 2.3 of its Imagesystem image processingsoftware (212-696-2500).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7INDEPENDENCE TECHNOLOGIES INC. Independence Technologies Inc. allows users to integrate an unlimitednumber of management information bases (MIBs) and automatically generatesmost of the C code necessary to support the private MIB objects with itsIview SNMP agent kit tool (510-438-2000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7INFORMIX Informix adds real-time capabilities to its Wingz spreadsheet with anenhancement package co-developed by Fusion Systems Group Ltd.(212-285-8001).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7INTERCON SYSTEMS CORP. Intercon Systems Corp. improves security in Planet X version 1.2, its XWindow-client software for the Apple Macintosh (703-709-9890).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7INTRACO SYSTEMS INC. Intraco Systems Inc. features multinational addressing formats, NetworkFile System support, and implementation of a customer survey function itsnew version of Telemark/SD for sales development and account management(407-368-8434).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7INTRIX SYSTEMS GROUP INC. Intrix Systems Group Inc. offers version 9.6 1A of its ISG Titanmanufacturing and material planning software with continuous flowmanufacturing, production activity control, and materials requirementsmodules (800-877-7501 or 916-928-0555).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7JYACC INC. JYACC Inc. provides a bidirectional bridge between its applicationdevelopment tools and Cadre Technologies Inc.'s Teamwork computer-aidedsoftware engineering (CASE) toolset with JYACC's Jam/CASE interface(212-267-7722).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7NATIONAL INSTRUMENTS National Instruments adds a multitasking device driver, a C languageinterface, software diagnostics, an interactive control utility, and aninteractive configuration program to its NI-488M driver software forprogramming its AT-GPIB interface board under AT&T UNIX SVR4 (800-433-3488or 512-794-0100).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7NEXT ADDS DIGITAL INSTRUMENTATION TECHNOLOGY INC. Next adds Digital Instrumentation Technology Inc.'s Floppyworks sourcecode, which provides Macintosh disk access, to its Nextstep 3.0object-oriented system software (415-424-8500).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7ONTOS INC. Ontos Inc. increases support for workgroup applications and integratedobject tools and languages, and adds a data storage manager for enhancedperformance tuning in its Ontos DB 2.2 object database (617-272-7110).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7PERSOFT INC. Persoft Inc. adds a programmable script language to its Smarterm 320terminal emulation software (608-273-6000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7POSTALSOFT INC. Postalsoft Inc. adds mail segmentation, bundling, and manifestingcapabilities to its Postware 4.0 mailing software (608-788-8700).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7RSX TERMINAL SERVICES RSX Terminal Services offers virtual word-wrap functionality on itsFXmail 1.5 e-mail software so that free-form text entered on an 80-columnterminal will still look correct on a recipient's 132-column terminal(202-362-3094).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7STATE OF THE ART State Of The Art adds a Point of Sale accounting module to its Mas 90Evolution/2 accounting software (800-854-3415 or 714-753-1222).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7SUNSELECT Sunselect integrates both Microsoft Windows 3.1 and MS-DOS 5.0 with UNIXclient-server environments, allowing PC users to access files and resourceson workstations and servers with version 4.0 of PC-NFS (508-667-0010).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7SYBASE INC. Sybase Inc. enhances Sybase Open Server 2.0 with event notification,application debugging tools, new configuration options, and features forreducing network traffic (510-596-3500).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7SYSTEMS STRATEGIES INC. Systems Strategies Inc. adds support for IBM's advanced peer-to-peernetworking protocol on its Express and Ezbridge connectivity software(212-279-8400).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TIGER MEDIA Tiger Media adds compatibility with Open Windows 3.0, full support of"drag and drop" capabilities from within the program's file manager, and apop-up control to define transparent colors on image objects to its CatsMeow 1.1 multimedia authoring tool (213-721-8282).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7VERMONT CREATIVE SOFTWARE INC. Vermont Creative Software Inc. lets programmers and developers design,generate, and change UNIX application interfaces using text-based objectswithout rewriting the source code, with Vermont Views version 3.0(802-848-7731).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7WAVEFRONT TECHNOLOGIES INC. Wavefront Technologies Inc. offers greater image precision in croppingand panning, and improved composition performance so users can produce moreframes per minute (805-962-8117).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7ZETACO INC. Zetaco Inc. upgrades its mass storage software, Netstor TOSF 3.1, underwhich the size of a file that can be migrated to optical is limited only bythe operating system's file parameters (612-890-5135).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7To Advanced Logic Research Inc.: the EISA-based ALR Powerpro 486DX2/50To Advanced Logic Research Inc.: the EISA-based ALR Powerpro 486DX2/50systems, designed around Intel's 486DX2/50 CPU starting at $5,295; the ALRFlyer Series 32-bit, 486-based systems starting at $1,495 for desktopsystems and from $2,295 for floor-standing systems (714-581-6770).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO DELTEC CORP. To Deltec Corp.: eight- and 10KVA models of its 2000 uninterruptiblepower systems, priced from $2,995 to $8,995 (619-291-4211).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO HP To HP: the HP 4995A Lanprobe II allowing network managers to monitornetworks with the fault- and performance-managment features of the remotenetwork monitoring management information base (RMON MIB) standard,starting at $2,595 (800-452-4844).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO IOMEGA CORP. To Iomega Corp.: Bernoulli Workstation Transportable 90 and WorkstationDual 90 removable disk drive systems, priced at $1,299 and $2,449,respectively (800-777-6179 or 801-778-1000).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO MEGATEK CORP. To Megatek Corp.: the Megatek Esprix one-slot SBus-based graphicsaccelerator board,priced at $2,495 (619-455-5590). To Mobius Computer Corp.: the P450icx and P450i Intel-based UNIXworkstations priced at $9,365 and $6,385 respectively (800-662-4871 or510-460-5252).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO TATUNG SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY INC. To Tatung Science and Technology Inc.: the Mdesk 2.0 graphical userenvironment for the Compstation series which includes release five of XWindow System (X11R5), Motif 1.1.4 window manager, and X.desktop 3.0icon-based software. (408-435-0140).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7TO TELEBIT CORP. To Telebit Corp.: the Netblazer ST and Netblazer 40 dial-upmultiprotocol networking routers, starting at $2,999 and $5,198respectively (408-734-4333).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7SCANNING FOR SCANNERSThe scanner for your UNIX application isn't a commodity, yet-here's howtoavoid paying too much for the wrong oneBy:Mike BurgardIt's Dr. Eddie Prestridge's responsibility to make sure mass-produced itemslike telephones and desks withstand the wear and tear they receive duringtypical use. At Princeton Gamma-Tech Inc., an image enhancement firm,Prestridge's clients use electron microscopes to analyze the materials inthese products. The problem is, some of their clients' older electronmicroscopes can only generate hard-copy prints. Prestridge used video cameras to capture these prints for furtheranalysis, but they were slow and degraded image resolution. To solve theproblem, he purchased a scanner and attached it to a UNIX workstation.Scanning the hard-copy prints lets Princeton Gamma-Tech input higherresolution images and conduct better analysis using its ownimage-enhancement equipment. Says Prestridge, "Video can only produce 512pixels per line, while our scanner supports 4,000 pixels per line."Princeton Gamma-Tech's specialized application is just one of manyapplications of UNIX-based scanners. The complexity of the company's workis indicative of what considerations go into the purchase of a scanner.Unlike commodity items such as printers, scanners are generally purchasedfor specific tasks. Scanner prices start at about $2,000 for a simple grayscale UNIX desktopscanner-these resemble their PC-based siblings, and are about the same sizeas a PC. Prices can climb to over $500,000 for a bundled high-end documentarchive system. These larger free-standing machines look more like officephotocopiers, and usually have an integrated workstation and monitor forediting and enhancing images. The key elements of scanners are speed, resolution, and compatibility.Scanning technology has not advanced enough that a single system can meetall these requirements, so compromise is inevitable. High-speed scannersmight scan as many as 25,000 documents in an eight-hour day.High-resolution scanners can give you images as detailed as 2,400 dots perinch (dpi), but at substantially lower speeds. In thecases in which usersinsisted on the highest resolution at the highest speed, they paid dearlyfor it. In most cases, once you've decided whether your application demandsspeed or resolution, you must next consider software and compatibility. Doyou need a scanner with optical character recognition (OCR) software? Or doyou just need to access scanned images, such as invoices and other forms,without modifying them? Whatever the task, no one wants to invest in an entirely new hardwaresystem to accommodate a scanner. Compatibility concerns include how thescanner connects to your computer, what type of software is provided, andhow well it works with your existing system. All scanners, regardless of style or size, use a similar technology.Think of a scanner as a high-powered copier with a direct interface to yourcomputer's hard disk. A beam of light passes over a document and capturesthe image, the scanner then stores the image and tunes the results.Grayscale scanners store each pixel as various shades of dark and lightbits. Color scanners separate the three primary colors into various shadesof each color. Resolution is affected by many factors, but is primarilytied to the speed at which the light passes over the document. More bitscaptured by the light mean a better quality image, but often at a slowerspeed. Users of UNIX-based scanners usually fall into one of three applicationgroups. First, there are the traditional prepress and graphic artsprofessionals who use systems designed to combine typeset text and scannedimages on a single page of a magazine, catalog, or brochure. The second group is users of large document archival systems, in whichthousands of documents, varying in size, content, and quality, may bearchived in a single day. At the U.S. Library of Congress, for example,government workers input 2,500 to 5,000 documents a day. Scanners thatallow such high-volume input usually only support 60 to 200 dpiresolution. Finally, people like Prestridge, and other scientists and engineers, arein the group most likely to use desktop scanners for image-enhancementapplications. These people scan maps, drawings, and photographs and enhancethe images pixel by pixel to meet a specific need.Can It do the Job?Resolution and speed sit opposite each other on a seesaw: when one goes up,the other comes down. Ed Ball is in charge of the prepress operations atcommercial printer Pearl Pressman Inc. He needs the quality of his scans tomatch the quality of the finished printed pieces as closely as possible.Commercial printing presses print at higher resolutions than computerprinters do, so if you input a photo with a low-resolution scanner, thepress cannot raise the resolution of the photograph. As a result, if thescanner can't produce at least 1,000-dpi scans, the quality of what comesout of the press suffers. Ball already owned a UNIX page layout systemcapable of 2,400-dpi output, so he chose Du Pont Inc.'s expensive Imagitexscanner to get the fastest speed possible with high resolution. But he paida price in excess of six figures to balance the seesaw as best he could. Dave Godman of General Dynamics Corp.'s electronics division, chose themore typical path-high resolution at slower speed. Godman's group enhancesimages for the U.S. Department of Defense, scanning maps provided bymilitary organizations including the Defense Mapping Agency. Using the mapsas background, Godman superimposes test-flight routes. The map is thengiven to pilots for use on test flights. In order to create much more detailed maps, Godman needed ahigh-resolution scanner that connected to his Sun Microsystems Inc.workstations. Sharp Corp.'s JX-600 gave him 600-dpi resolution at arelatively low cost, but he had to compromise on speed, and gets only about10 scans a day. Another user responsible for a state government contract needed exactlythe opposite trade-off between speed and resolution. Ken Sjogren, directorof Image System Products for Grumman Information Conversion, was bidding ona contract that involved archiving years of paper-based tax records.Sjogren used Eastman Kodak Co.'s 900 scanner-which is designed to work withdocument-archival systems and scan up to 25,000 pages a day-in apre-contract demonstration. Sjogren believes the machine's speed swung thestate's decision in Grumman's favor. An issue is how to get documents into an archival system. According tousers, an automatic paper feeder is the best solution, but you may need tolook for one that can handle odd-size sheets. Users report that automaticfeeders work fine with 8 1/2-by-11-inch paper, but can jam up with odd-sizedocuments.Working TogetherScanners are not like a typical peripheral that you can just plug in andhave work with your system. Compatibility, particularly in the area ofhardware connections and system integration, drives many a decision. As a photo retoucher for McMaster Carr Supply Inc., Johanna Stevenscould justify purchasing a scanner only if it worked with the Xyvision Inc.page layout system she was using. She works with the pictures that go intothe catalog of parts and supplies McMaster sends to customers across thecountry. There are thousands of pictures in every catalog, and becauseevery new or altered product has to have a new image placed in the computersystem, Stevens frequently stores more than 30,000 images. Before she bought a scanner, Stevens would get a photograph, send it toa service bureau that stored it on a computer disk, wait up to three daysfor its return, and then finally work on touching up the photo. Buying oneof Du Pont's scanners allows her to do all scanning in-house. It now takesonly an hour to restore an image, instead of days. Even this significanttime savings would have been offset by hardware costs had the scanner beenincompatible with the Xyvision system, however. The physical interface can be a compatibility sticking point for some.Princeton Gamma-Tech's Prestridge found that most scanners don't use a SCSIinterface. A SCSI connection was a critical factor because PrincetonGamma-Tech resells image-enhancement hardware with SCSI as the primaryinterface, and the company could not risk compatibility problems. To avoid this, look closely at the interface you use and your scannerwill need. Some scanners, such as Du Pont's, attach directly to yourEthernet network. And still others use the IEEE-sanctioned general-purposeinterface bus; several board vendors offer IEEE-488 expansion boards forboth VMEbus- and SBus-based workstations. Both Sharp and Mitsubishi Corp.scanners use this interface, but have recently added SCSI support as well.Integrating Your SoftwareThe software interface is as important as the hardware interface. Mostpeople don't want to write both software interfaces for users and devicedrivers for scanners. Users were happier working on the latter than theformer. In-house programming shops and system integrators tend to customizetheir own interface, regardless of what is provided by the vendor. However, if your application involves document archival, softwarecompatibility tends to be of lesser importance because you're more likelyto need an integrated system that already has built-in scanners,workstations, storage capability, and software. On the other hand, if you intend to scan and manipulate text, you needto research whether the scanner you want features OCR software. Somehigh-resolution systems incorporate OCR capabilities directly. Othervendors sell an optional OCR software package, while still others leave itup to third-party vendors. UNIX machines tend to be used more forpixel-by-pixel image enhancement rather than text in OCR applications.Remember that document archival often involves scanning paper with varioustypefaces, intermixed images, and handwriting samples of questionablequality. According to users, these challenges are beyond even the best OCRsoftware. Finally, regarding software, a typical eight-inch-square, eight-bitcolor image scanned at 600 dpi takes about 23 megabytes of disk space,which brings up data compression issues when you need high resolution for alot of images. One user strongly suggests that buyers ask vendors aboutimage-compression software to reduce storage requirements. Barringcompression built into the scanner, you can also look for boards for yourworkstations that support data compression.Price ScannersBecause they're not a commodity, scanners are not nearly as homogeneous asother hardware peripherals when it comes to price. You can pay anywherefrom $2,000 to more than $150,000 for an integrated high-resolution scannerand edit station, and up to $500,000 for document archive systems-so pricebecomes an issue, especially for system integrators. For example, PrincetonGamma-Tech bought its scanner from Apunix Inc., partially because the pricefit in with what it wanted to be able to charge for its ownimage-enhancement equipment. On the other hand, Pearl Pressman's Ed Ballwanted quality output and compatibility, so there was less flexibility onwhat he had to pay. Scanner purchases only vaguely resemble hard drive or network cardpurchases. Different uses, and a technical stalemate between speed andresolution, require that you think long and hard about the scanner'sintended use. Words of wisdom from users sadly advise that, unlike mostcomputer purchases, price should be one of the last considerations. Stepone is to look at your application and decide whether your primaryobjective is speed or resolution. Step two is to research the interfaces inboth hardware and software. The day may come, as more peripheral functions are integrated intoworkstations, that step three may not be price consideration. Until then,if you application requires a certain kind of scanning, the price is notyet negotiable.About the Author(s):Editor-at-Large Mike Burgard is a regular reviewer for UNIXWORLD and a datasystems information manager for a commercial printing company in Montana.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7RIVALS COMPETE FOR E-MAIL STANDARDSElectronic mail is rapidly becoming a communications mainstay for manybusinesses. While it was once used only within individual organizations,e-mail is now used to communicate between organizations. And this includesmore than just polite notes from one friend to another-today, e-mailversions of purchase orders, invoices, financial transfers, and otherbusiness documents are replacing their paper equivalents. But e-mail faces a major problem: incompatible e-mail formats make ithard to send messages across different networks. Two standards arecurrently competing to resolve that difficulty. One is the simple mailtransport protocol (SMTP) style of mail currently used on most UNIXnetworks in the United States. The other is the international-standardX.400 mail, the preferred type of e-mail in Europe which is also used bymost U.S. commercial e-mail carriers, such as MCI Mail. If one of the twocan gain clear dominance, it will define the shape of e-mail to come.E-mail EvolutionE-mail found its earliest business uses when large time-sharing mainframesmade it possible to put a terminal on each employee's desk. Replacing papernotes or memos between employees with electronic versions was a logicalapplication of computerized office-automation systems, such as IBM Corp.'sPROFS e-mail. Early e-mail systems had a significant drawback, however: apaper memo could go to anyone, but e-mail could only be sent to employeesconnected to the same computer. With the arrival of UNIX workstations, andPCs using local-area network systems such as Novell Inc.'s Netware, e-mailbecame even more familiar to many large organizations-although it remainedlimited to users directly connected to the local network in many cases. Today, e-mail is frequently sent between organizations. UNIX e-mail wasan early success, largely thanks to the support provided by the Internet, aresearch network that was funded by the U.S. Defense Department to linkuniversities and other defense contractors. But commercial e-mail providerssuch as MCI and AT&T have also demonstrated that there's a demand amongother businesses for the ability to send messages from one organization toanother-so much demand that they can make a profit from it. Other, more specialized forms of e-mail have also found wide businessacceptance. The most well-known is probably electronic data interchange(EDI), a special form of e-mail that consists of electronic versions ofpurchase orders, financial transfers, and other business documents. An EDImessage is not simply the text of a purchase order in electronic form;instead, it's actually a data file that contains information in such awell-defined format that it can be generated by one company's computer,sent electronically to another company, and processed by the recipient'scomputers-completely without human intervention. That's far faster, moreefficient, and error-free than paper documents that must be printed outfrom one company's computers, delivered, then typed back into anothercompany's machines. Still other kinds of existing e-mail-such as the voice e-mail availableon computers from Next Computer Inc.-point to a future in which e-mailcould carry voice, images, and other binary data between differentcompanies and different machines as easily as it carries text messagestoday.The Compatibility QuestionFor the most part, e-mail's widespread success has been limited to textwith messages that will be read by human beings. Human readers areremarkably flexible when it comes to finding messages in text, no matterhow it's formatted or what extraneous information the e-mail may contain.Human readers have relatively little difficulty deciding which part of ane-mail message is the "real message," and which part is information on howthe message traveled from the sender to the receiver-the electronicequivalent of a postmark. That kind of flexibility isn't available when a computer is supposed toread and process non-text messages. Computers need a well-defined format toidentify where a digitized voice message begins and ends, or where the datain an EDI message is to be found. Without such standard formats, it'simpossible to send that kind of e-mail. As a result, it's not surprisingthat EDI messages are usually sent through networks that cater exclusivelyto EDI users, or that Next's voice e-mail can only be used by Nextcomputers. On the other hand, when it comes to addressing a message, e-mail has nolack of standards. If anything, there are far too many addressingstandards. For a letter sent via the postal service, there's a unique,relatively simple address for every possible destination. But, when themessage is e-mail, the address can be highly complex, and messages going tothe same destination can have addresses that vary widely depending on thesender. In some cases, messages with the same sender and receiver can beproperly addressed in different ways. How can the sender be sure theaddress is correct? In simple terms, the problem is compatibility-the lack of awell-accepted, dominant standard for e-mail addressing and formatting.Fortunately, proponents of each of the two most widely used flavors ofe-mail-SMTP and X.400-are working to solve that problem by creating addressand format standards. Unfortunately, they're not necessarily working toprovide compatibility between the two camps.SMTPSMTP is the e-mail protocol used by most UNIX users in the United States.The reason is simple: the "backbone" for sending messages is thegovernment-funded collection of networks called the Internet. It wasInternet users who developed SMTP to route e-mail between Internet sites.Strictly speaking, the Internet is only for use by U.S. defensecontractors, but many Internet sites are also connected to other networks,including commercial networks such as UUNET. As a result, a large number ofU.S. UNIX users can send e-mail to one another, as well as to many othersites throughout the world. Although SMTP's "first name" is Simple, using it can be more complicatedthan anyone would like it to be. A major problem stems from the fact thatSMTP has two widely used systems of addressing. In the first, it's up tothe sender to specify the path the message will travel to its destination.That usually requires knowing the name of a major site connected to abackbone network, and then specifying the names of other specific networknodes on the way to the user, all separated by exclamation points (!). Forexample, uunet!uworld!frankh begins with a backbone site (uunet), followedby a node connected to it (uworld), followed by the user's name (frankh).Depending on which backbone sites the addressee is connected to, manydifferent valid addresses may be used for the same destination. The solution to that confusion is the other major form of SMTPaddressing, the domain name system (DNS). In DNS, the e-mail system itselfmaintains a directory of unique node names, so the sender need only specifythe "home machine" and user: frankh@uworld.com. DNS is steadily beingadopted for SMTP mail, but the older addressing style is still common. Tomake matters worse, some senders choose addresses that mix the two styles,such as uunet!frankh@uworld.com-a confusing, non-standard address thatresults in the e-mail being delivered successfully on some networks andreturned as undeliverable on others. And although SMTP is older and better-established than other kinds ofe-mail, its age creates another problem: All contents of an SMTP mailmessage, including the address, must be in a form that requires only sevenbits per byte, such as ASCII text. Non-text messages like voice, EDI, andbinary computer code require eight bits per byte, so such binary messagesmust first be somehow encoded into seven-bit text.X.400X.400 e-mail is based on an international standard designed to solve manyof the problems associated with SMTP mail. The X.400 standard was developedby a working group of CCITT, the International Telegraph and TelephoneConsultative Committee. The original standard was released in 1984, and in1988 was expanded to include formats for non-text binary messages. In X.400, every destination has only one address that consists of aseries of ever-more-specific locations, beginning with the addressee'scountry and working down to the user's account name. As with SMTP's DNS,the address is unique, but in X.400 it's stored in binary form in thee-mail's header section. This means the header must be created by a specialprogram called a "user agent," which encodes the address and packages themessage contents for mailing. As a result, the user-agent software canrequest the address from the sender in any appropriate form, and theaddress details can be hidden from the sender if desired. In addition,because the body of an X.400 message can be binary, it's much easier tosend non-text messages that must be re-encoded for SMTP mail-at least intheory. In practice, although X.400 may be technically superior to SMTP mail, itlacks the infrastructure and support services that SMTP users enjoy fromthe Internet-such as directory systems, help for addressing problems, andwidely available software for packaging mail into the proper X.400 form.That's a major reason X.400 is more popular in Europe than in the UnitedStates. Because there's no Internet to provide a strong, reliableinfrastructure for SMTP in Europe, users must create their own supportservices which makes SMTP less attractive outside the United States. Another drawback is that many existing X.400 mail systems use the older,1984 version of the standard, which limits its advantages. For example, theU.S. version of X.400 is largely used by commercial e-mail carriers such asMCI and AT&T. They use X.400-1984, which doesn't specify exact formats fordifferent kinds of binary mail, and as a result, each carrier must specifyits own binary mail formats, and messages sent from one carrier to anotherare limited to ordinary text.Competition and CooperationWork is not at a standstill on either SMTP or X.400. SMTP's advantage isthe excellent infrastructure support its users get from the Internet. Toencourage use and support of X.400 on the Internet, a project at theUniversity of Wisconsin at Madison is working to build some of the basicsupport systems necessary to make X.400 easily usable on theInternet-including user-agent software and directory services. The X.400Internet project is also specifying the implementation details for manykinds of X.400 binary mail, so that Internet and commercial X.400 userswill be able to send and receive non-text e-mail-regardless of where itoriginates or how many networks it must cross. But X.400's lead in non-text messages won't last. An Internet technicalgroup is working on a specification, called Multipurpose Internet MailExtension (MIME), that will allow SMTP mail to contain non-text messages. Will competition between partisans of the two e-mail styles torpedocompatibility between them? Probably not. Most users don't care whethertheir messages use SMTP or X.400-what's important to them is that the mailmust go through. Currently, that means messages sent between networks mayrequire a lowest-common-denominator approach-text only. In the future,appropriate gateways should make it possible to send non-text messagesbetween SMTP and X.400, by translating from the binary-formatspecifications being developed by the Internet X.400 project and the SMTPMIME extensions. Realistically, X.400 is the e-mail wave of the future. But thanks to thestrength of SMTP, that wave may crest for most of the world long beforeX.400 becomes dominant in the United States. Still, if the Internetprojects to fill in the gaps in each style of e-mail are successful, theymay eventually converge. When that happens, SMTP and X.400-and especiallytheir users-will be the winners.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIXWORLD via NewsNetJuly, 1992 Vol. IX, No. 7METATOOL TO THE RESCUREBy:Omri SerlinSience the early days of computing, a problem that has loomed larger thanothers has been how to bridge arcane sequences of logic signals-which arethe only language a computer really understands-to forms of expressionhumans can read, write, and comprehend. The quest to accomplish this has led to two separate but complementarysolutions. One is the development of operating systems, linking loaders,I/O drivers, and standard utilities. In addition to allowing users tomanipulate system components using relatively simple abstractions, thesetools help manage the resources of computer systems. Recent examplesinclude the type of system software that automatically manages filemigration between multiple levels of system storage, such as main memory,extended memory, disk drives, and robot-arm tape drives. From the users' point of view, a more interesting development has beenthat of automatic programming systems. Even a simple assembler, which istoday considered not much different than "machine language," introduces aprogramming interface that humans find significantly easier to manipulate.For instance, when was the last time you tried to create a program usinghexadecimal or octal notation? Compilers, such as Fortran and Cobol, created an even higher level ofabstraction, and allowed humans to write programs in languages that weremuch closer to the intended application. To a mathematician, the statementX = SQRT(A**2 + B**2) makes a lot more sense than the equivalent sequenceof a dozen or so obscure machine-language instructions. Similarly, Cobolprovides facilities to define and manipulate files and records in termsreadily understood by commercial application developers.SDTs: The Next StepThe next step along this path has been referred to as fourth-generationlanguages (4GLs), applications generators, or non-procedural languages.These tools allow programmers to define an application in terms that areeven closer to the application's own semantics. Unlike the strictlysequential nature of procedural languages like Fortran, Cobol, C, andPascal, these more modern tools allow applications to be defined as blockdiagrams-that is, a collection of processing tasks and theinterrelationships between them. These tools are increasingly being referred to as specification-driventools or SDTs. They have become the heart of many of the computer-aidedsoftware engineering (CASE) systems currently offered by a host ofvendors-the IEF, for information engineering facility, product family fromTexas Instruments Inc., for example. A SDT reads a specification-a description of an application in alanguage that is tailored to that application-and generates a "product" inresponse. The product is often a description or source code of the sameapplication in a more conventional programming language, such as C, thatcan be compiled and executed. Until now, the creation of an SDT was a difficult process, but a numberof vendors are currently proposing to ease the task of creating SDTs byproviding an SDT builder (SDTB). An SDTB is in itself an SDT. Because itsoutput is another SDT, rather than an application, an SDTB can beconsidered a meta-SDT. One example, Metatool, is being marketed by AT&TBell Laboratories. Rather than read an application specification, as a conventional SDTwould do, Metatool reads two kinds of specification files: one describingthe source language to be used to define the application; the otherdescribing the desired product that the resulting SDT is expected toproduce. The output of the SDTB is the source code for the desiredapplication-specific SDT. Once compiled, and augmented with macros andlibrary routines, this SDT will be capable of reading the applicationspecification and producing the desired product. More than one product can be specified by using a separatespecification, or product description file, for each. AT&T's Metatool has been used under its original name, Stage, in morethan 100 internal software development projects with observed programmerproductivity improvements from 4:1 to 40:1. In addition, the use of theSDTB resulted in improved software quality and delivery schedules,according to AT&T.Measuring ProductivityAs with all CASE tools, productivity, quality, and timeliness claims arerough estimates at best. Quantitative comparisons require setting up andmeasuring two independent development projects, with one using the toolsand the other using conventional programming techniques. Nevertheless, at least one reasonable quantitative measure is available,and with it AT&T has been able to support its productivity claims. Thereasoning goes something as follows: If an application program contains2,000 lines of code (LOCs), using an SDT tool, perhaps 250 lines ofspecifications are needed to produce the 2,000 LOCs-an 8:1 improvement. Ofcourse, creating the SDT tool by hand could require writing 8,000 LOCs.This still may be quite acceptable if the investment in the SDT isamortized over numerous applications. However, using Metatool, perhaps only 500 lines of code are required topopulate the source and product description files. In this case, a 2.7:1productivity advantage is achieved. The productivity gain is increased ifthe SDT can be reused many times. Metatool, and other products of the same ilk, are likely to excel inshort-term applications for which the target SDT is used for relativelysimple processing tasks. In principle, an SDTB could be used to create,say, a complete language compiler. In fact, Metatool and the target SDTcreated by it use tools including lex and yacc to perform their tasks.These old UNIX standbys provide the lexical analysis and parsing functions,respectively; which are crucial elements of any translator, compiler, orSDT. But creating the description files for a full-featured, complexlanguage requires above-average programming skills, which, in effect,defeats the purpose of an SDTB. Another reason that short-term, simple usage is the preferredenvironment for applying Metatool is that the efficiency of the generatedcode produced by the target SDT isn't as good as what might be obtained bydirect-coding of the application. This discrepancy is a commoncharacteristic of application generators and SDTs. In addition, thespecific way in which Metatool creates the parse tree-a formal, internalrepresentation of the input language-contributes to this shortcoming. Thegains in productivity are usually more than enough to justify theinefficiency of the generated code, however. Another problem is that yaccerror messages are not as precise as one would wish in identifying theoffending code. Metatool is an interesting approach to simplifying the construction ofcomplex UNIX applications. In principle, Metatool can even be used tocreate SDTs for environments other than UNIX, and has been used in a numberof projects for various hardware platforms. Within its limitations,Metatool should prove useful to application and system builders.Diagram: How Metatool WorksAbout the Author(s):Editor-at-Large Omri Serlin heads ITOM International Co., a consulting andresearch firm based in Los Altos, Calif.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-12IA059-000323-B026-191http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec06.html 205.156.212.5 19970114223713 text/html 271940HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:33:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:25 GMTContent-length: 271752Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec06.html Sample Issue Copyright UNIX TODAY! via NewsNet May 13, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEWS Aftermath Of A Battle -- AT&T And NCR Present United Front To Reassure Users (1230 words) NCR To Roll Out Commercial OLTP Parallel Machine (872 words) Supernet Test Set (995 words) Users Divided On Value Of X Terminals (1469 words) Data General Breaks Clear (1312 words) UI To Release Network Spec . . . -- Group's Proposed `Atlas' Distributed Environment To Rival OSF's Net Strategy (724 words) . . . While OMG Mulls OOP Bids (175 words) The SPARCs Are Flying Again With New Fujitsu Chip (195 words) English Molecular Visualization Package Coming To U.S. (188 words) Netwise Adding More Wise To Its SNA Product (158 words) DEC, Intel Intro PC (273 words) BT Revamps Unix OA Plan (484 words) Corrections (82 words) IBM Slashes RS/6000 Prices (782 words) Game Firm Sues Secret Service (640 words) Morris Appeal Planned (248 words) Demax Tool Monitors System Security (347 words) Sun OKs VAR Clone Sales (215 words) DEC RISC Box Gets Plaudits -- Most Beta-Site Users Pleased, Laud New DECstation's Performance, Expandability (653 words) New NCD Machines Double As Character Terminals (626 words) Team Plans ONC RPC Net Utilities (532 words) Hong Kong All-in-One Bank Information (162 words) In Russia, SCO Goes From Bootlegged To Bona Fide (127 words) Frame And Matsushita Say Kanji Is A Can-Do (165 words) Kubota Unveils New Workstation (100 words) THE PRODUCTS NETWORKING (528 words) The Rise Of OSI -- Users Showing Increasing Interest In Potential Of X.400 (2388 words) X Server Tool For DOS PCs (267 words) Four DECnet/SNA Links Premiere (567 words) New Sniffer Net Monitor Debuts (436 words) High-Speed LU6.2 Link Intro'd (392 words) DEVELOPMENT TOOLS NASA's TAE Eases Interface Design (637 words) OSF Patches Motif 1.0 (263 words) DATA MANAGEMENT (536 words) Motif GUIs For Ada (213 words) Ada Bindings For V.I. Tools from richman (159 words) New VAPS Launched (133 words) HARDWARE Acer Intros i486-Based Machines -- Touts Workstations And Servers' Performance, Expandability, Graphics Processing (613 words) Imaging Unit Unveiled (329 words) Graphics Performance Gets A Boost (410 words) Integrated SPARC Chipset Bows (405 words) OLTP Box From NEC (248 words) SOFTWARE CROSSINGS (470 words) Interactive Readies Its System V.4 OS (372 words) Upgraded HP/UX Debuts (454 words) Tracking Adverse Drug Reactions (517 words) 3-D Tool Blends Voxels, Geometry (477 words) Four RDBMS Gateways Bow (161 words) PRODUCT BRIEFS SOFTWARE (617 words) HARDWARE (637 words) TECHNOLOGY Spotlight On Serial X Terminals -- GraphOn, NCD Machines Offer Special Protocols, Neatly Fill The X Serial Void (2714 words) A Look At The Mips R4000 Chip -- Why Mips Selected The Simplicity Of Superpipelining Over A Superscalar Design (1852 words) Analyzing Program Performance -- Key Tools To Help You Size Up The Performance Of Your Application Software (1842 words) SORCERER'S APPRENTICE (621 words) SYSTEM'S ADMINISTRATION (604 words) USER STRATEGIES A Novel Procurement Program -- Canadian Transport Adopts Far-Reaching Unix Midrange System Acquisition Program (2214 words) Implementing OOP Designs -- Early Users Discover Promise, Pitfalls Of Object-Oriented Programming (1663 words) Judging OODBMS Performance (263 words) THE INDUSTRY E&S Gets IDC Tool (138 words) INDUSTRY WATCH (627 words) NIST Unveils Graphics Test Suite (389 words) Sun Reports Higher Profits (138 words) Baan Licenses Triton (202 words) VIEWS Legislating Computer Conduct (528 words) Benchmarks Key To Making The Right Deal (541 words) ETC. Architect Draws On RS/6000's Resources To Reconstruct Lost Abbey (201 words) It's A Scientific Fact: This Flock Of Gray Eagles Loves A Good Party (191 words) Striking A Blow For Accuracy: Did Early Koreans Find The Key To Software Quality? (142 words) Profits Translate To Lots-O'-Pizza At Data General (707 words) CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Aftermath Of A Battle -- AT&T And NCR Present United Front To ReassureUsersBy  DAN RICHMAN    New York-As the $7.48 billion takeover battle for NCR wound to a closelast week, executives of both AT&T and its soon-to-be newest subsidiaryjoined arms in a new campaign: one aimed at keeping their two sets ofusers happy.    Armed with top-level promises of continued migration and productsupport for all existing offerings, officials on both sides worked doubletime to be as reassuring as possible.    NCR President Gilbert P. Williamson, who has been tapped to replaceretiring Chairman Charles Exley as the NCR unit's CEO once the takeover iscomplete, went out of his way to comfort AT&T buyers.    ``We would like to assure AT&T customers that they will be fullyprotected, with a full migration path to the next generation ofproducts,'' he said. ``We agree [with AT&T] that there will be no changein our product direction and in the basic principles that underlie thatdirection.''    Over the next five months, AT&T and NCR officials said, a transitionplanning team consisting of six to eight employees from each company willbe working constantly to try and work out all the details of the productline merger. The planning team-to be co-chaired by Exley and AT&T ComputerSystems President Richard McGinn-will be isolated from day-to-dayoperations so that their discussions do not distract routine operations.    Most NCR and AT&T users contacted last week, however, seemed unsurehow they would act if they suddenly had to make a major Unix purchaseduring the next several months, as the two companies are hammering outtheir differences.    Paul S. Sawyer, a computer specialist with the University of NewHampshire's telecommunications department, is still using a 3B15 that hebought in 1985 to link a network of 12 terminals and 13 MACs. Even thoughhis 3B15 is ``obsolete'' and he has the authorization to replace themachine, Sawyer said he is putting off any new purchases until the mergerhas concluded and ``things have settled down a little. The situation isjust too uncertain right now.''    ``Definitely we will wait and see what happens,'' he said, referringto the talks of product mergers. ``I want to know what they are up tofirst.''    Gordon Curr, vice president of MIS for Hyatt Hotels, was less affectedby the news. He said any concern he might have had with the effects of themerger were offset by Hyatt's recent purchase of AT&T's RISC-based System7000 running SVR3.0.    ``The purchase of a Unix-based system was meant to protect me fromchanges by any manufacturer,'' Curr said. ``They can introduce a whole newproduct line, but as long as it's Unix, it's fine with me.''    Michael Nolan, a Lincoln, Neb., consultant who uses NCR's I series anda Tower and last year chaired the NCR Unix Users' Group, said he thinksthe merger will probably help NCR really develop the 3000 Series. He saidmany had wondered whether NCR had sufficient resources to accomplish thosedevelopment efforts alone.    ``Now there's no question,'' he said. ``They've sure got the cash.''    Jim Mercer, an educational systems manager for the Law Society ofUpper Canada, said his main concern is AT&T's products.    ``We use three 3B2s, and rumor has it that if the merger goes through,the line goes away,'' Mercer said. ``It's so incredibly expensive to buyparts for that it's pretty much gone away already, but if we are stillusing it, it would be nice to have support. The merger really opens up thequestion of whether we'll have it.''    AT&T has promised that the 3B2s will be provided for, despite threatssome months back from Exley that NCR would close down the line were thetakeover successful. ``Those with 3B2s can rest assured that theirinvestment is safe,'' AT&T spokesman John Skalko said. He added that whilehe won't promise that the 3B2 will not be dropped, there exists an $850million contract with the U.S. Air Force calling for delivery of about20,000 units from 1989 through 1994.    ``I don't know what products will stay and which will go,'' he said.``But we won't strand customers under any circumstances. We'll havecomplete backward and forward compatibility to protect their investment.''    Skalko also said that a 3B2 microprocessor upgrade would be announcedlater this month. He declined to give details, but James Clark, vicepresident of high-performance and fault-tolerant systems, early last monthreferred to the 3B2s using a RISC processor and running SVR4.    AT&T Chairman Robert Allen pledged that the months of merger planningwill not affect current computer efforts for either firm. ``The companieswill meet their revenue figures,'' he said. ``There are plenty ofcompetitors out there [who] are bound to be disappointed.''    While future lines are debated privately, officials with both firmshope users continue to make purchases even though the future is uncertain.    ``We're not going to do anything to reduce the value of any product,whether NCR's or AT&T's, so there's no reason at all for people to holdoff their purchases,'' said R. Elton White, currently NCR's executive vicepresident of marketing and the man slated to become the president andchief operting officer of NCR when the merger is finalized.    White said NCR achieved record revenues during this year's firstquarter, despite widespread speculation the acquisition would occur. ``Nowthat it's actually occurred, why should sales drop?'' he asked.    Similarly, AT&T has said that its computer systems division had turnedin record orders during March and April.    When AT&T began the takeover effort with a $90-a-share offer inNovember, both companies were engaged in major strategic changes. AT&T,which has lost an estimated $2 billion in computers and is still notreported as profitable in the computer arena, has been making its Unixsoftware entity more and more independent from its hardware side withoutside minority ownership announced this year.    NCR last year announced that it is phasing out its proprietarymachines by next year to offer up an entirely open systems line ofproducts. NCR executives said throughout the takeover battle that itwanted to be left alone to try to make its new all-open systems strategywork.    Throughout the six-month battle to keep NCR from being taken over,Exley personally and aggressively attacked AT&T's computer operations,saying he did not want to ``sacrifice'' NCR to ``bail out AT&T's failedstrategy'' and that the takeover was merely a ``desperate attempt tosalvage AT&T's disastrous foray into the computer business.''    Exley had also pledged to never oversee such a combined entity and,indeed, announced he'd retire several months early to avoid being at thehelm.    At a news conference last week announcing the $110-a-share deal, Exleysmiled, said nice things about AT&T and avoided several questions abouthis previous statements.    ``It's amazing how some of those [comments] have faded from mymemory,'' Exley told reporters. AT&T's Allen shot back, ``It hasn't fadedfrom my memory.''    While the deal was announced as an all-stock swap, the agreement setsa variety of upper and lower limits that are tied into stock marketfluctuations. A government requirement or unfavorable stock marketactivity could change the deal to one involving stock and cash.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991NCR To Roll Out Commercial OLTP Parallel MachineBy  PAUL KRILL    New York-NCR plans to launch here today a full-scale assault on themainframe market, with the introduction of a Unix-based commercial OLTPcomputer that can reach performance of 2,000 MIPS and hold as many as 288i486 processors.    Called the NCR 3600, the parallel multiprocessor system has baseprices ranging from $855,000 for a basic unit with 30 to 35 processors, to$8 million for a 288-processor system. NCR said the system has acost-per-MIPS rate of less than $5,000, vastly below that of conventionalmainframes. Processors are used for both applications processing and otherfunctions such as parallel database management.    The multiple-cabinet-based unit can hold as much as 300 gigabytes ofdisk storage, has a total system bandwidth of more than 12 gigabytes persecond, I/O bandwidth of 3.8 gigabytes per second and more than 380 SCSII/O channels, NCR said. NCR plans to make the unit available in September.    The 3600 reportedly processes as many as 256 transactions per second,a figure recorded in December 1990. ``I'm surprised that TPS isn'thigher,'' given the size and speed of the system, said Robert Kidd, ananalyst with San Jose-based Dataquest.    George Lindamood, an analyst with the Gartner Group in Stamford,Conn., however, called the 3600 a significant development.    ``There have been other parallel processing machines, but this is thefirst one intended for commercial, mission-critical applications, and notjust for use by tinkerers in a scientific environment,'' he said. ``Thisis the most significant move into the mainstream by parallelism.''    NCR is planning a follow-on release of the 3600 in 1992 that wouldexceed speed of 10,000 MIPS, offer 1,000 gigabytes of storage and processmore than 1,200 transactions per second.    The system, part of the NCR System 3000 family, incorporates UnixSystem V.4, high-speed intelligent interconnect technology and a scalablearchitecture, NCR said. The company is claiming that users can expect 99.9percent availability and scalable relational database capabilities tomonitor and analyze operations.    NCR is using a technology called message-passing parallelism, whichmanages the computer's internal network by communicating interrelatedmessages dealing with requests, status of work in process and results.Tasks are handled by a high-speed intelligent interconnect technologycalled Ynet, licensed from Teradata.    Each processor runs its own copy of the operating system. This enablesthe processors to perform other functions while waiting for messages orreplies from the network, NCR said.    The unit features application processors (APs), which group several486 processors together for application processing, and access moduleprocessors (AMPs). The AMPs are also 486 processors that are used tohandle parallel database functions and support recovery facilities of the3600 parallel database.    NCR has established relationships with Sybase and Teradata indeveloping the 3600.    Omri Serlin, editor and publisher of the FT Systems newsletter(fault-tolerant), said the 3600 presented ``a very interestingarchitectural concept.'' But NCR failed to provide many benchmarks, headded.    ``When I start to see some performance benchmarks that areoutstanding, then I will become a true believer,'' Serlin said.    He questioned, however, whether the system actually achieves 2,000MIPS. ``They're simply counting every processor that can be put in andattaching the peak theoretical performance,'' Serlin said.    ``The big issue is, `Can you put all these processors to effectiveuse?' '' he said.    Kidd said the 3600 ``kind of walks rings around everything in themarket'' insofar as raw performance is concerned. ``This is complex, veryinventive technology. The user could be confused by it,'' he said.    Gene Manno, president and CEO of rival Arix, said the machine wouldhurt sales of rival 486 users Sequent Computer Systems and Unisys. ``Thismachine's going to eat Sequent's lunch,'' he said.    But Sequent spokesman Grant Kimball said he did not see Sequentcompeting against the NCR machine. ``It looks like a very large machine,and there are other massively parallel machines out there that Sequentnever sees'' when competing for sales, he said.    Arix's Manno said that NCR is apparently planning to position themachine as a database platform. While the new NCR system might do wellthere, Manno contended that many applications might not see that muchimproved performance, simply because the workload on many applicationscan't be shared using the configuration NCR appears to be using.    ``If you have Lotus on a number of PCs, it probably won't run thatmuch faster than it does on a single processor,'' he said.    Arix makes the Arix System 90, a parallel multiprocessingsupercomputer running Unix, which can be configured using up to 86processors.    Manno said that it appeared that the NCR system devoted a huge portionof its processing power to keeping one copy of the operating systemrunning on each processor.    ``This thing will look like 288 PCs on a LAN,'' Manno said. ``If youtook 288 486 PCs, it would run just as fast. It just looks like a tightlycoupled LAN, but all the processors are in one big box.''    He added a contention that the use of Microchannel buses might createa data bottleneck.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Supernet Test SetBy  LEE BRUNO    Los Alamos, N.M.-In an experiment aimed at allowing people to shareand access high-end graphic visualization and animation files at speeds asmuch as 160 times faster than Ethernet networks, four supercomputingcenters in the U.S. will be linked to one another this summer over ahigh-speed fiber-optic network.    But users and vendors agree that this summer's linkup will be only thefirst step on a road that will likely lead to a quantum leap in speed fornetwork users, offering a glimpse of systems that in just a few years willbe high-speed information pipelines linking supercomputers to desktopworksta    tions. Once in place, users could see and interpret massive data filesin real time.    This summer's test, called the Casa subgroup, is one of five testsaimed at using gigabit networks funded by the Corporation for NationalResearch Initiative-a national effort aimed at exploring the possibilitiesof upgrading the Internet to gigabit networks within the next 10 years.    Experiment participants say the combined effort marks a milestone inthe future of high-speed networks and lays the foundation for thetechnology that some estimate will be in the hands of commercial usersthree to five years from now.    Participants were the San Diego Supercomputing Center, NASA's JetPropulsion Labs, Los Alamos National Labs and the California Institute ofTechnology.    Essentially, the technology, called the High Performance PeripheralInterface (HIPPI), is expected to help unclog the network bottleneck andprovide a pathway for supercomputers to pass data to workstations in realtime so that users can interact with massive data sets.    Graphics users today often find it difficult visualizing large amountsof data, such as reviewing seismic studies for oil exploration. Currently,users are unable to effectively interact and model such data, which can beas large as 30 gigabytes. The goal is to be able to link a supercomputersuch as a Cray over a high-speed network to a workstation, and then renderthe data in 3-D while the supercomputer continues doing the intensivecomputational tasks it is built for.    For example, the ability to apply complex algorithms in shorterperiods of time to seismic data collected from a potential oil field wouldgive an oil company a strong competitive advantage over its competitors,said Jeff O'Neil, director of reservoir computing at ARCO Oil and Gas inPlano, Texas.    ``It takes time to apply those algorithms, and the faster you canapply those algorithms, the better results you can come up with,'' O'Neilsaid. ``It means coming up with the better answer and being able to seesomething that no one else has seen.''    Today, that processing can take as long as six months to a year,O'Neil said, but the greater bandwidth that HIPPI technology offers couldbring that down to a few months. For most similarly complex projects,O'Neil estimates, the HIPPI effort should reduce processing time as muchas 75 percent.    ``It is imperative that we make some dramatic improvements in the nextfew years'' in the area of high-speed networks moving large amounts ofdata, said Bob Judd, group leader of the computer graphics group C6 at LosAlamos National Laboratories, one of the experiment participants.``Ethernet just seems barely able to handle network video bandwidth.''    One of the objectives of the HIPPI effort involves scientists who needto share large graphic images over networks, something that today's1-to-2-Mbyte-per-second Ethernet traffic makes all but impossible and, atbest, impractical.    The HIPPI technology potentially can handle the large stream of dataused in animation and high-end visualization types of applications, Juddsaid. For example, a single 24-bit color frame for a1,000-by-1,000-resolution graphic image can use as much as 3 Mbytes ofmemory. If a user wanted to run those images at 30 frames per second, thethroughput required for the network would be somewhere around 90 Mbytesper second.    Greg Chesson, chief scientist of research and development at SiliconGraphics, projects that in three to five years, the HIPPI technology willexist for networks that he expects to carry more than 100 Mbytes of dataper second.    But he added that he found it ``hard to believe that these [future]networks will be based solely on HIPPI technology.''    At the NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, they are using aHIPPI interface to connect a Thinking Machines supercomputer to anUltranet 1-gigabyte network.    ``We're expecting that a lot of the high-end workstations will beginhaving the HIPPI interface,'' said Jim McCabe, project leader for thenetwork development group for the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation programat the Computer Science Corp. for NASA Ames.    In a couple of years, McCabe said, he expects to connect to Ultranetand get a 400-Mbyte-per-second data transfer rate.    Today's leading workstation vendor, Sun Microsystems, agrees thatHIPPI is the current obvious choice for linking supercomputers toworkstations.    But Sun, which is currently considering building an Sbus HIPPIinterface, has some concerns about how well HIPPI would do for itscustomers in today's networks. ``The ability to construct a host interfaceis only half of the solution,'' said Geoffrey Baehr, Sun's director ofnetworking and communication. ``One needs a low-cost high performanceswitch.''    Baehr said there is a great degree of difficulty building a HIPPIswitch and making it affordable to the $5,000 workstation user.    As computational power increases, people are willing to developapplications that allow the data to flow to the specific engine bestsuited for tackling the data. And then the data has to be moved to the enduser in near real time. ``That puts a tremendous demand on the network,''Baehr said.    SGI scientist Chesson said that until users have routine access toHIPPI, there are a variety of ways of accelerating graphics transferefforts, such as data compression.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Users Divided On Value Of X TerminalsBy  PAUL KRILL    San Jose-Dr. Stanley Nel, dean of arts and sciences at the Universityof San Francisco, has had some second thoughts about the university'sdecision last year to buy 30 X terminals instead of workstations for theschool's computer science and math departments.    ``Everybody seems to be pointing to a distributed computingenvironment as the paradigm for the future. For a distributed computingenvironment, by definition one needs a local CPU,'' Nel said. Shrinkingprices are making workstations more viable than X terminals, he said.    But Reginald Beardsley, of Plano, Texas-based ARCO InformationServices, said X terminals are ``fabulous,'' enabling him to log intoseveral different systems at once.    ``For certain applications, I don't think that you can beat them,''said Beardsley, whose company develops oil exploration software.    Beardsley said he is responsible for release management of an internalinterface product on several different platforms. Sometimes he is loggedonto an IBM RISC System/6000, a Sun Microsystems SPARCstation, a DigitalEquipment DECstation and a Silicon Graphics workstation at the same time.``I can just move from window to window firing off compiles,'' he said.    The different viewpoints of Beardsley and Nel illustrate anapproaching dilemma: With the almost weekly introduction of new,higher-powered X terminals and lower-priced workstations from majorvendors, users are finding themselves making difficult comparisons betweennow similar technologies.    San Jose-based Dataquest projects volume shipments of X terminals togrow from 69,000 in 1990 to 861,200 in 1995. But workstation and Xterminal users remain divided over the usefulness of X terminals inclient/ server computing.    X terminals eliminate a lot of system administration and are suitablefor users who do not need a lot of display bandwidth, Beardsley said. Butsome believe they are a poor man's workstation and a return to the days oftimesharing.    Meanwhile, proponents argue that X terminals are a low-cost seat forusers not requiring a compute-intensive desktop system. And the cost of afully configured workstation still makes X terminals a clear-cut cheaperalternative, they say.    ``I think [X terminals are] a better solution because you're able toshare the power of a workstation. All of your applications do notnecessarily require full-blown workstations,'' said Dennis Mahbeer, whouses Hewlett-Packard X terminals as a CIM engineer at Northern Telecom inMontreal.    ``Just about everybody we have is on an X-Window terminal,'' he said.     `If you don't need the CPU for one reason or another, [X terminals]provide better performance in our experience than upgrading a PC or aMac.'    Mahbeer said the company uses the terminals as real-time shopfloor interfaces. The shop has about 90 terminals running off of four HP9000 models 380 and 845 servers.    To prevent bottlenecks between the terminals and servers, NorthernTelecom uses Ungerman Bass bridges that connect various segments of theLAN and keep X packet traffic from going out over the whole network.    The company has had some difficulties with X terminals. Mahbeer saidwhen the terminals were shut off and restarted, the server did not alwaysrespond to it. Northern Telecom has been updating its X display managersoftware to correct the problem, he said.    Hamish Reid, a senior software engineer at Sybase, in Emeryville,Calif., said X terminals are economical for the company. Reid said his Xterminal is connected to a Sun SPARCstation 1 and is used for databasedevelopment, programming and debugging.    ``We have Sequents and workstations. We can't afford workstations foreverybody, but we have X,'' said Reid, who added he was not speaking forthe company.    He said he did not see workstation prices ever being as low as Xterminal prices. But many engineers prefer workstations to X terminals, ifonly for prestige, Reid said. Sybase uses NCD and Visual Technology Xterminals.    X terminals consist primarily of a monitor, keyboard, mouse, Xgraphics processor and X server software. Prices generally range fromabout $985 for Visual Technology's X-14/es to $8,200 for a 19-inch colorIBM XStation 130. Workstations, priced as low as $5,000 in a diskless,monochrome configuration, usually have all the facilities of X terminalsbut add high-powered CPUs and disk drives. They can cost more than$100,000 with various options included.    Patty Chang, an analyst with San Jose-based Dataquest, said Xterminals are complementary to workstations and both should grow together.``An X terminal is not designed for computing-intensive applications,''she said. ``It's for multiple applications on one screen.''    Bill Carrico, president and CEO of NCD, said X terminals are designedto display the output of a server at a lower cost. ``Essentially, NCD aimsto have the X terminal cost one-half the list price of whatever thecomparable workstation would be,'' he said. Drew Davis, channels marketingmanager at Tektronix, said X terminals provide a specialized node in acollective computing environment, offering a common standard userinterface to access network resources.    However, a workstation user at a Midwest-based defense contractor, whopreferred anonymity, said his division frowned on X terminals after tryingsome DEC terminals. ``They were using 80 percent of the CPU and doingnothing,'' he said. The company wanted to use the terminals for softwareengineering, but instead uses them for general office work.    ``It makes more sense to us to spend the extra $1,000 or $2,000 andbuy a diskless workstation,'' he said.    Phil Serra, a software analyst at Ivac, a San Diego-based medicalequipment builder, also had reservations about X terminals. ``Theperformance is OK [but] if you're going to put a lot of them on theserver, it's really going to degrade the performance of the server,'' saidthe Sun workstation user.    Serra said X terminals can be used for viewing schematics and data andchecking functions. Designers, however, need either a workstation or an Xterminal with a powerful server, he said.    ``The X terminal is sort of a step backward'' in that it reverts backto a centralized computing paradigm, Serra said.    Nel at USF said he has questioned the value of X terminals because oftheir lack of independent processing power and what he sees as adiminishing price difference vs. workstations. The university bought 30IBM X terminals last year and connected them to a couple of IBM RISCSystem/6000 servers.    He said an X terminal is fine if a user needs high-intensity graphicsand can afford a $3,000 to $6,000 price tag. But a standalone systemprovides distributed computing power.    ``This is going to become even more of an issue as one finds the DOSworld, for example, supplying us with X-Window software,'' he said. Asystem such as a 486-based Intel machine provides a low price point andindependent processing, Nel said.    Beardsley, while an X terminal advocate, said they ``are still alittle bit on the pricey side.'' He added that running too many Xterminals off a server can cause system bottlenecks. There should be nomore than four terminals to a workstation, he said.    Beardsley said he gave up a SPARCstation so he could keep an NCD Xterminal. ARCO Information Services also uses workstations from Sun,Digital Equipment, Silicon Graphics and other companies plus about a dozenX terminals, which are being used mostly by summer hires.    David B. Lewis, a partner in Lewis, Trachtenburg & Associates, aCambridge, Mass.-based X and Motif consulting house, said X terminalsprovide the graphics necessary for software development or X development.Their price advantage, though, is diminishing, he said.    ``Some of the X terminals that are currently on the market are asexpensive as some of the workstations that you can pick up, and this isincreasingly true with some of the SPARC clones that are coming out,''said Lewis, who has used a Visual X terminal in a network of Sun and DEChardware.    ``If you don't need the CPU for one reason or another, [X terminals]provide better performance in our experience than upgrading a PC or aMac,'' he said.    Ira Winston, an X terminal user at the University of Pennsylvania inPhiladelphia, said X terminals still are a substantial bargain whencompared to workstations. Prices of workstations are driven up sharplywhen disk space and system administration costs are figured in, he said.    Winston said he has an NCD X terminal at his home that links with aSPARCstation workstation in his office. Students at the university use Xterminals for applications such as electronic mail, text processing andoffice automation, he said. ``If they're running things that are not verycompute-intensive, then an X terminal is fine,'' he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Data General Breaks ClearBy  EVAN SCHUMAN    Westboro, Mass.-Thanks to treble growth in sales of its Unix-basedcomputers and extensive cost-cutting, resulting in thousands of layoffs,Data General has tallied up its second consecutive profitable quarterafter five years of unprofitability.    With some Wall Street analysts saying financial figures released byData General suggest that the next several quarters will likely also beprofitable, this could very well mean a new lease on life for the onetimeall-but-written-off minicomputer maker. And many Wall Street analysts areattributing the company's apparent turnaround to open systems.    While it is not believed that two consecutive profitable quarters meanthe end of DG's financial difficulties, the news is expected to give theDG sales force breathing room to sell to customers without having toovercome the perception of imminent bankruptcy.    The second-quarter earnings report showed a $19.2 million profit forthe quarter, compared with an $8.6 million loss for last year's identicalquarter. The report for the year's first fiscal quarter-announced at theend of January-showed a $12.4 million profit, compared with a $20.5million loss for last year's identical quarter.    The second profitable quarter follows seven consecutive quarterlylosses for DG. Even before that, the company's financial results wereuneven, with quarterly losses mixed in with small quarterly profits. Thisyear's earnings reports follow five consecutive yearly losses that totaled$428 million in net loss.    ``There were certainly some viability issues last year,'' said BillZastrow, DG marketing vice president for the company's AViiONworkstation/server Unix line.    But the earnings were startling enough to prompt two of Wall Street'smore conservative investment houses-Smith-Barney and Salomon Bros.-toupgrade DG stock to a buy recommendation.    In Salomon's report to investors, analyst Steven Milunovich suggeststhat the recommendation may catch investors by surprise. ``We areupgrading the stock to a buy. Is that incredulity and skepticism wehear?'' he wrote. ``Data General has reported two excellent quarters in arow and analysts don't know what to do. Many of us had written off DGalong with Wang and Unisys.''    Wall Street analysts and DG executives agree that DG's move intoprofitability was achieved almost entirely through extensive cost-cuttingin research and development, sales and administrative. As is happening atmany companies today, exploratory projects-at least $10 million worth-werecanceled, and efforts were focused on core operations.    While revenues have been mostly flat, analysts are satisfied that theyare not dropping. Indeed, AViiON sales have been steadily increasing whilethe company's proprietary Eclipse MV product line have been falling,numbers that have basically balanced each other out.    ``They have got their costs in real good control and their revenue isnudging through, and that's all you need,'' said Barry Bosak, Smith-Barneymanaging director, who has also issued a buy advisory.    ``I think the turnaround is real,'' said Salomon's Milunovich in aninterview, attributing much of the turnaround to DG's having made ``asignificant change in strategy to switch aggressively to open systems.''    But Wall Street is not without its more conservative skeptics.    ``The jury is still out,'' said Marc Schulman, a high-tech stockanalyst for UBS Phillips and Drew. ``They certainly don't belong in thecategory of the Wangs and the Unisyses of the world anymore. DG willsurvive, but will it survive and prosper?''    Asked if the two good earnings reports mean that DG is in a financialrecovery, Merrill Lynch first VP George Elling said, ``It depends on howyou term recovery.''    From an earnings perspective, he said, the company is generating morethan $300 million a quarter and has stabilized. ``But if you term recoveryin terms of whether they are growing the business, revenues grew only 1percent,'' he said, adding that he ``would have to see some real signsthat the company is growing again'' before he would encourage people tobuy the stock.    Elling points to staffing cut-backs from a mid-1980s com- pany high of17,700 employees to the current 8,500, with the bulk of those layoffs inthe last two years.    ``Can they grow with cutbacks in those areas?'' he asked. ``They tookhumongous losses in the last two years,'' he said.    UBS' Schulman credits DG executives with having hit on the correctstrategy. Not only have they focused in the area of open systems, but theymade becoming profitable an absolute priority, knowing that sales would behampered as long as potential customers feared DG would not be around afew years down the road to support and upgrade today's purchases.    Wall Street is also expecting even better financial reports from DG inthe near future because the revenue from some recent major contractwins-including a U.S. Department of Interior contract worth as much as$127 million and a $50 million U.S. Sprint deal-have not yet appeared inany quarterly earnings. Also, DG is considered a front runner for twomajor govern- ment contracts that have yet to be awarded: one from theArmy Reserve and one from the National Security Agency.    What DG today considers its core strengths are the AViiON andproprietary MV lines. Wall Street had always expected the proprietarymachines to die off as AViiON grew stronger, but what was not expected washow slow a death that line is enduring.    Smith-Barney's Bosak estimates that about 25 percent of the revenuefrom the MV line is coming from new customers. Salomon Bros. estimatesthat AViiON revenues have tripled from about $15 million in last year'sfirst quarter to $48 million for the current quarter, and Salomon projectsthem to hit $65 million by this year's fourth quarter. Meanwhile, MVrevenues have dropped from about $158 million in last year's firstquarter, according to Salomon estimates, to about $134 million in thecurrent quarter, with $119 million projected for this year's last quarter.    But unlike many of the other major RISC players, DG's AViiON strategyis to focus almost entirely on servers under the rationale that a serversale pulls workstations in with it. Servers also have higher profitmargins than workstations, but on the downside they need to be purchasedand replaced less frequently.    ``Our point guard are the servers,'' said DG spokeswoman StephanieBigusiak. ``The workstation market is quite full with players. We're notso foolish to think that we can take that market over.''    An unusual twist to the DG financial story is the resignation earlierthis month-after the announcement of the second favorable quarterlynumbers-of DG's chief financial officer, Michael Evans.    While a CFO's resignation often signals a dissatisfied board ofdirectors, Evans has a strong reputation on Wall Street as a white knightwho goes into financially troubled companies, brings them to profitabilityand then leaves for the next challenge.    That's what he did at Commodore Intl., which he left in 1987 to cometo DG. Before that, he was CFO at RCA's Consumer Electronics Division, andis now leaving DG to go to the G. Heileman Brewing Co., now in Chapter 11.    Some are interpreting Evans' move as a sign that the hard part of DG'sfinancial recovery is over.    ``I obviously am a person who likes challenges, and I am stillrelatively young at 46,'' Evans said in an interview about hisresignation. ``I would have had a much more difficult decision to leave ayear ago.''    He said that were he to have stayed at DG, the challenges would not beas great.    Evans characterized the DG that he arrived at as ``thoroughlybureaucratic'' and ``bloated.'' His strategy was massive layoffs ``withoutbreaking the place'' and trying to maintain revenues. ``You had to be verycareful to still have the technology to bring out state-of-the-artproducts,'' he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991UI To Release Network Spec . . . -- Group's Proposed `Atlas' DistributedEnvironment To Rival OSF's Net StrategyBy  MITCH WAGNER    Parsippany, N.J.-Unix International intends next month to announce itsplans for a networking architecture to rival the Open SoftwareFoundation's own networking scheme, which is edging toward completion.    The UI strategy is part of an overall plan called ``Atlas'' to expandits system software beyond the OS, said David Sandel, UI's marketing VP.    The upcoming announcement is part of a swirl of activity going on inthe area of network technology among UI, the OSF, and a Framingham, Mass.,consortium, the Object Management Group:    o  The OSF has narrowed the focus of its Distributed ManagementEnvironment (DME) for managing software and peripherals over a network, asthe consortium moves toward an expected third-quarter announcement of whattechnology it's selecting, said business-area manager Jonathan Gossels.And the Distributed Computing Environment (DCE), for running applicationsover a heterogeneous network, is moving toward third-quarter release as itgoes into final testing over the summer.    o  The OMG, a consortium of major hardware and software vendors, isworking for summer completion of its efforts to create standards forobject-oriented programming. OMG is also working to keep channels ofcommunication open between OSF and UI, to ensure that the threeorganizations' object-oriented technologies can interoperate.    The networking technologies are a source of new disputes between UIand OSF, as UI claims that its technology is object-oriented while OSF'sisn't, and OSF claims that its technology is indeed object-oriented.Meanwhile, OSF is claiming that UI has been cooperating on OSF'sspecification for distributed systems management, while UI denies this.    ``Unix International, over the last several months, has been taking aclose look at what it needs to do to put together an overall architecturefor distributed computing,'' Sandel said. ``We took the approach that weneeded an architecture, not just a set of technologies.''    Technologies to be included in the architecture are distributed systemmanagement, interfaces for migration from TCP/IP to OSI, transactionprocessing services, security features, support for connection to PC andDCE environments, IBM System Network Architecture (SNA) andHewlett-Packard Network Application System (NAS).    Requirements put together by UI would be implemented by Unix SystemLaboratories, Sandel said. Or vendors can write their own elements usingAPIs made public by UI in the third quarter.    In that respect, the UI proposal is like OSF's. OSF will providereference implementations of its DME and DCE technologies, and will alsopublish APIs and test suites for vendors to write their own compliantapplications.    UI reference implementations are expected to be available within sixto nine months.    Technologies that could be included in the Atlas distributedenvironment include Top End transaction processing from NCR, or Tuxedo TPfrom USL, an OSI implementaton from Retix and Kerberos security. ``It'snot like we're going after brand-new technology,'' Sandel said.    The UI technology will interoperate with the Object Management Group'sspecifications for object technology, according to UI. The OMG is aconsortium of vendors including Hewlett-Packard, Sun Microsystems andothers, expected to release standards for object-oriented technology thissummer.    Object-oriented technology is at the core of a dispute between OSF andUI. UI claims its own Atlas will be object-oriented, while DCE is not.    ``To have object-oriented technology, you have to have the notion ofobjects. You have to have the ability to manage services. DCE does notinclude that,'' Sandel said.    But the OSF's Gossels said Sandel's claims were mere handwaving, thatSandel was not operating with a precise decision of object-orientedtechnology.    ``It's easy to say a technology will be object-oriented, but since wehave to provide working software, we have to deal with real issues, suchas, `What does it mean, how will it really behave?' ''    Meanwhile, OSF is moving forward on DME. The consortium agreed tosupport both OSI Common Management Information Protocol (CMIP) and TCP/IPSimple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) standards for network mangement,according to the OSF's Scope Document for the technology. Both CMIP andSNMP would run on OSI or TCP/IP.    The OSF has decided to exclude one area of technology it had initiallyconsidered including: for backing up data over a network. Gossels said OSFnow considers backup technology too immature, evolving too quickly for theconsortium to standardize on.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991 .  . . While OMG Mulls OOP Bids    Framingham, Mass.-The Object Management Group expects this week to seedemonstrations of three technologies vying to be selected as foundationsfor the organization's standard for object-oriented applications.    Technology for the Object Request Broker is expected to be selected inlate July, after a recommendation by a task force at a June 4 meeting inSan Francisco, said Richard Soley, the OMG's vice president and technicaldirector.    Technology submissions are in from NCR, Object Design, HP working inconjunction with Sun, and Hyperdesk working together with DEC.    The Object Request Broker would be the backbone of the OMG's work.OMG's goal is to standardize technologies for software so software can beconstructed out of discrete modules-or ``objects''-which can be reused indifferent applications.    The ORB should pass requests between applications and objects.    OMG is working with UI and OSF to ensure the technologies arecompatible. ``Down the road, it could turn into a competition, and that'swhat we're trying to avoid,'' Soley said. ``That's in no one's interest.''Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991The SPARCs Are Flying Again With New Fujitsu Chip    SPARC-compatible workstations operating at 29 MIPS and priced at$5,000 could be on the market by fall, said officials at FujitsuMicroelectronics, who plan tomorrow to announce a SPARC chip set on whichthe systems would be based. The chip set will be offered in 33- and 40-MHzversions for systems using VMEbus, Sbus or a busless architecture. TonyBozzini, marketing director for San Jose-based Fujitsu, said the chipset's integrated design will enable systems integrators andSPARC-compatible builders to offer 29-MIPS systems in the $5,000 pricerange. Included in the chip set is Fujitsu's MB86903 IU/FPU, whichcombines a floating-point processor and a SPARC integer unit on a singlechip. The set also includes APD's MB86921 Cache controller, Memorymanagement and Tag RAM chip, the CMT. Supporting cache sizes up to 256kbytes, the CMT links the IU/FPU to the Mbus, a local processor-to-memoryinterconnect that allows a system designer to reconfigure a design tosupport faster CPUs and new peripherals as they become available. Samplesof the new chip set should be available by early summer. Prices begin at$1,295 each, in quantities of 1,000 for a four-chip set for buslessdesigns.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991English Molecular Visualization Package Coming To U.S.    A British software product that until now has seen only limited,academic use is expected to make its commercial debut tomorrow with theunveiling of a port to Hewlett-Packard's Apollo 9000 Series 700workstations. Ports to four other Unix platforms are also planned. PIMMS,produced by U.K.-based Oxford Molecular, is slated to be announcedtomorrow. PIMMS is a GUI-based program, intended for use by pharmaceuticalcompanies, chemical engineers and materials researchers, that allows thevisualization and design of molecules. PIMMS will be ported to SiliconGraphics and to RS/6000 machines by the end of the summer, and toSPARCstations 1 and 2 by year-end, said David Marsh, Oxford Molecular'stechnical manager. A port to FPS Computing's FPS 500SPARCsupercomputer-the only supercomputer on which PIMMS will beavailable-is planned for completion by year-end. The port has been delayedby several months from its planned start date in February by FPS' pendingrelease of a new cross-compiler, Marsh said. On any of these platforms,PIMMS can be licensed for 5,000 pounds (about $9,000) per 20 users, withan additional 15 percent of the license fee for support and maintenance.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Netwise Adding More Wise To Its SNA Product    Look for Netwise to roll out enhancements to its SNA connectivityproducts in the fall or so, said Bill Jacobs, director of productmarketing. Netwise is the developer of a line of products based on OpenNetwork Computing (ONC) Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs), allowingapplications to be written to run in modules spread over a network. Thecompany makes an RPC Tool for developing distributed applications on Unix,Sun Microsystems and PC platforms as well as for System NetworkArchitecture (SNA) mainframes. Enhancements to the RPC Tool are expectedto address the fact that SNA has been implemented in different,non-standardized fashions on non-Blue platforms. The new RPC tool is alsoexpected to tighten the link between TCP/IP on one hand and SNA networkingprotocols such as Token Ring on the other. Netwise said that users will beable to administer the technology remotely. Users will be able to choosebetween command-line or graphical interface.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991DEC, Intel Intro PCBy  MITCH WAGNER    New York-Digital Equipment and Intel are expected tomorrow to come outwith a diskless 386 PC configured for networking, at least one laptopcomputer and other networking products, officials with both companiessaid.    At a news conference featuring DEC Chairman Ken Olsen and IntelPresident Andrew Grove, DEC will roll out a 26-to-27-MIPS PC pricedstarting at about $6,000 in diskless configurations, targeted for use on anetwork by commercial users, said two Intel sources.    The PC will be configured to run SCO Unix Version 3.2, Unix SystemV.4.2, OS/2 or DOS Version 3.3 or 4.01, one of the sources said. Themachine, which DEC is OEMing from Intel, will be available immediately,sources said.    It comes configured with 8 to 48 Mbytes main memory, with anadditional 16 Mbytes video RAM. It also comes configured with a SCSI bus,for adding an external disk drive.    The machine will be shipped with a high-resolution, VGA-compatible1,280-by-1,024-pixel display.    The laptop introduction will also be Intel architecture.    The introduction follows the March 13 European announcement of laptopsfrom DEC based on the Intel i386SX and i386DX. Sources indicated thatTuesday's announcement may be the American introduction of those machines.    The PCs will not have support for DEC's Ultrix implementation of Unixis not surprising, since Ultrix is currently configured to run only onMips RISC and VAX processors. On the Intel processor, DEC supports SCOUnix implementations, with the ``applicationDEC'' line including 386 and486 single-processor PCs, and the multiprocessor applicationDEC 433running SCO Unix with multiprocessing extensions.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991BT Revamps Unix OA Plan    London-British Telecom has changed its plans to provide Unix-basedoffice automation for an estimated 30,000 users, after cutting short anearlier project that was based on its own hardware.    The company's BoaT OA project involves building a corporate network ofUnix servers linked by X.400 and supporting dumb terminals and PCs. Amongother features, it will allow BT to have E-mail across its officesworldwide for the first time. BT is using Hewlett-Packard's NewWave andOpenMail software, with Uniplex on the servers, so that it can integratePCs running Windows and DOS into the system.     That level of PC integration was missing from an earlier attempt at aUnix-based office system, called Coast, which was stopped last year.Coast, which BT officials said still has about 1,500 users, was based onUniplex and dumb terminals. The hardware used was a Unix system called theM5000 that BT was selling at the time.     ``That didn't really address the PC community in BT,'' said MargaretHarrison, BoaT customer services manager. The need to integrate PCs wasone reason BT decided to look for a different solution that would let PCusers stick with familiar applications but also give them new OAfacilities like E-mail.     Another reason, she said, was that BT's Unix machines were capable ofsupporting only 40 or so users apiece, but BT wanted to use more powerfulmachines that could be supported by its computer services specialists.     Under the BoaT program, BT has switched to using Unix systems fromoutside suppliers. DEC, IBM RS/6000 and HP 9000 servers are being used forthree launch projects that are currently being implemented to support afew hundred users. Harrison said no decision has yet been taken about theservers that will be used to provide facilities for the thousands of otherprospective users.     BoaT users will either use Uniplex via dumb terminals attached toUnix servers or will have PCs that are linked to the servers. Oneattraction of the HP software, Harrison said, was that low-end PCs couldrun HP's AdvanceMail, while more powerful PCs could run the graphicalNewWave interface and NewWave Mail.     Those PC mail systems will link to HP's OpenMail on the Unix servers,which in turn will connect to a corporate X.400 network. Harrison alsonoted that OpenMail, which is in the process of being integrated moreclosely with Uniplex, is being ported to the IBM and DEC Unix systems.    Uniplex officials said last year that Uniplex would get involved inporting OpenMail to other systems and would get the two products to worktogether more closely, initially by putting a Uniplex-style interface onOpenMail.    BT's plans to use HP and Uniplex software with a variety of hardwarefollow an initial phase of BoaT that involved linking existing proprietaryIBM PROFS and DEC ALL-IN-1 OA systems via X.400.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Corrections    One of the performance figures in a story about Silicon Graphics'SkyWriter product, which appeared in the April 29 issue on p. 5, wasincorrect. It should have said that the product is capable of displaying5,000 polygons per frame at 30 Hz with full texture mapping and filtering,not 5,000 polygons per frame at 30 MHz.    Also, in an article on p. 10 of the April 29 issue, PrincetonInformation Ltd. was incorrectly identified as Princeton Associates.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991IBM Slashes RS/6000 PricesBy  PAUL KRILL    White Plains, N.Y.-IBM has cut prices by as much as 60 percentthroughout its RISC System/6000 workstation/server line and unveiled a newcompiler that raises the units' SPECmark performance.    The move is viewed by some analysts and competitors as reactive tomarket pressures.    The largest price cut-$78,000-was to the model 550, which dropped inprice from $130,000 to $52,000. The price of the line's low-end model320H, introduced in March, remained at $11,750, but the company isincluding a 400-Mbyte disk drive instead of a 160-Mbyte drive. Thisamounts to a $4,645 value, IBM said. Memory configurations were increasedon other systems, also.    Unit prices listed by IBM include the system unit, memory and diskstorage and no monitor or graphical user interface. The price of the 320H,for example, jumps to $17,972 when adding in facilities such as 19-inchdisplay, SCSI interface, keyboard, mouse, user interface and a FORTRANcompiler.    IBM announced a new version of its AIX XL FORTRAN Compiler/6000,Version 2.2, which includes a new release of the AIX XL Run TimeEnvironment. The compiler will be available in September.    The new compiler executes floating-point instructions faster than theprevious release, IBM said. Through use of the new compiler, new SPECmarkand floating-point ratings are as follows, with old ratings inparentheses: model 320H, 41.2 SPECmarks, 66.8 SPECfp, (32.4, 45); model520, 32.6, 52.9, (25.8, 35.7); models 530, 730 and 930, 43.4, 72.5, (34.2,48.5); models 550 amd 950, 72.2, 119.7, (56.3, 79).    Users who have the current FORTRAN compiler will get the new one freeof charge when it ships, according to Big Blue.    Jeff Mason, IBM advanced workstations and AIX systems director, saidIBM dropped its prices in response to what customers wanted and to helpthe company reach its goal of being the workstation market share leader by1993. ``We've gone in and analyzed how customers use each of the machines.We've gone into each environment and tried to tune them in themarketplace,'' he said.    Performance enhancements now on the drawing board involve stepping upCPU clock rates, increasing the number of instructions in a clock cycleand more compiler improvements, Mason said.    Michael Goulde, analyst with Open Systems Advisors in Boston, calledIBM's announcement a clear reaction to Hewlett-Packard's new HP Apollo9000 Series 700 workstation line. Those machines, with entry-level pricesof $11,990 and $19,900, score 57 MIPS and 76 MIPS and 55.5 SPECmarks and72.2 SPECmarks. They were introduced March 26.    ``There's nothing in the announcement today that reflects any changein hardware. HP can certainly crank up its compiler technology to improveperformance as well,'' Goulde said. He said he expected price andperformance changes from Sun Microsystems and Digital Equipment also.    DEC spokesman Dave Bouffard called IBM's announcement ``a beleagueredattempt to maintain market mind share.''    ``They can't match the HP price/ performance, and they still don'thave anywhere in their family a low-end, high-volume machine''    for less than $10,000, he said. Bouffard said DEC this year plans tointroduce its own higher-performance workstations and already hasworkstations selling for less than $10,000.    IBM's price reductions, he said, could hurt sales of IBM's ownmainframes and midrange AS/400 accounts.    HP spokesman Jim Barbagallo also called IBM's moves reactive to HP.``If you look at specifications and pricing, they're still way off the HPmark,'' he said.    John Loiacono, a Sun spokesman, said Sun has no plans at present tolower prices on workstations or servers. The company had no comment onIBM's announcements.    Mason said the announcements were made with competitiveness in mindbut not as a straight reaction to HP's 700 series.    IBM also announced price reductions to its RS/6000 entry-level 3-Dcolor graphics adapters. New prices are $2,320 on 8-bit adapters and$4,520 on the 24-bit adapters. Previous pricing was $10,400 for a 24-bitunit and $4,160 for an 8-bit system. With an optional Z-buffer solidrendering feature, the 24-bit adapter costs $4,520 and the 8-bit adapter$3,995.    IBM separately announced the availability of engineering qualityassurance software from Valisys on the RS/6000. Valisys lets engineersvalidate CATIA (Computer Graphics Aided Three-Dimensional InteractiveApplication) CAD drawings to ensure a part is being manufactured accordingto specifications. CATIA is an IBM logo product made by Dassault Systemesof Paris.    Valisys, made by Valisys of Santa Clara, also is an IBM logo product.The product previously was available on IBM mainframes and PS/2 systems.    The Valisys software modules will be available from IBM in mid-Junepriced from $8,500 to $10,155.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Game Firm Sues Secret ServiceBy  MITCH WAGNER    Austin, Texas-A company that makes games and comic books is chargingthat the U.S. Secret Service seized its computers and records, thusparalyzing the business, because investigators suspected that one employeemight be engaged in computer crime.    The lawsuit, filed by Steve Jackson Games, paints a picture of theSecret Service as part comically incompetent and part Orwellian in itscrackdown.    Jackson said that investigators burst into his office early on themorning of March 1, 1990, took everything from PCs to disk drives to aZiploc baggie of miscellaneous screws, as part of an investigation intocomputer crime. Almost all of the equipment has since been returned, saidJackson, but the seizure resulted in irreversible publication delays.    The Secret Service held onto the material about three and a halfmonths, until June 21, causing the company to miss a critical deadline,which set off a financial chain reaction that still has the companyreeling, Jackson said. He was forced to lay off eight of his 16 employees.The company now employs 12 people and has revenues of $1.2 million.    More critical than the hardware was the data contained on hundreds of1.2-Mbyte floppy disks, three computers with internal hard disk drives,and three or four 40-Mbyte hard disk drives, Jackson said.    Jackson's appeals to at least be able to make copies of his data wentunheeded by the Secret Service, except for the return of about ninefloppies containing five to six Mbytes of data in June 1990, Jackson said.The data was largely useless to the company.    Neither Jackson nor any of his employees were ever charged, he said.    The lawsuit, filed May 1 in Federal District Court in Austin, seeks toextend First Amendment free-expression protections to computercommunications. It charges investigators with violating the PrivacyProtection Act of 1980, which places strict limitations on thegovernment's powers to search publishers' offices; and the ElectronicCommunications Privacy Act and Federal Wiretap Statute. It also chargesthe government with violating Fourth Amendment guarantees againstunreasonable search and seizure.    Named in the lawsuit are the Secret Service; Assistant U.S. AttorneyWilliam J. Cook, of Chicago; Secret Service special agents Timothy M.Foley and Barbara Golden; and Bell Communications research assistantmanager Henry M. Kluepfel, who assisted in the search. Bringing thelawsuit along with Jackson are Elizabeth McCoy, Walter Milliken andSteffan O'Sullivan, New Hampshire residents who are identified in thelawsuit as users of a computer bulletin-board system the company ran,called ``Illuminati.''    The BBS, named for one of the Jackson games, was used by the companyto obtain product feedback.    Backing the lawsuit is the Cambridge, Mass., Electronic FrontiersFoundation, founded by Lotus Development founder Mitch Kapor. The groupportrays itself as a proponent of civil-rights protections for informationsystems. It has been involved in defense of several computer-crimesuspects.    The lawsuit charges that investigators took a book manuscript and thecomputer used to run Illuminati, along with two other PCs and several diskdrives, and other equipment.    At one point, Jackson appealed to several U.S. senators andcongressmen to have the data returned, according to the lawsuit. Thelegislators-including Texas senator and 1988 vice-presidential candidateLloyd Bentsen-were falsely told by the Secret Service that the seizedproperty had been returned, according to the law suit.    Jackson said he has not yet calculated the financial damages, but heestimated they reached $125,000 by the time a month had passed. He addedhe was shocked by the ignorance of computer technology that the agentsdisplayed. ``They literally had no idea of the difference between what acomputer could do in Star Trek and what a computer could do on yourdesk,'' he said in an interview.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Morris Appeal Planned    Washington-Attorneys for Robert Tappan Morris, the former CornellUniversity graduate student convicted last year of unleashing theso-called ``Internet Worm'' in 1988, have decided to appeal Morris'conviction to the United States Supreme Court.    ``I'm going to tell them the court was wrong,'' said Morris attorneyThomas Guidoboni. Beyond that, he said, he had not formulated the groundsfor the appeal.    The court could be expected by fall to decide whether to take the caseand, if the court takes it, it would likely be heard within about a year.    A U.S. Court of Appeals panel upheld Morris' conviction in March.Morris was convicted in January 1990 and later sentenced to serve threeyears' probation, more than a year of which has already been served. Hewas also sentenced to perform 400 hours' community service and pay a$10,000 fine.    Morris was convicted of one count of fraud for unleashing a worm viruson the Internet in November '88, while he was a 22-year-old graduatestudent.    Thousands of Unix systems tied together on the Internet crashed whenMorris' worm duplicated itself uncontrollably due to a programming error.    In order to convict someone under the computer fraud statute,prosecutors must show that a defendant knowingly entered a system withoutauthorization and damage resulted.    Guidoboni argued that Morris was not exceeding his authorized accessto Internet, but used common programs like sendmail and finger. The lowercourt rejected those arguments.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Demax Tool Monitors System SecurityBy  MICHAEL FADEN    San Mateo, Calif.-VMS security software specialist Demax Softwareplans by year-end to ship a set of Unix security and network managementtools that the company says will constantly monitor system security.    Demax has developed Unix equivalents of the security software itcurrently offers on DEC VAX minicomputers running VMS and is preparing tointroduce the new software on June 6, along with Sun Microsystems. Productmanager Tanya Candia said the first version will run on Sun workstations,followed by ports to other workstations.    The current products include Securepak, a management tool forindividual machines that lets administrators build a ``baseline'' securitysystem and then monitor and analyze activity on the system, and Securemax,a complementary product that is said to let administrators manage thesecurity of machines on a network from a single point.    Candia added that the current goal of the product is to supportheterogeneous networks of Unix workstations and eventually to supportnetworks that include both VMS and Unix systems.    Aiming at some new Unix sites with less Unix-expert administrators,company officials stress what they say is a comprehensive and very easy touse GUI design, based initially on Open Look.    The product prompts the user along with step-by-step securityinstructions, allowing the user to not have to worry about overlooking orforgetting a step.    While Demax President Kevin Kalkhoven said last week that Demax is``still working on pricing,'' he estimated the product's annual costshould range from about $100-for a standalone workstation added to analready existing site-to $3,000, which would cover a server and up to 30workstations.    Demax, which says it sold about 3,000 copies of its VMS securityproducts, was prompted to develop Unix versions when some VMS customersstarted sprouting networks of hundreds of Unix workstations, Candia said.The firm showed customers prototype Unix software, on Sun workstationsrunning OpenWindows, that had 60 percent of the planned final productfunctionality and was encouraged by the response to continue development,she said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Sun OKs VAR Clone Sales    Mountain View-Clarifying its ``you can't sell SPARC clones if you sellSun machines'' policy announced last month, Sun Microsystems is now sayingthat it will allow its resellers to send in the clones, provided the unitsare either SPARC laptops or systems built under an OEM relationship withSun.    Sun, to prevent channel conflict, last month began prohibiting Sunresellers in the United States from also selling SPARC-compatibles, alsoknown as clones. SPARC laptops are being exempted because Sun itself doesnot build any, while OEM systems are allowed because they are builtthrough partnering with Sun, company officials said.    The rule means SPARC laptop vendors such as RDI, TriGem and Toshibaand OEM firms such as Xerox can use the same reseller channels as Sun. RDIqualifies under both exemptions: It buys system boards from Sun under anOEM pact.    Sun, in banning VARs from simultaneously selling both clones and Sunsystems, wants clone makers to broaden the base of SPARC by developingtheir own channels, Sun spokesman John Loiacono said.    Kam Chan, president of SPARC-compatible workstation builder TatungScience and Technology, called Sun's policy contradictory. ``They try toopen up the SPARC architecture. At the same time, they try to close up themarket,'' he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991DEC RISC Box Gets Plaudits -- Most Beta-Site Users Pleased, Laud NewDECstation's Performance, ExpandabilityBy  PAUL KRILL    Mountain View-Digital Equipment's new RISC workstation has gotten goodreviews from its initial beta sites, with users touting the machine'sperformance and daughter-card-based CPU upgrade strategy.    The new DECstation ``met all of our expectations,'' said Brad Krebs, aprogrammer analyst in the CAD Center at the University of California,Berkeley.    ``We liked the speed, we liked the expandability of it and being able,when the next version of the CPU comes out, to replace it with a daughtercard instead of having to replace the whole damn box.''    DEC late last month introduced two new workstations, the DECstation5000/120 and the DECstation 5000/125, to fill a price gap between thecompany's high- and low-end machines. Code-named ``3MIN,'' the unitsfeature daughter-card upgrade paths that will enable CPU swaps through thereplacement of pocket-sized daughter cards.    Model 120, priced at $6,495 in a diskless configuration, features a20-MHz Mips R3000A RISC processor. The box runs at 13.9 SPECmarks, 21.7MIPS and 2.6 MFLOPS. Model 125, in a diskless base configuration costing$8,495, has a 25-MHz R3000A and is rated at 16.4 SPECmarks, 26.8 MIPS and3 MFLOPS. Various graphics options are available for each model.    Krebs said the college used a model 125 with 128 Mbytes of memory as aCPU server, for use in designing integrated circuits. He noted thesystem's 50-Mbytes-per-second Turbochannel I/O bus was slower than the100-Mbytes-per-second I/O of the DECstation 5000/200, but this did notaffect users.    Tom Furlong, DEC RISC workstations manager, said the slowerTurbochannel bus was sufficient for the unit and was used to keep price ata minimum. The 50-Mbytes-per-second system only needs one bank of dynamicmemory, while a 100-Mbytes-per-second unit needs at least two, he said.    Krebs said the university has ordered 20 of the new workstations.    Katy Moore, platform marketing manager at beta user Autodesk, said theCPU upgrade paths are important to the company's AutoCAD software users,who upgrade systems as new versions of AutoCAD are developed. She said theworkstation was fast and ``seemed to be reliable.''    Not all reaction was glowing, however. One beta user, who asked thathis name and company affiliation be withheld, called the 3MIN box ``justanother workstation.'' He had a model 120 that was used for applicationdevelopment.    The user noted the new workstation lacks the power ofHewlett-Packard's new HP Apollo 9000 Series 700 workstations, which run at57 MIPS and 76 MIPS in different configurations.    ``If I had my choice, at the present moment I'd probably lookseriously at HP,'' he said.    A beta user at Chevron Information and Technology of La Habra, Calif.,who also requested his name be withheld, said the new workstation wasfaster than a model 3100. But he said DEC's $3,995 upgrade program toconvert a model 3100 into a model 120 was too expensive. The model 3100 israted at 11.8 SPECmarks, 16.2 MIPS and 1.7 MFLOPS.    ``For $4,000, it's a lot of money for not much improvement,'' he said.    The user said he disliked Ultrix because it was less standard and didnot write to disk as fast as Sun's SunOS.  He also said he wasdissatisfied with the performance of the model 3100. He did, however likethe X-Window performance of the DEC system.    Kevin Scully, systems and technology manager at Sumitomo Bank CapitalMarkets in New York, said he was pleased with the memory expandability ofthe model 120, which can hold as much as 128 Mbytes of RAM. He said hetested a unit but was not a beta user. He also liked the CPU upgrade path.Sumitomo plans to order 96 3MIN boxes for its London and New York offices,he said. ``We think that Digital is just going to have a winner withthem,'' he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991New NCD Machines Double As Character TerminalsBy  MITCH WAGNER    Mountain View-Network Computing Devices has rolled out two new Xterminals that it says aren't really X terminals at all.    The new MWT15b and MWT19 monochrome terminals-which are not suited forgraphics-contain both client and server X software located within thedesktop units. What that means, said NCD executive vice president JudyEstrin, is that users can utilize the products in place of ASCIIterminals. Users can run multiple windows of character applications withinthe X terminals.    Priced starting at nearly $1,700, the two X terminals are far moreexpensive than the character terminals they are designed to replace, whichcan be had for less than $400. Larger installations might also require aterminal server, priced at several thousand dollars.    But Estrin said the price of the MWTs is worth it for users who arecommitted to making the switch to X-but not switching immediately.    ``If they're going to go to X over the next year or two, they can makea hardware investment now, and the hardware investment is safe. You makethe hardware investment now, and later you turn on software code, and itturns on X.''    Another reason to buy the multiwindow terminals is if the capacity torun several sessions in windows on a single screen is very important,Estrin said. That kind of capacity can save seconds per call in atelephone order-entry operation. Those kinds of time savings can add uppretty fast, she said.    ``Even hot-keying between different screens is different from havingmultiple windows and being able to cut and paste between windows,'' shesaid. The terminal can be connected to an Ethernet network viatwisted-pair or ThinWire Ethernet connection, replacing an ASCII terminalwithout requiring any changes to host software or applications. Eachwindow on the X terminal emulates a VT220 terminal session.    The terminals are designed to  offer a practical migration path forusers planning to eventually make use of X-Window technology. The newdesktop products can be made into true X terminals, capable of simplegraphics processing, by changing the software, Estrin said.    The MWT15b is priced at $1,695 and the MWT19 at $3,400.    ``There's a lot of users that, when you say X, they get nervous andsay, `Oh, that means I have to do host upgrades,' '' Estrin said.``Because our terminals have the local window manager and software, you'reable to get a step closer to the network computing X model without havingto take the full step yet. The hardware lets you know that, in the future,all you have to do is flip a software switch and you're there.''    Users can upgrade the Multi Window Terminals to regular X terminalssimply by changing software, paying a $50 software license to NCD, said acompany spokeswoman.    The 15-inch model makes use of the same hardware platform as thecompany's low-end NCD15b, while the 19-inch model uses the same hardwareas the company's midrange NCD19. The 15-inch model offers1,024-by-800-pixel resolution, and the 19-inch has 1,280-by-1,024resolution.    The NCD15b is priced at $1,495, $200 less than the MWT15b because ithas 2 Mbytes less memory. The NCD19 has the same price as the MWT19.    The terminals can be used for transaction processing, database,spreadsheet, word processing and other office automation applications,according to NCD.    Users can cut and paste text between windows, resize them and iconifythem. The terminals can use the look-and-feel of Motif or MicrosoftWindows 3.0. They have a 70-Hz refresh rate and a 13-by-13-inch footprint.Both of the models have 4 Mbytes of RAM. The terminals will be available30 days after receipt of order.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Team Plans ONC RPC Net UtilitiesBy  MITCH WAGNER    Mountain View-Five networking companies have banded together todevelop base-level networking utilities around Sun Microsystems' OpenNetwork Computing system of Remote Procedure Calls, with the goal ofcoming out with mail and print-sharing facilities by the time of theOctober Interop show.    ``The basic premise is that we want to be able to produce anequivalent to the PC-based network operating systems that are out there,providing all the features, and do it on an open architecture,'' said CarlBeame, president of Beame & Whiteside, Ontario, Canada, one of the fivecompanies involved in the effort.    The other companies are Interlink, FTP Software, Intercon and TGVSoftware. In an effort to keep the group lean, they have no offices, nofull-time professional staff nor even a name, Beame said.    The utilities will be protocol-independent, and source code for theUnix reference implementations would be made public, Beame said.    All five companies specialize in offering TCP/IP and Network FileSystem (NFS) implementations for non-Unix operating systems. Beame &Whiteside runs it for MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows. TGV, in Santa Cruz,Calif., specializes in Digital Equipment VAX/VMS. FTP, which is inMassachusetts, has offerings for DOS and OS/2. Intercon, in Herndon, Va.,specializes in Apple Macintosh computers. Interlink, meanwhile, offers NFSand TCP/IP for IBM MVS systems.    FTP, Intercon, TGV and Beame & Whiteside already offer mail programs.``What we provide is not suitable for connectivity to anything but Unix,''Beame said. ``What we want to provide are the services over the commonbase that's best for all concerned.''    The mail- and print-sharing services will serve as a sort of test forthe organization, said David Kashtan, president of TGV Software. He saidif the companies can't succeed in bringing those technologies to fruitionby October, he'll favor abandoning the team.    But if the October deadline is met, he said he'd favor moving on toproduce timing, authentication and other services. Among these would befacilities for sharing devices. A Unix system, for example, would be ableto read and write data directly to a VMS disk drive, Kashtan said.    In an effort to keep the group lean, the companies have no offices, nofull-time professional staff nor even a name.        The services would provide a uniform look-and-feel and API overdifferent operating systems. They will run on top of X-Window, Kashtansaid.    The group is not in competition with the Open Software Foundation,which is trying to standardize basic network functions, Beame said.``People will see us as competition. That's not our intent. We're not hereto provide standards. We're here to provide real-world applications,''Beame said. ``But if we both end up providing the same functionality,then, yeah, I guess we'll be in competition.''    The technologies being worked on by the five-company group do notoverlap or compete with OSF work, say sources at the group and at OSF.    The ONC RPCs were chosen because the technology is what the companiesare already familiar with, Kashtan said. OSF has standardized onHewlett-Packard RPCs for inclusion in its Distributed ComputingEnvironment (DCE).Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Hong Kong All-in-One Bank Information        Liu Chong Hing Bank in Hong Kong is developing an application thatuses Oracle products under Unix to give managers constantly updated,unified information on all customer accounts. Currently, the bank tracks acustomer's loan, mortgage, savings, foreign exchange and other accountsseparately so that a customer's financial profile must be assembledmanually. ``This will give our managers a complete picture of clientportfolios, which will help them make quick, accurate decisions on loansand other matters,'' said Sampson Tong, the bank's data processingmanager. The application, called the Customer Information File, will becrafted using Oracle's SQLoForms, SQLoPlus and SQLoReportwriter, runningon an NCR Tower 32/700 configured as an additional application processoron the bank's proprietary NCR mainframe. The Customer Information Filewill be available for use by managers at the bank's 29 Hong Kong branches,as well as those in San Francisco and Shanghai. Plans call for customerseventually to be able to access information on their own accounts.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991In Russia, SCO Goes From Bootlegged To Bona Fide    As long as bootleggers are already widely distributing Santa CruzOperation products throughout the Soviet Union, SCO thought it might aswell get a few legitimate dollars from the generated interest. SCO hasannounced its first distributor in the Soviet Union, Moscow-based FutureTechnology International. FTI, which is 70 percent owned by an Austriancompany and 30 percent owned by the Soviet Informpribor Institute, willsell and support the complete range of SCO products in the Soviet Union.Software is widely bootlegged in the Soviet Union, and at least twocompanies are openly selling illegal copies of SCO Xenix, complete withphotocopied documentation, SCO said. Plans call for FTI to deal in hardcurrencies initially, with the possibility of sales in rubles in the nearfuture.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Frame And Matsushita Say Kanji Is A Can-Do    Frame Technology has revealed the fruits of its joint developmentagreement with Matsushita Computer Systems with the rollout of theJapanese version of its workstation publishing software. The new software,called Japanese FrameMaker, is a Japanese-language version of itsFrameMaker 2.1 product and allows users to create and edit business andtechnical documents in both Japanese and English, Frame officials said.Some of the key capabilities of the product are a front-end processor thatallows the phonetic Japanese characters, called Hiragana and Kanjicharacters, to be entered with a English keyboard. In addition, thesoftware has Japanese word processing and graphics standard formats andprovides support for the Japanese Industrial Standard character set ofKanji characters. The product is currently available in Japan fromMatsushita and runs on Panasonic BE workstations running under theX-Window System. Frame says that, within 30 days, versions for SunMicrosystems and Solbourne computers will be available. The software costs585,000 yen (about $4,300) for a single floating license.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Kubota Unveils New Workstation    More support for the Mips RISC chip can now be found in Japan, withthe introduction of Kubota Computer's new high-end Unix-based workstation,capable of 25.1 SPECmarks and 4.6 MFLOPS of peak processing performance,Kubota officials said. The workstation, called the RS3330, is based onMips Computer Systems' R3000A RISC chip and runs Mips' RISC/OS 4.5 Unixsystem software. The workstation features 128 Mbytes of memory and canutilize 600 Mbytes of internal disk storage and 6.2 gigabytes of externaldisk storage. The workstation comes with a 17-inch monochrome CRT displayand costs 1.97 million yen (about $14,275).Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991NETWORKINGIf you work with the private sector, OSI might be somethingnice that may someday improve or replace TCP/IP. If you work with thegovernment, OSI is a requirement. As they did with Unix, the bureaucratsare demanding systems that talk OSI for new purchases.    Let's look at how two PC network companies are dealing with this. WhenI say look, I don't mean look at the physical stuff. As the joke goes, thedata sheets are shipping in volume, with product to follow. But peopleswear to me this stuff is shipping-just not very much yet.     Novell, with its new NetWare 386 Version 3.11, has an optional FTAM(File Transfer Access and Management) module that runs on the server. Thisis a responder only, and provides services like file transfer and printingto FTAM clients. Unix naming conventions are followed, and FTAM initiatorscan send, retrieve, print to Novell printers, delete, rename and readfiles on the server. No mention is made of security control; surely Novelldoesn't expect FTAM users to need a NetWare user name and securityprofile. Attached Novell PC users don't get access to any other FTAMservices on the network.    This method fits with Novell's other recent releases in that NetWareis still proprietary while providing open hooks for everyone else. AsNovell has the largest PC LAN installed base to consider, it will followthis plan for a while. And if all new products are open and older productsare opening more and more, we have to be satisfied for now.     Directly opposite Novell's position is 3Com (once again). While itisn't selling the Network Operating System anymore (LAN Manager/3+Open wasgiven back to Microsoft, remember), it is staying active in the protocolbusiness.     3Com's approach is to provide a PC OSI stack that can be loaded andunloaded from memory when needed. All the features of its fine TCP/IP DPA(Demand Protocol Architecture), such as Virtual Terminal, third-partyterminal emulator support, file transfer and the ability to unload RAMwhen you're finished, are in the OSI package. The underlying code camefrom Retix, an early OSI company, so compatibility should be no problem.This software will work with earlier LAN Manager versions sold by 3Com andwith the newest Microsoft 2.0 version.     With the 3Com software available either today or ``real soon now,''you will be able to run TCP/IP, NFS, OSI, NetBIOS and Novell's IPX all atthe same time. You may not have any RAM left for an application, but youcan transfer files to and fro until your network screams for mercy.     Are you going to run OSI as the primary protocol on your localnetwork? Probably not, at least not for a few more years. You may soonneed to connect to random OSI hosts, however, and the 3Com option will letyou do that more easily than the Novell option.     It seems that OSI is slowly but surely making inroads. It's beensneaking in with the routers and mail systems, and now your PC can speakOSI and your server FTAM. It's a start.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991The Rise Of OSI -- Users Showing Increasing Interest In Potential Of X.400By  MICHAEL FADEN    Fourteen years ago, a bunch of standards experts at an InternationalStandards Organization meeting in Sydney, Australia, decided that OSIshould be invented. Given that many say OSI has only started to spreadthrough the Unix world, one may at some point wonder why they bothered.     Some vendors say that one big problem holding back the spread of OSIis that the set of OSI protocols hasn't, up till now, really solved manyproblems or offered any capabilities that you couldn't get some other way.     Within the Unix world, TCP/IP has offered many of the advantages ofbeing able to network machines from different vendors that OSI is supposedto deliver.     Even while vendors started providing OSI on their Unix systems, somehave been recognizing the widespread adoption of the TCP/IP protocols byimplementing them on proprietary operating systems, providing another wayto link together incompatible machines. In some areas, the capabilities ofTCP/IP still outstrip OSI equivalents.     ``With TCP/IP, you can have routers dynamically build tables. WithOSI, you don't have that, the protocol is not finalized, so you find thatyou cannot build a large network dynamically,'' said Lloyd Spencer,product manager at Sun's international center for network computing inGrenoble, France.     However, because the IEEE standard versions of Ethernet and TokenRing have been adopted by ISO as OSI standards, in theory huge numbers ofpeople are using OSI in some form already.     Also, in Europe, the X.25 wide-area OSI networking protocol wassupported by most national phone companies and turned out to be a betteroption for many users than leasing phone lines, so that has also boostedthe number of people that are already using OSI.     What most people mean by OSI, however, is the software that runs ontop of those basic carriers and provides everything from general transportmechanisms to sophisticated, specialized ``application-level'' services.     The services that actually start to provide useful and sometimes newcapabilities, vendors say, will be one of the main reasons userseventually start buying OSI. A more immediate reason may be thespecification of OSI in government procurements.     If one looks at the expected takeup of various OSI services, itbecomes clear that some of them are likely to take off much faster thanothers. According to a recent OSI study by London consultants Ovum, by1995 suppliers will be required to support the X.400 standard for carryingE-mail and other information in 48 percent of shipments to largeorganizations in the U.S., Britain, France and Germany.     X.500, a directory standard that has attracted a lot of attentionrecently and is often considered to be closely linked with X.400, will berequired for 23 percent of shipments, even though vendors are only nowstarting to get products into the market, according to Ovum. Both X.400and X.500 were originally defined by a committee of telecommunicationscarriers called the CCITT.     In contrast, the OSI Virtual Terminal protocol for connecting remoteterminals to different machines will be required in a mere 7 percent ofshipments, according to the study.     One reason the expected takeup for X.400 is so high, vendors say, isthat it solves a problem that's widespread, even endemic in largeorganizations, namely getting mail between incompatible systems.     Large organizations often need a mechanism for getting mail betweenIBM SNA mainframe networks, TCP/IP minicomputer nets, and Novell PC LANs,for instance, observed John Stephenson, senior vice president of Retix,which claims to have around 160 OEMs for its Unix OSI software.     ``Right now, major corporations see it as a solution to a bigproblem, connecting mainframes and PCs,'' said Paul Madden, president ofAlfalfa Software, supplier of a mail package that runs over both X.400 andthe SMTP mail protocol used with TCP/IP.     ``SMTP really hasn't been accepted as a solution for corporateE-mail,'' Stephenson said. ``It's still not available on every machine inthe corporate net.''     To solve that problem of connecting incompatible mail systems, a lotof vendors say they are currently backing the gateway approach. Companieswill sell you a gateway box, or software that runs on a machine you havealready, that takes proprietary mail and converts it into X.400 format.Then, that mail could be carried on an X.400 ``backbone'' or over one ofthe X.400 public mail networks that are now provided by most of the mainpublic carriers to another gateway box. The second gateway is connected toanother proprietary mail network and converts the X.400 mail to the newproprietary format. Each gateway can sometimes deal with a number ofdifferent proprietary formats.     SoftSwitch, Wayne, Pa., offers turnkey systems based on software andgateway boxes that it says will translate mail to and from IBM mainframeoffice systems, DEC's ALL-IN-1, PC local-area network mail systems likeMicrosoft Mail and cc:Mail, and Unix/SMTP mail. Coincidentally, thegateways themselves run Unix System V, Release 3 on 80386 processors.     Touch Communications sells gateway software that runs on InteractiveUnix systems. Typically, said Touch product manager Vince Hunt, thosecould be used to take mail from proprietary PC LANs out into an X.400network.    Vendors say the advantage of the gateway approach is that end usersdon't have to learn anything new. They can just keep using their familiarmail systems, except now they can send mail to people on other kinds ofmail systems.     Many vendors, including HP and Unisys, say they have X.400 softwareavailable under Unix, so in theory one could build an X.400 Unix-onlynetwork. Vendor OSI groups like Osinet and Eurosinet also stage X.400demonstrations based largely on Unix to show that their systems really cantalk to each other. Those suppliers that haven't already delivered X.400Unix products plan to do so.     DEC will implement X.400 as part of its DECnet Phase V release beforethe end of the year; in the meantime, Ultrix users would have to route DECproprietary mail messages through a VMS-based X.400 router, officialssaid. IBM has issued a statement of direction that it will support X.400on its AIX Unix systems.           Currently, X.400 provides no big advantages over RFC822 (SMTP)and may even have some disadvantages, said Steve Kille, project manager atUniversity College, London, which is involved in developing andproliferating a stack of freely available OSI software called the ISODevelopment Environment. The ISODE, based on a core of software originallydeveloped by Marshall Rose, now with Performance Software International,includes X.400 and X.500 software and has been incorporated into a numberof commercial products including those from the Wollongong Group and SunMicrosystems.     The reasons that people are getting involved are the potential futurecapabilities of X.400, like multimedia and security, he said. There areX.400 pilots on the Internet and in European countries, Kille added.     The components of X.400 include Message Transfer Agents (MTAs) thattypically run on a local minicomputer or server and are responsible forrouting and storing mail messages to other MTAs. Communicating with thoseare User Agents, the mail applications that let the user format, send andretrieve messages from their local MTA. Today, those applications areoften replaced by gateway software that shuffles mail to and from aproprietary mail system.     In the future, X.400 applications and even proprietary applicationswill take advantage of a key design feature of X.400: the ability to carrymuch more than text messages.     ``X.400 allows you to have enclosures that are recognized by X.400and hold image, ASCII, the extended character sets used in Europeanlanguages, and reformattable documents [like spreadsheets or formattedword processor documents],'' said Stephenson of Retix. ``But when you lookat the products [today], they are pretty much restricted to textualmessages at this point.''     ``There's probably a four to five times greater demand for X.400 thanfor FTAM [OSI file transfer],'' said Sun's Spencer.     ``I think there are going to be a couple of really importantapplications. One is the usage of X.400 with EDI. A lot of companies arelooking at EDI for commercial applications; they are looking at building aretail business on EDI. I think X.400 will become the primary carrier [forthat information].''     EDI, another OSI standard, is a protocol for carrying various kindsof business information like purchase orders.     Every four years, the CCITT produces a new version of the X.400standard. The products in use today, and the services provided by publiccarriers, are almost all based on the X.400 1984 standard, but 1988compliant products are starting to emerge.     ``'88 has some advantages, like making it easier to define newdocument types, but the primary reason [for moving to it] is security,''said Stephenson. ``'84 had essentially no security features.''     Retix announced an '88 X.400 source code product for OEMs earlierthis year. Wollongong has an '88 product in alpha test, said Doug Ambort,Wollongong product manager.     Although the use of X.400 today is still relatively small, Stephensonsaid that picture will change soon. ``What you'll really see happening inthe next year is that large users will start to deploy reasonable-sizednetworks,'' he said. ``You'll see many large networks a year and a halffrom now.'' He classified a large network as having at least 50 MTAs thatcould represent several thousand end users.     Several vendors said they don't plan to try and offer X.400 overTCP/IP, but Sun is an exception. Spencer said, Sun can currently run FTAMover TCP, and the company will continue that way with X.400. He declinedto give detailed product plans or delivery dates.     The X.500 directory standard has also started to feature in vendors'strategy and product announcements, and is being described as a technologythat, like X.400, could play a role throughout an organization. Also likeX.400, people are already talking about using it much more widely than adirectory that is used just to store mail addresses and simplify the taskof directing mail to other people.     ``Basically if you look at existing proprietary E-mail systems, theyall have some kind of directory,'' said Stephenson. The problem is thatlike the mail formats themselves, the directories are not compatible, aproblem that implementing X.500 across the board could solve.     The X.400 '88 standard introduced a standard set of rules foraccessing X.500 directory information, to make it easier to build productsthat work together. However, vendors say X.500 could have a much widerapplication than just acting as a mail directory.      ``People view X.500 as literally a telephone directory where you canstore any kind of information. For instance, there's an example where acompany is thinking of using it as an organizational chart builder,'' saidSpencer.     Retix officials said phone companies could set up yellow pages-typedirectories that could be used as the basis of a business informationservice.     When the Open Software Foundation was planning to come out withdirectory and naming services as part of the Distributed ComputingEnvironment due later this year, OSF members ``advised us very clearly''to make it X.500-compliant, said Jonathan Gossels, OSF businessdevelopment manager.     OSF officials said that because you can look for objects in thedirectory by searching on particular attributes, you could store printernames and look for high-speed or color printers on the network for aparticular printing task.    Walt Tuvell, a technical consultant at OSF, claimed that the OSFtechnology adds proprietary features that remedy some of the gaps in thecurrent '88 X.500 standard. ``The X.500 standards do not specifyreplication or caching or security,'' he said.    ``We expect the 1992 standard will fix those [replication and securityareas],'' said Spencer, indicating that Sun would not wait till then tointroduce a product.    According to Kille at UCL, a pilot worldwide directory system based onX.500 has already taken off in a big way. About 400 organizations in 15countries are participating in the pilot, he said. Some are using an X.500implementation called Quipu that is part of the ISODE, others are usingother X.500 implementations, Kille added.     Because OSI communications standards are meant to be independent ofOSes and programming languages and do not include any standardapplications programming interface, common APIs for X.400 and X.500 havebeen slower to arrive than the software itself.          Retix co-founded a group called the Application ProgrammingInterface Association that has been defining APIs for these OSI protocols,Stephenson said. Some vendors have charged that the APIA was dominated byRetix and that the association's X.400 API is based closely on the RetixAPI. Some software, like the ISODE and Wollongong's products based on theISODE, does not support the APIA interface, the developers said.     Hunt, at Touch Communications, agreed the API is based on Retix, butsaid it has also been adopted by X/Open and that Touch is implementing itin addition to its own API.     Other vendors are using the API to build gateways or interfaces frommail systems, Retix officials said. Among them is HP, which claims thatits OpenMail is one of the first products to include X.400 addressing andformatting into its core architecture.     Last year, HP and Uniplex got together to port OpenMail to non-HPUnix platforms including DEC and IBM, and Uniplex officials said the firstports are nearing completion.     In the future, Stephenson said, vendors of other kinds ofapplications will develop software that integrates X.400 and operates asan X.400 user agent talking directly to an X.400 MTA.     ``Non-E-mail vendors, spreadsheet companies, will come out withproducts that attach to X.400. You would pull up a menu in a spreadsheetpackage and one of the options would be mail,'' he said.     The spreadsheet vendors will register their spreadsheet formats sospreadsheets can be carried over X.400 and uniquely identified by thereceiver. A message can contain information from several differentapplications, so when it is received, those applications can be triggeredautomatically to let the receiver see the different parts of the message,whether spreadsheet, text or image, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991X Server Tool For DOS PCs    Anaheim, Calif.-Integrated Inference Machines is offering X serversoftware for MS-DOS PCs allowing users to save money by licensing thesoftware over the whole network, rather than on a per-copy basis.    Multiuser X.11/AT 3.2 X-Window System Server software incorporates alicense manager and can be downloaded to DOS PCs from Unix or Novellfileservers, or any platform that supports Network File System (NFS) orDOScopy protocols.     The license manager keeps track of the number of copies of the Xserver that are in use at any given time. The user pays for a maximum of20, 50, 100 and 250 or more ``floating users.''    The X software runs on Microsoft Windows 3, said Charles Ross, IIMsenior VP. The software now incorporates TCP/IP drivers.    It allows concurrent access from remote X applications and local MSWindows applications, and cut-and-paste of text and images between Xapplications and MS applications.    IIM has tested the software to run on Novell NetWare, SCO Unix, SunOSand Intel Unix.    It is available immediately, priced for a 20-user license at $7,900,plus an optional $1,000 maintenance and upgrade fee; $17,900 for a 50-userlicense plus $2,500 annual maintenance; $29,500 for a 100-user license,plus $4,000 annual maintenance; and $59,900 for a 250-user license, plus$7,500 annual maintenance.    On a per-user basis, that translates to $238 per user for 250 users,and scales to $395 per user for 50 users. Most X server software packagesfor DOS PCs sold on a per-copy basis sell for $450 or more.    IIM is at 714-978-6776.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Four DECnet/SNA Links PremiereBy  MITCH WAGNER    Maynard, Mass.-Digital Equipment has rolled out new communicationsproducts designed to provide DECnet users with enhanced connectivity intothe world of Big Blue mainframes.    The DECnet/SNA Data Transfer Facility Version 3.0 allows users onDECnet systems to access data on IBM System Network Architecture (SNA)computers using DECnet calls, while IBM users use SNA calls to get intoDEC Ultrix, VMS and RSX machines, as well as MS-DOS and OS/2 systems, saidJane Brewer, DEC's IBM interconnect marketing manager.    ``It's a file-transfer and information-access environment,'' saidBrewer. ``It connects to the two environments and lets users in eachenvironment initiate file transfers using the commands that they're usedto.''    The facility is ideal for situations where systems administrators needto put longstanding VMS or Ultrix operations in touch with each other.    ``Our users tend to be comfortable working with what they're used to,which is SNA-oriented,'' said Brewer. ``They tend to be large corporatedata centers which have large investments in SNA. Manufacturing andscientific arms of those organizations have VMS and Ultrix. Now people aresaying, `Let's integrate it. We don't want to have multiple copies ofeverything.' ''    The products, which are expected to be available next month, come infour components:        DTF Server is the software package that controls all requests forinformation and includes fail-safe functionality. It runs on a VMSplatform, starting at $1,510 for the VAXstation, increasing in price to$22,100 for the VAX 6410 and reaching $63,200 for the VAX 9000 mainframe.    DEC Utilities includes remote management features and other fail-safefunctionality. It is priced at $640 for a low-end VAXstation, $9,480 onthe VAX 6410 and $27,000 for the mainframe VAX 9000.    The DTF software module that runs on the MVS machine is priced at$30,900, and the software module running on the VMS machine is priced at$21,000.    DEC also offers two 2.2-Mbps pay-one-price packages featuring server,IBM software and the DECnet/SNA Gateway CT, which actually passes datafrom the DECnet to SNA environments. The packages are priced at $60,000for MVS systems and $50,000 for VM systems, independent of which VMSplatform they run on.    Digital has also introduced a new terminal server and router.    The DECserver 300 Version 2 terminal server, supporting 16 ports,allows users to run Local Area Transport (LAT) and telnet sessionssimultaneously, said Lee Cooper, network marketing manager.    The server software can be downloaded from a PC running MS-DOS andDEC's PC networking software, Pathworks 3. Until now, software wasdownloadable only from a VAX. ``Now you have a low-cost alternative togive the department local control over the terminal server,'' said Cooper.    Ultrix pricing for the standalone software is $616, while VMS pricingis set at $647. The software will also be bundled with future sales of theDECserver 300, the company said. Pricing for the DOS-downloadable versionis $650.    The DECrouter 150 supports two serial ports as well as an IEEE802.3/Ethernet port. The serial lines can either be one at 56 or 64 Kbpsand one at 9.6 Kbps, or two lines at 19.2 Kbps. The product also supportsmodem dial-back as a security feature.    The router is available immediately and is priced at $3,250.    For more information, Digital can be reached at 508-493-5111.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991New Sniffer Net Monitor Debuts    Billerica, Mass.-Network General is offering a new version of itsSniffer network-monitoring product that does what the Sniffer's never donebefore-stay in one place.    The Sniffer was, until recently, a network-monitoring product designedto be taken from place to place on the network, with a tap to cut in onnetwork wiring and interpretive software that runs on a laptop computer todissect the network traffic moving over the wire.    Now, Network General is offering the Distributed Sniffer, which offerssimilar functionality in a unit the size of a PC CPU, designed to bescattered in groups over network segments and feed data to software thatanalyzes and displays it on a PC-the SniffMaster Console, said NetworkGeneral.    ``The basic product, the analyzer, allows you to see into yournetwork-it's like a CAT scan for your LAN,'' said company spokesman RonHerman.    The Sniffer approach to monitoring the network is different from onethat has become more popular over the past two years, since the emergenceof the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) element of TCP/IP.    In the SNMP school, network devices are polled for their status bymanagement software-a process with the picturesque name of pinging-and thedevices send signals back to the manager.    Sniffers actually tap into the network traffic, sampling it anddetermining the state of the network that way.    ``I don't necessarily think it's a conflict with SNMP,'' said BobBessin, manager of market development for Network General. ``SNMP wasdeveloped to check the status of the devices on the network. SNMP islimiting. What we do is decode traffic on the network, provide statisticson network traffic itself.''    But he added that Sniffers can report to SNMP software.    The system consists of Sniffer Servers, which actually tap into thenetwork and collect data. Applications running on the servers are theAnalysis Application, providing troubleshooting, performance analysis andnetwork optimization by capturing and analyzing packets on more than 120protocols. The Monitoring Application tracks network traffic, keepingnetwork and station statistics, issuing alarms and trying to proactivelyidentify problems. It generates standard or customized reports.    The Distributed Sniffer will be available in June. Server pricing is$4,995 to $10,995, depending on applications and configuration. Theconsole, which consists of a board and software, is priced at $7,995. Twostarter kits are available: a kit of two Ethernet servers with monitoringand analysis applications and a console board and software for $19,995,and a 16/4-Mbps Token Ring starter kit for $21,995.    Network General can be reached at 415-688-2700.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991High-Speed LU6.2 Link Intro'd    Lebanon, N.H.-Corporate Microsystems is introducing software toprovide for LU6.2 file transfer and remote execution across Unix, IBMproprietary and OS/2 platforms.    MLINK APPC Communications System (MACS) is ``an outgrowth of a needamong our customers to instigate a high-speed link along OSI,'' said DickGreen, president of CMI.    For executing jobs in the IBM environment, LU6.2 is much faster thanthe more common form of IBM System Network Architecture (SNA)connectivity, where the client machine emulates an IBM 3270 terminal,Green said.    Meanwhile, for job execution on Unix, CMI intentionally stayed awayfrom the most common networking protocol, TCP/IP. Instead, CMI decided tohave the remote, non-Unix node on the network initiate Unix commands byspawning a Bourne or C shell and generating commands either in ASCII orthe IBM equivalent to ASCII, EBCDIC. The shell is spawned using VirtualTelecommunications Access Method (VTAM), a component of SNA.    ``The reason for not using TCP/IP is that it's not a default in mostmainframe shops,'' Green said. ``VTAM is an integral part of the operatingsystem in 90 percent of the mainframe shops. TCP/IP will be found moreoften in the future, and we will eventually support that.''    MACS is now available for IBM mainframes running MVS or DOS/VSE. Itrequires VTAM Release 3.2 or higher. The product is also now available forthe RS/6000 and the RT running AIX, and for systems running OS/2. It isexpected to be available for the AS/400 by June 1, and also for severalUnix platforms, including the NCR 3000, Bull DPX/2 and AT&T's Intel-basedplatforms. It may be used over any SNA-supported link, including TokenRing, SDLC, X.25 and Ethernet.    Green said that CMI focused on file transfer and remote execution in astrategy designed to achieve maximum performance for those two functions.MACS intentionally offers far less functionality than a product like XCom,from Spectrum Concepts in New York, which offers a full Unix-to-SNA API.    CMI does not offer direct DOS or Macintosh connectivity, but signalscan be passed to the Mac or PC through the Unix machine, Green said.    The mainframe pricing for the product is $11,500 to $29,500. TheRS/6000 version is priced from $2,495 to $6,500. MACS for OS/2 is pricedat $1,250.    CMI can be reached at 617-259-1400.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991NASA's TAE Eases Interface DesignBy  DENIS HART    Greenbelt, Md.-The National Aeronautics and Space Administration'stechnology distribution arm will soon make available to commercial usersits latest release of a software application environment called TAE Plus.    TAE Plus Version 5.0, based on the OSF/Motif toolkit and X11R4, allowsusers to interactively design end-user interfaces.    TAE Plus, first developed by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center withsupport from Century Computing and RMS Technologies, generates C or Adacode automatically after a user interface is designed. The code connectsthe user interface with lower-level computer services such as databases,said Elfrida Harris, manager of TAE support at NASA.    The main components of TAE include a WorkBench, a set of WindowProgramming Tools and the TAE Command Language. The WorkBench allows usersto construct and manipulate a set of ``interaction objects.'' Theseinclude user-entry objects, such as radio buttons and text entry fields;information objects, such as brief status error messages displayed in abother box; and data-driven boxes such as dials, thermometers and stripcharts.    The system's Window Programming Tools are services used by applicationprograms to display and control the WorkBench-designed user interfaceobjects. Unlike other commercial products, the WPTs allow users to createa user interface that remains independent of the application code,allowing changes  to be made to the interface without changing applicationcode, Harris said.    ``I think most graphics tools use code to build the interface, andthat code becomes part of your application,'' she said. TAE's set ofwindowing tools have also been submitted to the POSIX 1201.1 committee forconsideration in an upcoming layered application programming interfacestandard.    Pat Mortenson, director of marketing at Cosmic, NASA's commercialdistribution contractor, estimated that the latest version of the softwareshould be ready within two to four weeks. The new software, unlike theprevious 4.1 version, will run on Motif 1.1 and X11R4.    The product has already been ported to the DECstation 3100 and DECVAXstations running Ultrix, Sun SPARCstations and the HP 9000 Series 3000running Unix. It will also be ported to Macintosh II and Apolloworkstations as soon as they upgrade to Motif 1.1, Harris said.   Users who want to do a complete installation from source code must haveX11R4, Motif 1.1 and a C and a C++ compiler, NASA said. The softwareincludes InterViews and idraw, two software packages developed by StanfordUniversity and integrated into the product.    So far, Version 4.1 of the software has been installed in more than400 user sites, a third of which are commercial users and the restacademic institutions and government sites, Harris said. She added that,unlike other graphical user interfaces, the software is geared more towardnon-programmers and has, therefore, proven popular.    Mortenson agreed. She added that compared to existing commercialproducts, TAE is also inexpensive. Although prices for the new producthaven't yet been decided on, licenses for Version 4.1 of the programmingsystem cost only $500. ``A person who develops a commercial product on TAEis also free to distribute that product without restriction,'' Mortensonsaid. She added that academic institutions are also eligible for a 50percent discount.    ``Since the products have been created with taxpayer money, NASA isnot expected to recover development costs,'' Mortenson said.    Harris added, however, that the commercial acceptance of the newproduct will be directly related to how widespread the use of Motif 1.1becomes in the future.    Most customers of TAE have been those who have been computer-literate,such as universities, high-technology companies and some consulting firms.So far, however, even though X-Window systems and Unix have prospered inthe financial community, few such firms and companies have sought out NASAtechnology for their systems. Cosmic is at 404-542-3265.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991OSF Patches Motif 1.0    Cambridge, Mass.-The Open Software Foundation has made available apatch release to Motif Version 1.0 for those users who have not yetmigrated to X11R4.    The product, patch release 1.0.5, contains changes necessary to fixapproximately 40 bugs, but offers no new functionality, said OSF systemsengineer David Brooks.    The corrections include changes to the X11R3 intrinsics that willprevent the major memory leaks that occur when users delete dialog widgetsand corrections that previously caused compiling difficulties on variousarchitectures, Brooks said.    The patch also corrects a warning message caused from setting scrollbar thickness at more than two pixels and display errors caused when usersuse horizontal scrolling with tabbed characters in text. The patch alsoreworks some code that caused an incorrect x-pointer icon size onDECstations running Ultrix.     Brooks said this will be the last patch released for Motif 1.0 andadded that though there may be some outstanding problems, ``none of themare fatal.''   Although OSF will still accept questions on usage and code problems forits previous Motif release, OSF will not fix code problems for Motif 1.0from now on.    Brooks also said that all the fixes made to Motif 1.0 have alreadybeen made to Motif 1.1.    Motif 1.0.5 is available at no charge to Motif 1.0 licensees who holdfull support or update contracts for Motif. Also, those users who havealready received 1.0.4 will receive the new patch automatically.   Contact the Motif Support Administration, Open Software Foundation,617-621-7300, or via E-mail at motif-support-admin@osf.org.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991DATA MANAGEMENT    By Julie Anderson    At the recent UNIX Today!DCI Open Systems Forum in Atlanta, we spenthalf of the first day tossing about various definitions for the term``open system.'' After hearing several speakers' thoughts on the subject,we generally agreed that for a system to be ``open,'' it must provide adefined set of standard interfaces.     The obvious advantage of open systems to end users is vendorindependence. Vendors may not consider this an advantage as they watchtheir margins dwindle, but end users become free to base theirapplications on a mix of products from many vendors.     Unfortunately, we are just starting to see the first open systems. Sofar, much interface-definition work has focused on standardizing low-leveloperating system interfaces--system and library calls. This is fine ifyou're using C.    But what about the sizable number of people who are building DBMSapplications? True, many are writing C code and using SQL for datadefinition and manipulation. These people are faring relatively wellbecause of the ANSI efforts to standardize SQL (a slow and painfulprocess). Useful standards are also promised from the SQL Access Group.     Many people, however, are using the DBMS vendor's 4GL or front-endtools to build at least part, if not all, of the application. Yet, thereare no standard interfaces for the end user for these tools, nor am Iaware of any standards movements afoot. Any similarities that you may findamong the many 4GLs on the market are merely coincidental. Oracle, forexample, doesn't even have a 4GL; it has an interactive forms builder,SQLoForms, that generates a screen definition which is driven by theOracle runforms utility.     A few products do provide vendor independence at the database level.Unify and Jyacc offer tools (Accell and Jam) that build data entry formsthat can be used with a variety of databases. But a Jam screen is notinterchangeable with an Accell form, and vice versa.     At one of the Forum sessions, the MIS directors from Hyatt Hotels andthe Burlington Coat Factory presented their strategies and experienceswith building OLTP applications on Unix. Both had chosen Informix as theirdatabase and used Informix/4GL as their development language. They wereimpressed by the high productivity that Informix/4GL gave them. Inaddition, they were able to hire less technical (i.e., cheaper) people todo the development. (Not good news for CICS experts, I must say.)     By choosing Informix, Hyatt and Burlington Coat Factory were able toget vendor independence. Because Informix runs on a wide variety ofsystems, the underlying hardware and operating system could be changedwithout having to modify the application.     But as an astute attendee pointed out, these systems are onlyquasi-open. They are vendor-independent at the hardware andoperating-system levels, but tied tightly to the Informix vendor at theAPI level. Changing to a different DBMS means a rewrite of theapplication.     What are application developers to do to get high productivity and anopen system too? Unite. Vendors have little incentive to standardize theirAPIs unless users insist. To survive, vendors must deliver what thecustomer demands.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Motif GUIs For AdaBy DAN RICHMAN    San Diego-Ada programmers working on Data General's AViiON, SPARC andSun-3 systems can automatically create Motif-based graphical userinterfaces by using new techniques with products already sold by Telesoft,according to Bruce Sherman, the company's vice president of corporatemarketing.    Telesoft has released an 18-page ``technical application note''describing how to use two of its interface-generation products, TeleGen2Ada and TeleUSE, with Ada. Until now, those products could be used onlywith C.    TeleUSE lets programmers ``paint'' static screens and describe withif-then statements how the interface should function. Then theyautomatically generate Ada (or C) code to produce those results. TeleGen2Ada includes a compiler, a debugger, an optimizer, a profiler andproductivity tools. The two products can be used separately for otherpurposes, but must be used together to generate Motif-based GUI interfacesfor Ada.    Automatic interface-generators can save up to 90 percent of the timethat writing such code from scratch would consume, Sherman said.    The technical application note is free with the licensing of the twoproducts, or on request to current users. TeleUSE is priced at costs$7,500; TeleGen2 Ada costs from $4,500 to $9,500 depending on theplatform. Telesoft can be contacted at 619-457-2700.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Ada Bindings For V.I. Tools from richman    Northampton, Mass.-V.I. Corp. has announced bindings that are said tomake it easier for Ada developers to use its DataViews applicationdevelopment tools. The bindings (C language header files that allow onelanguage to be called from another) sell for $3,000 and are availableimmediately.    DataViews is a package of tools for creating dynamic GUIs. DynamicGUIs can display not only icons that launch programs but symbols thatchange to represent data. For example, in a direct manipulation interfacetypical of those produced by DataViews, opening a GUI ``valve'' caninstruct the program to drain the tank, and the liquid level in the GUI``tank'' will steadily decrease as it drains, said Andrew Copeland, V.I.'svice president of marketing and operations.    The bindings must be used with DataViews' DV-Tools, which sells for$17,700. That price includes DV-Draw, a drawing editor, but not DV-Proto,a prototyping tool.    The company can be reached at 413-586-4144.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991New VAPS Launched    Montreal-Virtual Prototypes has released Version 2.0 of VAPS, theVirtual Applications Programming System. Version 2.0 is the first VAPSimplementation intended for commercial use; Version 1.0 was aimed at theaerospace industry.    VAPS is an object-oriented GUI development tool that lets programmersdesign interfaces that both influence and reflect changes in data. Itincludes 26 objects, such as graphs, switches, rotors and buttons. ObjectsType 3 line callout here in Italic.    VAPS 2.0 is designed to accept data, such as switches, can sendsignals to output objects, such as graphs, and can also influence theoutside world.    VAPS supports the IBM RS/6000, Sun SPARCstations, HP/Apollo and SGI,among other Unix platforms. It sells for $15,000 (U.S.) and is currentlyavailable.    Virtual Prototypes can be reached at 514-483-4712.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Acer Intros i486-Based Machines -- Touts Workstations And Servers'Performance, Expandability, Graphics Processing    San Jose-Acer America recently rolled out two new workstations and twoservers, all powered by Intel's new i486 SX processor.    Units, priced in monitorless base configurations from $2,745 to$11,995, can run either SCO or Interactive Unix or MS-DOS. The two Unixoperating systems can be purchased separately at a cost of about $700 forSCO Unix and $600 for Interactive. The systems also will run Banyan Vinesand Novell NetWare.     Desktop units are called the AcerPower 486SX and the AcerPower 500.Floor-standing servers are the AcerFrame 1000 and the AcerFrame 3000SP33.    Acer director of product marketing Olend King said the machines aredistinguished from other PCs by their performance, expandability andgraphics processing. Both workstations support Ultra-VGA graphics.    All units use a 20-MHz, 14-MIPS 486SX processor except for the3000SP33, which uses a 33-MHz, 20-MIPS 486SX. Upgrades to a 33- andeventually a 50-MHz 486SX can be made by inserting a new chip into themotherboard through Acer's ChipUp upgrade technology or through modularupgrades.    Acer said it has designed the 486SX for use in graphical windowingenvironments. The system's $2,745 base configuration includes 2 Mbytes ofmemory and can support as much as 98 Mbytes of RAM. The unit's memoryimplementation supports as many as 63 different SIMM conbinations,allowing incremental upgrades without RAM swapouts, Acer said.    Available immediately, the workstation also features 8k bytes ofinternal processor cache, Ultra-VGA graphics supporting 1,024-by-768-pixelresolution, four ISA slots and a 1.44-Mbyte, 3.5-inch floppy disk drive.    The Power500 is a six-slot EISA-based modular system for engineering,financial and entry-level networking and multiuser Unix environments.    Featuring 4 to 256 Mbytes of memory, the $3,745 base unit uses a128-bit data path that supports dynamic expansion from 32-, 64- and128-bit accesses as memory is expanded. The system also supports Ultra-VGAgraphics resolution.    Acer's AcerFrame 1000 is an EISA-based, floor-standing server designedfor networked and multiuser Unix work groups. The unit holds 4 to 128Mbytes of RAM and eight EISA expansion slots. A 5.25-floppy disk drive isincluded. Availability is expected in June.    The AcerFrame 1000, which supports at least 32 users, has a suggestedbase price of $4,995 and will be available in June, Acer said.    The AcerFrame 3000SP33, priced at approximately $11,995 and availablethis month, was designed for client/server environments and applicationssuch as business databases. It supports eight to 64 users and supportsNovell NetWare, Banyan Vines and OS/2 LAN Manager.    The unit features 8 to 64 Mbytes of RAM, a 5.25-inch floppy diskdrive, secondary-level processor cache, eight EISA expansion slots,built-in VGA and an LCD console. An EISA SCSI disk controller isavailable. The unit supports as much as 2 gigabytes of internal on-linestorage using SCSI hard disk drives.    Monitors available from Acer include the AcerView 35, a1,024-by-768-pixel color monitor priced at $995; the AcerView 33, an800-by-600 color monitor costing $795; and a black-and-white monitorpriced at $200. The units are equipped with Windows 3.0 but will supportwindowing environments from SCO and Interactive, King said.    While the new systems continue Acer's reliance on Intel, Acer isinvestigating whether to build a Mips-based RISC system in accordance withthe Advanced Computing Environment (ACE) specification, said King.    ``We're evaluating the marketplace as the year goes on,'' he said.    Acer last month became part of a 22-member ACE initiative. Thecompanies plan to build or distribute systems that would run the SCO OpenDesktop and Microsoft OS/2 3.0 operating environments on systems based onIntel and Mips R3000 and R4000 processors.    Acer can be contacted at 408-922-0333.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Imaging Unit UnveiledBy  LEE BRUNO    Dayton, Ohio-NCR has unveiled a general-purpose imaging system aimedat making image-based document processing affordable to users who want tocombine such image-processing tasks as scanning, optical storage,character recognition and relational database services into a singlesystem.    The client/server-based product, called the Document Management System(DMS), runs on NCR's System 3000 line of Unix-based servers andworkstations over either a Token Ring or Ethernet connection and supportsSNA 3270 communications protocols. Included with the system is an opticaldisk jukebox that provides the large storage capacity required for imagerecords.    One of the key components in the DMS product is called WorkflowAutomation. This software element is icon-driven and allows the user tosee where a particular document is at any time. This capability allows anorganization to graphically represent and track the flow of documentsbeing processed within an office or an enterprisewide networkedenvironment.    Another component of the system is its character-recognitioncapability. This technology utilizes neural network principles, whichallows the system to adapt and learn the important inputs in a particularenvironment. NCR said this technology involves three algorithms, of whichone is a neural network-based algorithm. NCR said the technology enablesthe system to read typewritten fonts as well as hand-printed numbers.    The size of typical image records that the DMS can handle is roughly50k bytes, while conventional application data records only run from 100to 1,000 bytes, NCR said. To handle these larger files, NCR said it addedVery Large Scale Integration (VLSI) in both central processing unit andmemory and in their I/O subsystems.    NCR said the product will be featured with the System 3000 line ofworkstations. The system ranges in price from $800,000 for a20-workstation configuration to $3.5 million for a 120-workstation system.    NCR said the DMS will be delivered in the first quarter of 1991. Foradditional information, call 513-445-5000.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Graphics Performance Gets A Boost    Austin, Texas-National Design has rolled out three new Unix-basedgraphics coprocessor boards based on Texas Instruments' TMS34020 chip forPCs that boost graphics performance and allow a user to modify the boardcharacteristics to meet high-resolution requirements.    The three boards plug into the AT bus of PCs or compatibles and arecalled the AT1100, AT1300 and AT1600. They are designed to boost thegraphics performance of a PC, allowing a user to run graphics routines at175,000 independent vectors per second in a Unix environment and 65,000Xstones in an X-Window environment. The board runs under both SCO OpenDesktop 1.1 and Interactive Unix 2.2. National said the TI TMS34020graphics processor is a particularly fast ``fill engine'' that allows auser to draw and shade graphic images quickly.    National said the products can be modified to meet user requirements,such as higher resolution and color diversity for particular graphicsapplications. For example, the AT1100 is capable of delivering 24-bitcolor in 1,024-by-768 resolution with 16.7 million colors. If a user wantsa greater resolution, such as 1,280-by-1,024, then the AT1300 snap-inmodule can be added to the AT1100 base board and get 16-bit color. Thosedemanding a 1,600-by-1,280 resolution display would add the AT1600 moduleto the base board and get 8-bit color with 256 colors.    Gabrielle Ryan, president of National Design, said the boards aretargeted at the process-control market in manufacturing and the electronicengineering market. Typically, these two markets utilize PCs along withUnix-based servers, and the boards allow PCs running Unix to interoperatewith VME-based Unix systems, Ryan said. For example, a person using aPC-based Unix workstation can design a part and then send that data fileto the VME-based shop floor for production, Ryan added.    Ryan said that all of the server component-utilized in an X-Windowenvironment-fits on the graphics coprocessor board, and only a fewlow-level CPU routines are executed on the main CPU of the host. Inaddition, the base board also contains all of the DRAM and video RAM.    National said it also provides a 3-D snap-in module for the boardsthat utilizes TI's TMS34082 floating-point coprocessor chip. This optionallows the user to execute up to 40 million floating-point operations persecond, Ryan said.    National said the three boards will ship this June. The AT1100 costs$2,995, while the AT1300 and AT1600 costs $3,995.    For additional information, call 512-343-5055.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Integrated SPARC Chipset Bows    Sunnyvale-Weitek today plans to announce an integrated SPARC chipsetthat could enable SPARC-compatible makers to build SPARCstation 2-classsystems selling for $10,000 by summer.    Weitek's SPARC Enhancement set includes the W8701 SPARCmicroprocessor, which integrates the floating-point and integer units ontoa single chip, and the W8720 Integrated Graphics Controller (IGC), asingle-chip graphics acceleration unit. The W8720 is a single-slot Sbuscard that allows for migration of accelerated 2-D graphics to themotherboard of next-generation SPARC workstations, Weitek said.    ``What we're doing is providing the systems manufacturers anopportunity to come up on the power curve,'' said Christopher Tice,general manager of Weitek's processor business group.    By combining the floating-point and integer units on one chip, theW8701 cuts system processor cost, Weitek said. The 207-pin unit delivers28.5 MIPS and 21 SPECmarks when used at 40 MHz and roughly 23.5 MIPS and17 SPECmarks at 33 MHz, Tice said.    The 40-MHz ratings compare with Sun's SPARCstation 2, which has a baseprice of $15,000. Through the SPARC Enhancement set, SPARC-compatible, orclone, builders could build 28.5-MIPS systems in the $10,000 rangedepending on their own design expertise, said Tice. The chipset isexpected to be available in May and begin appearing in systems thissummer.    Tice said several SPARC-compatible makers are interested in thechipset, but he would not name them. Weitek, which has providedfloating-point units for existing SPARC chipsets, said the W8701 is asingle-unit replacement for Cypress Semiconductor's multichip 601/CY7C602SPARC RISC chipset.    ``This is one of the first, if not the first, design for a SPARCmicroprocessor that was done outside of Sun,'' Tice said.    Weitek is pricing the chip in quantities of 5,000 at $240 for the33-MHz device and $264 for the 40-MHz version.    The 208-pin W8720 features internal memory and video controlfunctionality and hardwires such graphics functions as polygon drawing,BitBLT( BitBlock Line Transfer) and logical raster operations. It is ratedat 400,000 2-D vectors per second and 100 million pixels per second. Theunit runs in the frame-buffer bandwidth, Tice said.    The chip can be used in windowed graphics environments such asX-Window, Microsoft Windows, SunView or Display PostScript, Weitek said.    The chipset marks Weitek's entry into the SPARC microprocessor market,although the company has been supplying floating-point units for SPARCchips.    Weitek can be reached in Sunnyvale at 408-738-8400.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991OLTP Box From NECBy DAN RICHMAN    Tokyo-Targeting the telecommunications industry, NEC said it plans tostart shipping its first fault-tolerant on-line transaction processingcomputer, the Super Tolerant FT20, in late November.    The machine's manufacturer, Stratus Computer, calls it the firstcommercially available RISC-based fault-tolerant computer to run SVR4.Stratus, which announced the machine last month, sells it as the XA/RModel 20.    The machine runs at 40 MIPS with 32-MHz i860 RISC chips. NEC will sellit for 78 million yen (about $591,000 at current exchange rates) equippedwith 32 Mbytes of memory in each of its two processors, duplexed I/O andother essentials, a tape drive, and LAN and OS software. Stratus sells itfor $274,000 with essentially the same configuration.    NEC spokesman Yoshiko Senft (CQ) said the price difference results inpart from features NEC adds, like Japanese-language processing andprinting and enhanced connectivity with NEC's other computers andsoftware.    NEC will market the Super Tolerant FT20 both alone and in conjunctionwith its NEAX 61 central office switching equipment. Targeted customersinclude national and regional phone companies, providers of 800- and900-number services, credit-card verification services, and private phonenetworks.    Both NEC and Stratus stressed that fault tolerance is becomingincreasingly important in telecommunications as more and more data travelover phone lines. Stratus regards telecommunications as ``a keyopportunity for growth,'' said Dave Hayward, a Stratus spokesman.    For more information, NEC can be reached at 508-264-8000.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991CROSSINGSPerhaps the most well-known Unix transaction processing (TP)monitor is Tuxedo, from AT&T's spinoff, Unix System Laboratories (USL).That may be because Tuxedo is probably the oldest Unix TP monitor around;it has been used inside AT&T Bell Laboratories and other AT&T units since1982, and its roots go back to even earlier development projects. Tuxedohas been available for license since 1985.    Tuxedo supports a distributed on-line transaction processing (OLTP)environment, supporting client/server networks. In keeping with the``open'' philosophy, Tuxedo remains independent of any particular RDBMS,network protocol, hardware platform or Unix version.    Mark Curges, one of Tuxedo's principal architects and a member ofUSL's technical team, refers to Tuxedo as ``the glue'' that can holdtogether a heterogeneous network of different versions of Unix running ondifferent hardware platforms-a 386, a Mips RISC CPU, you name it.    The Tuxedo System consists of two major components, System /T andSystem /D. The first, /T, is a transaction-processing (TP) monitor. It isthe real glue that binds multiple systems, including desktop computers,workstations and servers, together across a network.    The System /T TP monitor oversees and controls transactions across thenetwork. It consists of libraries for making systems calls to the Unixoperating system and relational and hierarchical databases, as well ascommands.T is database-independent and includes interfaces to all leadingUnix relational database management systems (RDBMSes), including Oracle,Informix, Ingres, Sybase and others. It conforms to X/Open's XA TPinterface.    The second component is System /D, a combined hierarchical andrelational DBMS. It was also developed and used internally for TPapplications within AT&T and the old Bell System. System /T and /D arelicensed separately, with more licensees opting for /T than /D. That makessense, as many of the licensees are leading Unix RDBMS vendors, whoobviously do not need T&T&APOTROPH;s DBMS    Tuedo, which USL licenses to any interested party, runs on Unix SystemV Release 4 operating system, supporting OLTP applications in aclient/&TC;server environment. Network protocol support includes TCP/IP,the current standard in the Unix market, as well as the Open SystemsInterconnect (OSI) suite, IBM's NetBIOS and Novell's NetWare.    Curges notes that though open OLTP systems offer many advantages overtraditional proprietary ones, customers simply will not throw away theirexisting investments, especially in applications that for many companiesdeliver revenue-generating services to customers. For that reason,interfacing open OLTP systems to existing proprietary OLTP systems is ahot item, he says. In response, USL is developing a third component,called /Host, that will connect the /T TP monitor to an IBM CustomerInformation Control System (CICS) TP environment through IBM SNA 3270 andLU 6.2 protocols. This product was demonstrated in the USL booth at theUniForum show last January in Dallas.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Interactive Readies Its System V.4 OSBy  DENIS HART    Santa Monica, Calif.-Interactive has set June 2, the date of adevelopers' conference for its Unix System V product line, for theintroduction of its Unix System V.4 operating system and developmentenvironment.    Interactive CEO Dennis Peck said that the product will be based onUnix System Laboratories' base V.4 version, but said that Interactive willalso supply Motif with the product.    Interactive expects, however, to begin shipping enhancements to theproduct sometime in the last quarter of this year. ``This will be ourinitial product. We will have a second release in the fourth quarter ofthis year, and we are planning a major release in the first half of1992,'' Peck said.    The product, which will operate on 386 and 486 systems, will betargeted toward ISVs, sophisticated end users and the value-added resellercommunity, he added.     Paul Wellens, product line manager for V.4 at Interactive, said thatthe product will be the first V.4 on the market to follow USL's publishedmodel and, unlike the competition, Interactive will not modify the baseproduct.    He added that unlike such products as Microport's and UHC's V.4implementations, Interactive's release will be based on V.4 Version 3, thelatest of USL's source code releases. Version 3 offers reliabilityenhancements and a new installation program that make it easier for V.4 tobe installed on Intel-based systems. The base system will include the OpenLook GUI, X11R4 and full documentation, Peck said.    Interactive also expects to add additional enhancements to the productby the end of 1991. Most notably, ``what you can expect to see in ourfourth quarter release is iBCS2 compatibility, our version of PortableNetWare for V.4 and a V.4-oriented DOS simulator,'' Peck said. IBSC2compatibility will allow applications to be portable over SCO Unix andInteractive Unix environments.    The next release of Interactive V.4 should also include USL'smultiprocessing extensions, Interactive said.    Peck said he expects more than 500 people to attend the developers'conference. The conference will feature 84 speakers, 50 technical sessionsand product demonstrations by approximately 30 vendors. Kodak will also beshowcasing a photo finisher workstation running V.4.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Upgraded HP/UX Debuts    Palo Alto-Hewlett-Packard has brought out a new release of the HP/UXoperating system, tailored specifically for its new low-end HP Apollo 9000Series 7000 workstations, but also compatible with the Series 300 and 400workstations and Series 800 business servers.    The new HP/UX 8.0 includes enhancements such as Instant Ignition, apre-loaded and preconfigured system that includes the X-Window System,OSF/Motif, HP Visual User Environment 2.01, and System AdministrationManager, a menu-driven system-administration utility.    ``What Instant Ignition basically is, is all the most popular things acustomer would buy preinstalled on a disk such that the customer plugs thesystem in and up it comes. It includes the operating system, X-Windows andMotif,'' said Chris Van Woerken, HP/UX product manager. ``Literally, it'sa matter of plugging in your machine and hitting the power switch,'' hesaid.    The operating system conforms to SVID2, XPG3, POSIX 1003.1, FIPS 151-1and Network Computing System and NFS communication protocols.    Although Van Woerken claims the system is based on V.3, HP/UX 8.0 doesnot have Streams, the networking protocol included in AT&T's Unix SystemV.3. ``We are starting to get some input for Streams and are starting toconsider it in our future plans,'' he said. He added that although thecurrent product has a full set of ``Berkeley-isms, there aren't as many asall of our customers would like. We are remedying that on an ongoingbasis.'' He said that Berkeley MAP libraries are something that HP willadd in future releases of the product.    HP will also make the full set of OSI protocols available to users asa separate package, and will make the full set of operating systemdocumentation for the new operating system available on a CD-ROM formatfor $695.    In line with the company's hopes of making its systems easier to usefor the end user, Hewlett-Packard's new System Administration Manager alsohelps system administrators with such tasks as adding users, configuringthe system with diskless clusters and setting up different system backupmechanisms.    ``We spent a lot of time to make life easier for the user and haveadded all the latest standards that exist in this point in time,'' VanWoerken said.    HP also plans to run native OSF/1 on the system 7000 line by the endof the year and plans to make OSF/1 and HP/UX 8.0 application-compatiblein that time frame.    The new product also has additional tools, including HP SwitchOver/UX, a feature that switches jobs to a standby processor when there isa system failure, and a version of the Korn shell that allows users tonavigate HP/UX systems interactively.    Hewlett-Packard is at 303-229-2255.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Tracking Adverse Drug ReactionsBy  LEE BRUNO    Stamford, Conn.-Clinical Information Services has unveiled aUnix-based information system for pharmaceutical companies that can managedata about adverse reactions to drugs and produce reports required byhealth authorities.    The product, called the Adverse-Reaction Information System (ARIS),runs on Apollo and Sun workstations and provides users with a tool forvalidating and analyzing data about adverse drug reactions. The datacollected can then be used to produce reports in different languages forworldwide health authorities such as the World Health Organization andregulatory agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration, CISofficials said.    CIS said pharmaceutical companies are required to submit data onadverse reactions to drugs to governmental regulatory bodies that overseedrug safety. Typically, the company said, these reports have to besubmitted within a few days of any new reports of an adverse reaction.    CIS said some of the types of reports ARIS can produce include formsthat can be submitted to regulatory bodies such as France's CommissionNationale De Pharmacovigilance, the Italian Ministry of Health andEngland's Committee on the Safety of Medicines.        CIS said the system is capable of providing the necessaryinformation for a Drug Experience Report, used for recording drugs' sideeffects and adverse reactions. The product is able to extract thenecessary data from the report and import it into a letter for regulatoryagencies.    One of the key advantages of the system is that a small or largepharmaceutical company can use the product to track all adverse drugreactions worldwide, CIS said.    Arthur Allen, sales manager at CIS, said ARIS can also be used as atool for archiving information about drugs and adverse reactions. The ARISsystem operates in a distributed environment so that drug information fromboth clinical studies and post-marketing studies can be pooled forevaluation, CIS officials said.    The ARIS system supports data entry with defined code lists thatpinpoint the country where an adverse reaction was reported. In addition,a user can access various types of data groups, such as patient anddisease data, through a menu option window. Also, the system has a set ofstandard dictionaries in multiple languages for diseases, drugs andadverse reactions. These dictionaries and languages can be selected duringdata entry and report generation.    The system is able to link multiple processors and printers at remotesites over communication networks including Ethernet, wide-area networksand leased lines, CIS officials said. The system is based on Oracle'sdatabase and allows a user to customize the data structure and screenformats.    The ARIS system runs on Unix-based Apollo and Sun workstations and iswritten in the C programming language. A basic configuration of the systemrunning on a Sun workstation costs $68,000 and includes phone support andtraining. The basic license allows the user to run as many terminals offthe main workstation as desired. However, each additional remote nodeconnected to the main workstation by a communication link costs $16,000.    For more information, call CIS at 203-964-8317.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 19913-D Tool Blends Voxels, GeometryBy LEE BRUNO    Fairfield, Iowa-Vital Images has unveiled a Unix-based interactivevolume-rendering software system that allows engineers and scientists toembed traditional geometricgraphics such as lines into a volume of 3-Ddata.    The company said the new product, called VoxelView/Ultra, increasesthe rendering speed and efficiency and allows a user to comine bothvoxels-a three-dimensional pixel&HYPHand geometry into one image. In thepast, a user would have to choose between these two visualization methods.    The product runs on Silicon Graphics' IRIS Powervision family ofworkstations.    Vital Images said it developed the product because its customers havebeen asking for a way of melding geometric graphics and volume renderingwithout giving up the inherent benefits of each method. For example, anengineer evaluating oil and gas fields can combine seismic data and datagathered from the well into the same image to help determine where thelikely regions of oil deposits may reside.    Bill Van Zandt, director of research and development at Vital Images,said VoxelView/Ultra will provide both scientists and engineers with a newtool for visualizing data.    ``It will be a way of summarizing data and helping to quantify furtherby enabling scientists and engineers to make concrete measurements,'' VanZandt said, referring to the VoxelView/Ultra product. ``Now, in a fewseconds they can see an entire rendered volume that they could have takenmonths to look at in 2-D slides and paper,'' he said.    Vital Images said the previous version of VoxelView Plus rendered 4million voxels per second on a four-CPU SGI GTX workstation. The newproduct, running on a single CPU IRIS/4D-310 VGX workstation, canvolume-render data at a rate of 18 million voxels per second. The productis also capable of volume-rendering photo-realistic images with shading,variable transparency and anti-aliasing at about 10 million voxels persecond.    One of the areas in which the company said it expects the product tobe used is in planning radiation treatment, in which a doctor can use thevolume data to help target the radiation beams at tumors. Doctors may alsouse the system for checking that a bone implant will fit the body socketit was designed for.    Simultaneously, the company also debuted its development environmentsoftware, called VoxelView 2.0, which the VoxelView/Ultra product runsunder. A component of the VoxelView product is a rendering ``engine'' thattakes voxel volume and rendering parameters and produces an image ofvolume rendered.    Vital Images said the VoxelView/Ultra product costs $40,000 for aversion that runs on SGI's IRIS/4D VGX Powervision computer. A version ofthe VoxelView/E for SGI's Personal IRIS workstations costs $20,000, whilea Voxel/View/Plus 2.0 for SGI's IRIS/4D GT and GTX workstations costs$30,000.  All of the products will ship this June.    For further information, call 515-472-7726.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Four RDBMS Gateways Bow    Burlington, Mass.-SQL Solutions has introduced four models of itsGateway, a product that lets users access and manipulate data stored inOracle, Rdb, Ingres and Informix relational database management systems asif the data were stored in a Sybase SQL Server environment.    The Gateway can help users migrate from those RDBMSes to Sybase whilepreserving their data investments, said Dan Cronin, SQL Solutions' vicepresident of marketing. The Gateway also allows any third-party front-endtool to be used on any of those four back-end databases, by means of theSybase SQL Client, an application programming interface (API).    A separate Gateway is required to access each of the four RDBMSes forwhich the product is available. With multiple gateways, several RDBMSescan be accessed concurrently.    The Gateways for Unix platforms sll for between $5,000 and $14,000,depending on the size of the machine, and are available for Ultrix andSunOS. SQL Solutions can be reached at 617-270-4150.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991SOFTWARE   Product: Pixel!SCAN.    Company: Mentalix.    Location: Plano, Texas.    Telephone: 214-423HYPH;9377.    Contact: John Carnegie    Price and Availability: $695; immediate.    Profile: An image-scanning and manipulation product that runs onHewlett-Packard/ Apollo Series 3500, 4500 and Series 9000/400 workstationsand Sun Microsystems SPARCstation 1, 2 and IPC. Mentalix said the productsupports 24-bit true color and allows a user to adjust the brightness andcontrast of an image as well as smooth, sharpen or shadow the image. Theprogram provides TIFF input/outut, editing functions, image transformfunctions and image operations.    Location: 1700 Alma, Suite 110, Plano, Texas  75075    Product: Advanced Terminal Architecture software driver.    Company: Stallion Technologies.    Location: Los Gatos, Calif.    Telephone: 615-333-6095.    Price and Availability: Free for users of Brumby and ONboardIntelligent Multiport boards; immediate.    Profile: The new driver, dubbed Advanced Terminal Architecture Version3.0, uses a series of menu-accessed screens to provide information onboard and port configurations, communication monitoring and hardwarediagnostics. Additional features include real-life graphical presentationsof actual hardware components. The screens include on-line help, coveringall the issues involved in cabling and configuring devices. When a valuemust be entered, a pop-up window is available with all possible optionslisted. The ATA release 3.0 will allow system integrators to easilyinstall identical configurtions with a built-in customizing utility. Theutility will allow the integrator to ``snapshot'' an installation and copyto a diskette, eliminating the time required to duplicate multipleinstallations. ATA Release 3.0 will be available at no additional costwith Brumby and ONboard Stallion Intelligent multiport boards purchasedafter March 1, 1991. The product will run on SCO Xenix V/386, SCO UnixV/386, Interactive Unix Release 3.2 and AT&T V.4 and V.3.2.    Location: 983-B University Avenue, Ste. 104, Los Gatos, California,95030.    Product: TP-IX Unix/68K for the Motorola 68040 processor.    Company: Tadpole Technology.    Location: Austin, Texas.    Telephone: 512-338-4221.    Price and Availability: Binary prices begin at $500 for an authorizedcopier version, $640 for the distributor version; immediate. Profile: Theproduct is an optimized version of AT&T's System V.3.2 operating systemthat is now available for Tadpole's 68040-based single board computingengines, the TP40V and the TP41V. The operating system supports 68040instruction cache and copy-back data cache and also includes compilersupport for 68040 optimized instructions. Also included in the product isassembler support for 68040 block move instruction. and library andexception handler support for 68882 floating-point emulation. Performanceis as much as four times that of products running the 68030-basedTP-IX/68K. Options include TCP/IP and NFS networking extensions and X11R4support.    Product: APLoPlus II for Unix.    Company: STST.    Location: Rockville, Md.    Telephone: 301-984-5385.    Price and Availability: $2,500 for single user; immediate.    Profile: A mathematically oriented programming language especiallywell-suited to creating complex financial and actuarial applications.Formerly available only for DOS, the product is now available for Sun-4and SPARC machines running SunOS, IBM RS/6000 running AIX, and DECmachines running Ultrix.    CONTACT: Ed Beemer, 301/984-5385    Product: XVision 3.2.    Company: Spectragraphics.    Location: San Diego.    Telephone: 619-450-0611.    Contact: Steven Woodward    Price and Availability: $449; immediate.    Profile: The terminal emulator software package allows users to accessUnix-based X-Window System applications on their PCs. XVision features256-color display capability as well as full NFS functionality withsupport for Beame & Whiteside. The product supports FTP PC/TCP, ExcelanLAN Workplace and Sun PC-NFS, Spectragraphics said. Included in thepackage are X terminal emulation software, network software,high-resolution graphics card, network card and installation guides.    Location:  9707 Waples Street, San Diego, Calif. 92121    Contact: Terry RhoadsBack to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991HARDWARE    Product: Mitac 4270E.    Company: American Mitac.    Location: San Jose.    Telephone: 408-432-1160 or 800-648-2287.    Price and Availability: $2,995;    immediate.    Profile: A workstation based on Intel's 20-MHz 80486SX chip andfeaturing 1 Mbyte of RAM, a 5.25-inch floppy disk drive and MS-DOS 4.01.The workstation can support up to 64 Mbytes of on-board memory, 1-Mbyte or4-Mbyte SIMMs, one parallel and two serial ports, four EISA slots and avideo controller supporting 16-color and 1,024-by-768 screen resolution.The product runs Interactive 2.2 Unix and Santa Cruz Operation 3.2 Unix.    Location:  410 East Plumeria Drive, San Jose, Calif.  95134    Product: NETstor Server 3010.    Company: Zetaco.    Location: Burnsville, Minn.    Telephone: 612-890-5135.    Price and Availability: $90,000 for minimum configuration; immediate.    Profile: A Unix network fileserver that combines 5.3 gigabytes of10.5-millisecond access time magnetic storage with 38 gigabytes of 5- to11-second access time optical storage. The product is shipped with customsoftware that automatically moves less-frequently-accessed files tooptical storage. It includes two VME slots for peripherals. The 3010 fillsa gap between Zetaco's larger server, selling for about $150,000, and itssmaller unit, selling for about $65,000. All three combine magnetic andoptical storage.    CONTACT: Julie Stevens, 612/890-5135    Mailing address: Bravo Communications Inc., 1310 Tully Rd. Suite 107,San Jose, CA 95122.    Editorial Contact: Robert J. Fisher, (714)852-1313.    Fisher promised to FedEx a color transparency or slide to me, forTuesday, April 30 arrival.    Product&COLO; Universal Serial Line Extender Model 2042E.    Company: Bravo Communications.    Location: San Jose.    Telephone: 800-366-0297.    Price and Availability: $149, immediate.    Profile: Bravo claims a single extender will allow computers to sendand receive signals over serial lines for distances of up to a mile.Linking extenders will allow users to connect for distances up to 10miles. The extender regenerates 25 RS232/V.24 signals and runs at speedsof up to 40 Kbps. The unit measures 1 inch by 3 inches by 4 3/4 inches. Ithas six built-in connectors. All 25 RS232/V.24 signals are supported onthe DB25 connectors. Pins 2 through 8 and pin 20 are supported on the RJ45and terminal block connectors, allowing users to mix all common serialcable types. The extender can be used as a port expansion or peripheralsharing device by putting connected equipment on-line or off-line asneeded. The unit supports synchronous/asynchronous communications,hardware and software handshakes, simplex, half- and full-duplex modes andall serial arameter settings. It has dual Null Modem switches, one foreach port; that let the so users can install any cmbination mix of modems,computers, plotters, printers and terminals for DTE/DCE compatibilitymatching. The unit also has an 8-element, redHYPH;gree LED sttus display.The extender is fully shielded and includes surge protection againstunder- and over-voltages.It is FCC Class B, UL and CSA approved.    Product: Sybase Net-Gateway available for Sun workstations and IBMRS/6000.    Company: Sybase.    Location: Emeryville, Calif.    Telephone: 415-596-3500.    Price and Availability: $1,260 to $64,800, depending on the power ofthe gateway machine; second quarter.    Profile: A network gateway that controls and monitors communicationbetween networks and IBM MVS mainframes. Formerly available only for theIBM RT workstation running AIX.    CONTACT: Simone Otus, 415/546-8080    That last sentence is in there because the product brief left theimpression that there was a battery in the unit....CORRECTION-The telephone number for Tripp Lite, maker of the OMNI-750 LANpower backup system, is 312-329-1777. That number was given incorrectly inthe April 29 issue of UNIX Today! The OMNI-750 LAN is designed to keepsystems up and running in the event of a brownout without using a battery,thus conserving battery power in case the brownout becomes a fullblackout.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Spotlight On Serial X Terminals -- GraphOn, NCD Machines Offer SpecialProtocols, Neatly Fill The X Serial VoidBy  JASON LEVITT    Back in the '70s, when American Motors and disco ruled the Earth andthe acronym GUI was never heard, companies invested millions in ASCIIterminal technology because it was cheap, standard and vendor-independent.Today, many of the same companies are contemplating replacement of thoseASCII terminals with X terminals. X technology is also cheap, standard andvendor-independent, and has the added attraction of an advanced    GUI and considerable flexibility. Most companies that  are switchingwill replace their RS232 serial connections with Ethernet, but RS232 willstill make sense in some situations such as modem connections and inlocations where it is too expensive or logistically difficult to layEthernet.     In these cases, why not run X over existing serial lines? This is agood idea, and nearly every X-terminal and workstation vendor supportsSL/IP (Serial Line Internet Protocol), the de facto standard for suchserial connections. However, SL/IP has a number of deficiencies, such aslack of data compression and robust error detection, that make it lessthan adequate for X-    Window use. Point to Point Protocol (PPP) is a better solution, but itwill be a while before implementations are widely available.     Filling the X serial void are two companies, GraphOn and NCD, whohavedeveloped their own serial protocols designed specifically for running X overserial connections. NCD's protocol, XRemote, runs only on NCD X terminalsequipped with special XRemote PROMs. GraphOn has no special name for itsprotocol, which is built in to the GraphOn X terminal firmware. (We willjust call it the GraphOn protocol.)     The primary customers for these protocols are individuals andcompanies involved in remote computing over phone lines using modems, and,to a lesser extent, those interested in running X over inexpensive andconvenient direct RS232 serial connections.X BY DESIGN     As Fig. 1 shows, GraphOn and NCD tackle the serial problem indifferent ways with different degrees of success.     The GraphOn approach splits the X server between host and X terminal.The device-independent (dix) portion of the X server, which handles thebulk of X-Window server functionality, runs on the host, where it can takeadvantage of virtual memory, higher I/O throughput and raw CPU power. Thedevice-dependent layer (ddx), the part that vendors must port to theirmonitor, CPU, mouse and keyboard specifications, is split between the Xterminal and the host.     With the bulk of the server on the host, GraphOn can be veryintelligent about what it sends down the wire to the X terminal. Manyscreen events that would normally generate a flurry of packet activitybetween a typical X terminal and host generate little or no activity withGraphOn. Error correction and compression ensures that any trafficgenerated moves quickly and safely. GraphOn uses a sliding-window protocolwith 14-bit checksum and Lempel-Ziv compression. It can operate over 7-bitand 8-bit data paths.     Because the GraphOn can use host resources to store pixmaps, fontsand other server data, very little RAM is required inside the X terminal;consequently, the GraphOn 19 comes with 1 Mbyte of RAM standard. There areno upgrades available; according to GraphOn, none are needed. Having ahost-resident server means that the X application can use the host'svirtual memory instead of being limited to the amount of physical RAM inthe X terminal as is NCD.     NCD takes a rather conventional approach to the problem by basicallyreplacing the TCP/IP protocol normally used to transport X protocolpackets with their own custom protocol stack, called XRemote. XRemote usesa sliding-window protocol with 16-bit CRC error correction and aproprietary compression technique to transfer X protocol packets over theserial line to and from the X server. Unlike GraphOn, XRemote cannot use a7-bit data path. This will be a disadvantage if your serial lines supportonly 7 bits, which is sometimes true of older installations.     Unlike GraphOn, NCD makes no attempt to alter the basic logic of theMIT X server; X clients communicate with the XRemote daemon running on thehost, which exchanges X protocol packets with the X server running on theterminal. The lower layer of the XRemote protocol is similar to theemerging PPP standard, which indicates that NCD may ultimately supportPPP. PPP is a serial protocol that is expected to replace SL/IP.     A SL/IP connection, which has no compression and poor errorcorrection, is illustrated in the first part of Fig. 1. (For more detailsabout SL/IP and PPP, see ``Two Protocols Worth Observing,'' in the Jan. 7,1991, issue of UNIX Today!)     In order to get a ``feel'' for the relative speed of XRemote andSL/IP, Table 1 displays some comparative benchmark results. As you cansee, 9,600-bps SL/IP runs at about 1/10 to 1/20 the speed of Ethernet,while direct 9,600 bps XRemote runs about 5 times faster than SL/IP. Thiscontradicts NCD's XRemote documentation which claims that it is 10 timesfaster than SL/IP.SETTING THINGS UP         Thanks to thoughtful software engineering from both NCD andGraphOn, setting up serial X connections is quite easy. In the UNIX Today!lab, equipped with a SPARCstation 1 (SS1) host on loan from Apex    Computers of Redmond, Wash., a GraphOn 21 X terminal and an NCD19 Xterminal, connections were established using both direct serial cables and9696 V.32 modems from FastComm of Reston, Va.     The first step is to load the appropriate software tape onto yourhost system. NCD and GraphOn sell tapes for popular Unix systems. Both theNCD and GraphOn tapes contain binaries, fonts, start-up files and toolsfor use with the XRemote and GraphOn protocols. The latest beta NCDversion, which was not tested, includes a terminal-resident,Motif-compatible window manager that should prove popular.     Firing up the X terminals is simply a matter of switching them on,because the protocols are supported entirely from internal firmware. Ifyou already own an NCD X terminal with the standard server PROMs, you willhave to replace them with the XRemote server PROMs. The NCD PROMs areconveniently accessible through a small slot on the back of the CPU box.Swapping them out takes 30 minutes or so.     Establishing a connection between the X terminal and host is done viaa built-in terminal emulator that each terminal supports. If theconnection is direct, you immediately see a login prompt on your Xterminal. If you are using a modem, you use the usual Hayes commands todial the modem attached to the host. Once logged in, you simply typexinitremote for XRemote or startxgo -pl 3 for GraphOn, and the X serverconnection is automatically established.    At a minimum, a single xterm client is launched. To exit the X serverconnection and return to the terminal emulator screen, you exit all Xclients.    The display name for both GraphOn and XRemote is testbed:1.0, wheretestbed is the name of the SPARCstation host. When running the XRemote andGraphOn protocols over serial lines, the X terminals logically exist asextra displays attached to the host rather than separate nodes on thenetwork.    If you are establishing a modem connection, it is important to use afull-duplex modem. NCD recommends the FastComm modems, which support therecent V.32 full-duplex standard. Half-duplex modems, like the TelebitTrailblazer Plus using their PEP mode, are fine for file transfers wheremost of the data traffic flows in one direction at a time, but interactivesessions require that data flow in both directions simultaneously for bestresults.     The newer Telebit T2500 or T1600 provide V.32 in addition to PEP.Most V.32 modems optionally provide hardware data compression and errorcorrection, but these must be disabled when using XRemote or GraphOnbecause data compression and error correction are provided by theprotocols. Using these modem options actually slows throughput becausethey provide no additional functionality, yet require compute time.FLEXIBILITY AND PACKAGING         Both the NCD and GraphOn X terminals have unusual cabinet designsas X terminals go. The GraphOn 21 is an ``all-in-one'' unit with the usualpizza box electronics stuffed inside the back of the monitor. Thisactually makes it the most compact 21-inch monitor I've ever seen. TheNCD19 has a bracket for attaching the monitor to the base unit, thusturning it into a single unit as well. Both machines have thick and thinEthernet ports and a serial port. The serial ports on the NCD and GraphOnare configurable up to 38,400 and 57,600 bps, respectively. (For moregeneral software and hardware details, see ``X Terminals: The Ratings AreIn,'' in the April 1, 1991, issue of UNIX Today!)     With the XRemote PROMs installed, the NCD19 can run the XRemoteprotocol over the serial port or over Ethernet. If you want to use the NCDwith TCP/IP and X protocol over Ethernet, you can download the NCD Xserver into it from the host, provided you purchase the regular(non-XRemote) boot tape and load it on the host.    The GraphOn runs GraphOn protocol over its serial port or Ethernet,but GraphOn does not offer a version that sends X-Window protocol over thewire.     The ability to use the NCD as both a standard Ethernet-based Xterminal and XRemote serial X terminal is a big plus for those needingconnectivity in both environments.PRICE     Ask anyone why they purchased an X terminal, and they will probablymention the price. X terminals are inexpensive and are rapidly becomingcheaper. Their low cost per seat has been a major influence on theirmarket acceptance. A quick price accounting gives GraphOn a definite edge.     A complete low-end monochrome NCD XRemote package comes to $3,045(NCD15b with 5 Mbytes, $2,245, plus XRemote PROMs, $300, plus Sun boottape, $500), while the low-end GraphOn, which has no Ethernet capability,comes in at $1,390 (GraphOn 14, $995, plus Sun boot tape, $395). Both boottapes include site-wide licenses, so you pay for the tape only once.     For the tested high-end monochrome systems, the price disparity iseven greater. The NCD19 comes in at $5,300 (NCD19 with 8 Mbytes of RAM,$4,400, plus XRemote PROMs, $400, plus Sun boot tape, $500), while theGraphOn 21 is $2,390 (GraphOn 21, $1,995, plus Sun boot tape, $395). It isimportant to note that the prices on the NCD terminals can be cut byhundreds of dollars if third-party memory SIMMs are purchased.PHILOSOPHY OF PERFORMANCE     The NCD19 ran two to three times faster than the GraphOn 21 overEthernet, which comes as no surprise to anyone. The NCD has excellentserver software that speaks native X-Window protocol encapsulated byTCP/IP. The GraphOn 21 has Ethernet connectors and can run over Ethernet,but the packets contain GraphOn protocol, which is designed for efficiencyover serial links, not Ethernet.     Over serial links, however, the NCD and GraphOn are comparablesystems. Table 2 is a range chart with a logarithmic scale showing theratios of GraphOn 9,600-bps and XRemote 9,600-bps results compared to anNCD19 SL/IP connection at 9,600 bps. The results are for direct 9,600-bpsserial connections.     Each box shows the full range of ratios for the given category oftests from the x11perf benchmark suite. The bold line within each box isthe geometric mean of all the ratios represented by the box. The purposeof each box is to show how performance varies within each category oftests.    In the General Graphics category, the GraphOn results ranged from 0.01of SL/IP performance to 2.0 times the speed of SL/IP, while the geometricmean of all the results, the bold line, places the overall score at about0.2 of SL/IP. The information is incomplete because the box does not tellyou which tests score low and which score high.    GraphOn tends to do quite well on common X drawing operations such asthin lines, dots, and rectangles, but worse on less common graphics suchas filled ellipses. The GraphOn has only a small number of drawingprimitives in its terminal firmware, so it has to send many drawingrequests from the host to complete complex graphics. Because NCD's XRemoteis sending X-Window packets, it sends only a few drawing requests to its Xterminal server, and then all the drawing and computation take place inthe terminal.    The GraphOn performs admirably, however, in terminal emulation, windowmanagement and X-specific operations. GraphOn's slim procotol and splitserver personality allow better than or equal performance on common Xfunctionality.     Although the results here are for direct 9,600-bps connections, modemconnections at 9,600 bps should be similar though somewhat slower becauseof modulation/demodulation and the occasional noisy packet that has to beretransmitted.     While the GraphOn does well in these benchmarks, the mostlyhost-resident X server steals CPU cycles from the host. For each GraphOnterminal attached, another X server process is created on the host. Thoughthe NCD X server runs in the X terminal, the XRemote daemon runs on thehost, and each NCD X terminal attached to the host requires its ownXRemote daemon process. So what percentage of CPU and memory do theXRemote and GraphOn processes require?     To get a rough idea, I used a 9,600-bps direct serial connection andran three copies of the X demo program ico that displays a rotatingisosahedron. This keeps a continuous stream of packets on the wire. I thenran the command ps -au every four seconds and grep'ed on the XRemote orGraphOn process. For the NCD19, the XRemote process required about 3percent CPU and 3 percent system RAM. For the GraphOn, it was 7 percentCPU and 6.5 percent RAM. These results suggest that the GraphOn requiresabout twice the host resources as XRemote.     On the purely subjective side of things, I ran several common Xapplications such as bitmap and muncher as well as a full-blown commercialapplication, Asterix, a spreadsheet, word processor and data managementtool from Applix (508-870-0300).    The most noticeable effect of running several applicationssimultaneously was that the GraphOn handled obscured windows better thanXRemote, because GraphOn was more intelligent about screen updating.    For those wondering about window manager compatibility, I successfullyran the Motif 1.03 and OpenWindows 2.0 window managers on both systems.They also claim to support the DECwindows manager.    Complete benchmark results can be obtained on the machine uunet.uu.net(UUNET Communications Services, Falls Church, Va.) in the/unix-today/benchmarks directory. The file 51391.bench.tar.Z contains theraw data that was processed using the shell script x11perfcompDR.A WORD ABOUT 2,400     The benchmark tests were run at 9,600 bps, but what about 2,400 bps?Can it be done? The answer is no and sort of. Running SL/IP at 2,400 bpsis out of the question. XRemote at 2,400 bps was barely usable, but wasbearable with no window manager running and only two or three xtermwindows. As you might expect, the GraphOn makes a great terminalmultiplexor and does surprisingly well, though not spectacularly, at 2,400bps. Continual screen output to one xterm window tended to lock things upa bit, but was nonetheless usable.CONCLUSIONS    For someone who is serious about dedicated serial connections, theGraphOn is a good pick. Its extremely low-cost, host-based XR3 server andresponsive serial performance make it an excellent choice.   However, if you ever intend to use your terminal with Ethernet, theGraphOn will probably disappoint, as it is quite slow and awkward comparedto other Ethernet-connected X terminals. The GraphOn makes the most sensewhen used exclusively for serial communications.   If flexibility and future options are an issue, the NCD has the abilityto run well over serial lines using either its XR4-based XRemote or SL/IPand, when attached to Ethernet, is among the most robust andhighest-performing monochrome X terminals available.    The UNIX Today! Labs are distributed among New York, Maryland andTexas. Technical free-lancers also test products in their labs to ourspecifications.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991A Look At The Mips R4000 Chip -- Why Mips Selected The Simplicity OfSuperpipelining Over A Superscalar DesignBy  ROBERT B. K. DEWAR AND MATTHEW SMOSNA    In one of the earlier articles of this series, we described how RISCarchitects are attempting to break the one-instruction-per-cycle-barrierthrough the use of either superscalar designs or superpipelining. Of allthe major players in the RISC wars, only Mips developed an architecturebased on the superpipelined approach. In this article, we will take a lookat that architecture and try to explain why Mips chose superpipeliningover a superscalar approach.     The R4000 is not only technically interesting, it recently made thefront page of the business section in papers all over the country when itwas chosen as the RISC processor for the newly created Advanced ComputingEnvironment (ACE), a project including several top software and hardwarecompanies including Microsoft, SCO, Compaq, DEC as well as Mips (seefront-page article in UNIX Today!, April 15, 1991). The ACE companiesannounced that the Mips R4000 is planned as the main RISC hardwareplatform for SCO's Unix and Microsoft's OS/2. Notably absent from the listof companies supporting ACE are other major suppliers of workstationsincluding HP, Sun and IBM. An interesting contest is shaping up here.THE MIPS R4000 SUPERPIPELINE     The Mips R4000 Superpipeline builds on the earlier Mips R3000 chip.Instead of a simple 5-cycle pipeline, the R4000 uses an 8-stage pipeline.Notice that two stages are executed in each external clock cycle(internally the chip subdivides the clock signal, to give an internalspeed twice that of the external clock). The eight stages of the pipelineare:     IF: Instruction fetch, during which the first of two instructions tobe fetched into the pipeline is loaded from the instruction cache.     IS: The second half of the instruction fetch cycle (this overlaps thefollowing IF phase, i.e., the fetch of the second instruction).     RF: Register fetch, during which operands in    Robert B. K. Dewar is professor of computer science and Matthew Smosnais computer systems manager at the Courant Institute of NYU. They are theauthors of Microprocessors, A Programmer's View, published by McGraw-Hill.    registers are fetched.     EX: Execute (the operation is performed).     DF: Data fetch, during which a memory reference results in the databeing loaded (we hope) from the data cache.     DS: The second half of the data-cache cycle, which overlaps thesubsequent DF phase (i.e., the second instruction's data cache load occurshere).     TC: Tag check, during which an addressing translation tag or TLB(Translation Lookaside Buffer) check is made.     WB: Write back, during which the result is written back to theregister file or memory.     Keep in mind that these stages sometimes have different functionsdepending on the instruction that is being executed (for example, aninteger arithmetic instruction will not use the DF and DS stages, as suchinstructions can only have their operands in registers-there are noreferences to the data cache).     A very interesting aspect of the R4000 pipeline is the lack ofrestrictions on the instructions entering the pipeline. Somesuperpipelined processors require the instruction mix to be balanced(certain types of instructions must enter the pipeline at certain times inorder for the processor to work-the Intel i860, for example). Otherprocessors, such as the IBM RS/6000, do not require any specific mix, butdo have better performance when the mix it right.     A superpipelined approach in which two instructions are processed oneach external clock basically performs similarly to a superscalar designwith two separate instruction streams processed in parallel. Comparing theR4000 to the IBM RS/6000, we might still expect that the IBM processorhave an advantage in that it can issue up to four instructions at once.     However, Mips claims that in practice this potential advantage isseldom exploited, and that there will not be a significant performancedifference. Looking at the performance of the RS/6000, we typically seeinstruction rates that do not exceed two instructions per clock except inspecialized situations, so this may be a fair overall judgment-of course,we will have to wait for the first R4000-based machines to be sure.    Mips claims that the advantage to its superpipelined approach isbasically a much simpler hardware design than the correspondingsuperscalar design. If it is really true that there is no substantialperformance difference, then this simplicity is an advantage that maytranslate into higher clock rates and cheaper fabrication. Again, we willhave to wait to see whether this theoretical advantage materializes inpractice.THE INTEGER UNIT     Although the Mips R4000 distinguishes itself in the use ofsuperpipelining, it is also one of the first processors to be implementedas a full 64-bit architecture. The IU registers are 64 bits wide, and thedata paths to the cache are also 64 bits wide. While the R3000 had integeroperations of 8, 16 and 32 bits, the R4000 extends these to full 64-bitoperations while maintaining object code compatibility with the R3000.These computational instructions are performed in registers, with only twoaddressing modes supported: All operands in registers or one of theoperands being a 16-bit immediate value. The instruction set includesloads and stores that can be done 8, 16, 32 or 64 bits at a time (theymust be aligned), and like other RISC architectures, loads and stores arethe only instructions that can access memory.    In an interesting change of emphasis, the R4000 uses interlocks, thatis, the instruction that immediately follows a load may use the contentsof the register that is being loaded. The Mips R3000, and earlier chipsproduced by MIPS, distinguished themselves by not using interlocks. Infact, the acronym Mips originally stood for Microprocessor withoutInterlocking Pipeline Stages, but now Mips is just a company name thatdoesn't stand for anything but itself.     The integer instruction set is very basic. In the Mips design, RISCturns out to mean a small set of instructions as well as a simplifieddesign for instructions. As we have seen on other RISC chips, such as theHP precision, it is not necessarily the case that RISC implies smallinstruction sets, but the MIPS design takes a minimal view-you won't finddecimal arithmetic, fancy shifts or string instructions on this processor!One small point is that the integer operations have an option to trapautomatically on overflow-a feature that is very useful if you need tocheck overflow. (This is required in Ada compilers.) The instruction setalso does include an integer multiply and divide.FLOATING-POINT UNIT     The floating-point unit is implemented on-chip (on the R3000,floating point was implemented on a separate chip, the R3010). It isIEEE-compatible, with Mips claiming a 25 percent improvement inperformance over the R3010. Until we see benchmarks, it is hard to predictexactly how fast it will be-it will probably not quite measure up to thetop performance level of the RS/6000, but this depends on what clockspeeds can be achieved.     The register set of the FPU is configurable as either 16 64-bitregisters or as 32 32-bit registers. Because of the 64-bit wide data path,loads and stores to these registers can be done in a single cycle (unlikethe 2 cycles required for double-precision floating-point on earlier Mipsdesigns).     Fully precise floating-point interrupts are implemented on the R4000.As we discussed in the last article on the HP PA-RISC architecture, thisallows for user-defined trap routines as suggested by the IEEE standard bypre-examining any operands that might result in an overflow. This is avery important feature if overflow trapping is required-by contrast, theRS/6000 can achieve automatic trapping only by disconnecting thefloating-point pipeline, with a huge execution penalty as a result.THE SYSTEM COPROCESSOR     The system coprocessor of the R4000 implements the virtual memory, aTLB, cache management, exception handling and I/O. It contains its owninternal set of registers for control of these system features.     The R4000 is able to operate in three modes: a user mode thatprovides a flat virtual address space to the user, a kernel mode with fourvirtual address spaces and a supervisor mode with two regions. Again, herethe architecture is a full 64-bit architecture, with all virtual addressesallowing access to the full addressing space (although, for instance, theuser mode gives a user access to only half of the space, the other halfbeing reserved for the system).     The effectiveness of the cache is critical to any RISC machine, butthe designers of the R4000 have placed a particular emphasis on itsimplementation.    Both the instruction and the data caches have their own 64-bit datapaths, and both can be accessed independently in a single cycle. Initialversions of the R4000 will have only 8k bytes of on-chip instruction anddata cache each, but it is clearly the intent here to increase this amountlater. An external secondary cache of up to 4 Mbytes can be added whenrequired by the system architecture.     The instruction cache is virtually indexed and physically tagged. Asa result, while instruction lookup is being done in the instruction cache,virtual address translation is done simultaneously just in case a cachemiss occurs.    The data cache is direct-mapped write-back cache with a line size thatcan be configured as four or eight words. A ``store buffer'' allows theR4000 to do two stores to slow memory on each cycle.     The Mips R4000 clearly derives much of its design from the earlierR3000, but incorporates a significant new design: the superpipeline. Inaddition, the FPU has been brought onboard the chip, and the cache designhas been enhanced.    But the use of superpipelined design is what distinguishes theMips-its use differentiates it from other RISC processors. The questionis, has MIPS staked out a claim that will result in beating the other RISCdesigns (including the processors that use a superscalar approach, andalso the HP precision architecture, which uses a The floating-point unitis implemented on the chip.    conventional approach but a very fast clock?) As usual, we won'treally be able to find out the answer to this question until we getsilicon in our hands and can actually run the benchmarks.     Another critical issue is the importance of making the jump to a true64-bit architecture. Right now, 32-bit integers and a 4-gigabyte addressspace satisfy most users. Mips is betting that these limitations willstart to hurt soon. The history of computing has been full of statementslike ``No one could possibly need more than `X' memory.'' The first suchstatement is attributed to Van Neuman with X = 4k bytes! Are the otherRISC manufacturers who say that no one could need more than 4 gigabytesmaking the same historic mistake? Mips thinks they are, and if they areright, getting there first to the true 64-bit address space could be awinning move.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Analyzing Program Performance -- Key Tools To Help You Size Up ThePerformance Of Your Application SoftwareBy  MIKE CARL    People the world over are seeing our natural resources less as acommodity and more as a precious treasure. From toasters to automobiles,the claims of ``energy efficiency'' are now vogue. Most Unix applications,on the other hand, tend to need increasing amounts of compute resources.     Almost weekly, hardware manufacturers crank out faster processors orhigher-capacity memory and storage devices. Just glance at a data sheetfor a typical personal workstation. In order to run a commercial grade ofUnix with an X-Window System, we're talking a 32-bit processor with atleast a 20-MHz clock, 16 Mbytes of RAM and a bare-minimum 100-Mbyte harddisk.     With such a configuration, solid and responsive performance shouldnot be a problem, right? The answer eludes a simple reply, but suffice itto say that with each gain in hardware performance and capacity, systemsand application software make lock-step demands of these gains to rendernew functionality.    Many users are price-sensitive and can't make the investments inhardware upgrades. I still see a lot of Sun 3/50s with 4 Mbytes of memorybeing used to run an X server and assorted X clients. Or consider thenumber of Intel 386 users who are running Unix and X. Obviously,performance isn't the big attraction; being able to run some of theexciting new X applications is.     Lines of source code number in the thousands for many non-X-Windowapplications running on Unix. Adding an X-Window interface will make theapplication grow like Liz Taylor with a dessert menu. For example, xmh,the X front end to the MH mail programs, adds more than 7,000 lines ofsource code.     Under that kind of weight, finding    Mike Carl is a software tester for Teknekron Software Systems in PaloAlto, Calif.    and making performance improvements requires time, hardly a commoditywhen the release date is near and you are still debugging problems.However, some primitive performance analysis tools are delivered with yourUnix system.UNIX TIME     The first and simplest is the time command. This command exists intwo forms: a built-in portion of the C shell and a program located in /binor /usr/5bin on SunOS. The C shell's time command displays statisticsabout how a program uses system resources as well as the CPU time spent inthe kernel and in the program. An example run of time on a SPARCstation 2would be as follows:        The program being tested here, qsort, generates an array of 50,000random integers and then sorts them uses the Quicksort algorithm createdby C. Anthony R. Hoare in 1962.    The 3.1u reveals that qsort spent 3.1 seconds of CPU time in the userprogram, while the kernel (or system) took 0.1 seconds to perform serviceson behalf of qsort. The third value from the left is the total elapsedtime. The next value represents the user and system time as a percentageof the elapsed time. Due to rounding, these numbers are not alwaysprecise. The remaining statistics detail the program's memory use,physical I/O and paging.     Because Unix is capable of running several processes, time statisticscan be affected by other processes getting a time slice. To better controlsuch variance, try taking an average of time statistics while the system'sload is low.     Data gathered here could prove useful as a baseline fortroubleshooting or benchmarking subsequent releases of a program. Thus,you can see the effect of a new library, or you may even want to increasebuffer size to lower physical I/O.DID YOU GET A PROFILE?     When efficiency is important, getting an execution profile is anexcellent first step in finding where a program spends most of its time.The Unix command prof(1) displays such profile data. Before running prof,you must first compile the programs to be studied using the -p option ofcc(1V). The prof results for the qsort program above are shown in Fig. 1.     For each routine, prof displays the time taken by the routine as apercentage of the total run time of the program (%time), together with thenumber of times that routine was called (call) and the number ofmilliseconds used per call (ms/call). The cumsecs column displays arunning total of the seconds taken by the routine in addition to theroutines listed above it.     The figure points out that 43 percent of the program's running timeis spent in a subroutine of the qsort program called partition(). Thepartition() routine is the workhorse of the ``divide and conquer'' ideaunderlying Quicksort.     The profile data also reveal a large number of calls made to theswap() routine (swap exchanges two unsorted elements). Armed with thisdata, you can make significant performance improvements by improving thelogic in partition() or by reducing the number of calls to swap().     Although a lot of information can be gained from prof, it may not besufficient to point out every area where improvements can be made. What isnot clear from prof's output is that qsort has a recursive implementation.The effect of called routines, and routines recursively callingthemselves, is detailed with the profile of each caller in the performancetool called gprof(1). Your system may not provide gprof. This profileresults from the data file created by compiling the programs with the -pgoption of cc(1V).  Let's get a call graph profile of the qsort programused above.     Fig. 2 displays the portion of the call graph profile that revealsthe recursion. The listing shows the routines in order of execution,including the time taken by any descendent routine calls. To locaterecursive routine calls, look down the column containing ``called+self.''For quicksort(), one finds the value ``1+69750,'' which means thatquicksort() is ``called'' one time in the main cycle, but quicksort() goeson to call itself 69,750 times.     The algorithm chosen for the qsort program need not be recursive. Anequivalent iterative algorithm could have been implemented. Usingrecursion, however, simplifies the program and requires fewer variables.Consequently, the program is easier to maintain and understand. Thedownside is that with each recursive call, the function's arguments mustbe pushed onto a stack, inflicting a time and space penalty.     After you've squeezed all the performance enhancements out of yourprogram, follow-up profile data probably won't reveal any performancespikes, and the granularity of the data collection will make furtherimprovements difficult.STATEMENT-BY-STATEMENT ANALYSIS     Code coverage performs statement-by-statement analysis on a programand displays which statements are executed and how many times. Codecoverage can identify areas of code that never get executed, which mightimply areas of code that are not being measured or tested.     The command tcov(1) produces a code coverage analysis andstatement-by-statement profile of a program. The program must be compiledwith the -a option to produce the analysis. Each time the program isexecuted, code coverage data is accumulated in a file with the same nameas the program, but with a ``.d'' suffix. Next, the tcov program must beexecuted with the source code file as its argument. Tcov reads thecorresponding .d file and creates a listing of the source with coveragedata in a similarly named file with a ``.tcov'' suffix. Fig. 3 gives theexact iterations for each statement in the partition() routine.ANALYZING X APPLICATIONS     The performance analysis tools discussed so far are most useful forprograms that follow a fairly predictable order of execution. Getting yourarms around the performance characteristics of a program developed for theX-Window System is inherently more difficult.     At the heart of a typical X application lies an event loop. Thenumber and order of the execution paths through an X program depend on howan end user interfaces with the program. For instance, users can chooseavailable functions from menus and enter text fields in many differentorders. Even the user's interactions with other applications can affectthe program (e.g., opening or closing another window).     Add to the above difficulty the distributed nature of the X-WindowSystem (clients and servers can run on different machines). X applicationperformance depends greatly on the load on the network and the variousmachine loads. The performance of the X server software is also a criticalfactor. Although you usually do not have the source code to the server andtherefore cannot change the code, you can improve performance bydetermining the best ways to interact with the server.     Two tools exist today for measuring the display performance of Xservers, namely x11perf and xbench. Let's look at a well-known hot spotwith the performance of an X11R4 server (Xsun) in filling a100-by-100-pixel trapezoid . Running x11perf on a SPARCstation 2 withSunOS 4.1.1, we get the 550.0 repetitions/sec for filling a 100-by-100trapezoid with a solid color; 46.5 repetitions/sec if the trapezoid isstippled; and 41.7 repetitions/sec if the trapezoid is tiled (checkered).     Note the factor of 10 difference in filling the trapezoid withstipples or tiles. The take-home lesson here is: You will be trading awaydisplay performance by an order of magnitude when filling objects liketrapezoids with stipples or tiles.     Certainly the display speed of an X server will greatly influence theoverall perceived performance of an X client. However, X applicationdevelopers should assume worst-case, and code for optimal performance oftheir client application. One tool that can be of aid in understanding anX application's efficiency is xscope.     Running as a separate process, xscope monitors the connectionsbetween the X11 window server and a client program. Sitting between aclient and an X11 server, xscope outputs the contents of each request,reply, error or event that is communicated between them. For instance,with xscope a programmer who made liberal use of XFlush or XSync mightnotice several ``replies'' coming from the X server to acknowledge theclient's requests.     The majority of Xlib calls don't require a reply from the X server.Consequently, calls that require a reply from the server, sometimes called``round-trip requests,'' can induce greater network traffic. Although mosttraffic generated by X clients and servers rarely taxes the networkbandwidth, prudent use of roundtrip requests such as XFlush() and XSync()is a good defense against poor performance when the network gets saturatedby a large remote file transfer.     Complete performance analysis of application software doesn't comeeasy, because you are not necessarily seeing solely the performancecharacteristics of the application, but also getting variances imposed bythe network, the underlying operating system and other components such asthe X server. You may liken performance analysis and tuning to defensivedriving. While behind the wheel, the defensive driver may not predict allpotential hazards on the road, but tries to see ``the whole road'' andrecognize possible trouble spots.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991SORCERER'S APPRENTICEBy  SEAN FULTONIn order to have a fully functional USENET site, you need a news reader, anews transport and a method to your madness. In truth, setting up USENETnews on an SCO Unix box isn't that difficult if you can get around thefinicky new Microsoft C compiler that complains about sloppy endifs.     When I moved our 386 from SCO Xenix to SCO Unix last summer, thebiggest problem I faced was pleasing the compiler. Having accomplishedthat, maintaining and reading news on our 386 is back to what it oncewas-a forgettable task.     But Unix 3.2 brought with it a host of networking options I neverdreamed of with Xenix, and after carefully weighing our initial steps, Idecided to plunge headlong into the abyss.      On our Xenix box, all users read news from terminals connectedeither directly or via modems. Unix, with its TCP/IP support and NFS,provides the network allure, a smell of connectivity and openness that Ihadn't even contemplated before.     Why not set up a system where users on one PC could read news onanother? Colleges and universities do it with Sun and DEC boxes all thetime, so why not tackle the problem on our 386?     For this project, I used two 386 boxes loaded with SCO Unix 3.2.2 andTCP/IP.     To those SCO boxes I added CNEWS source on the server, trn source onthe news ``client'' and NNTP source to both machines. NNTP stands forNetwork News Transport Protocol. NNTP allows two forms of networked newstransfer: by article, in a situation such as the one I planned to install,and by batch, as in two separate news servers sending news batches to eachother over a TCP/IP net.     The server side compiled with few problems. I built CNEWS first, thenspent the next several hours debugging the NNTP source.     I also had to do some serious tweaking to the config.h file,convincing it that I was using the CNEWS dbz database routines, since SCOUnix did not have its own. I also had to move our CNEWS library files fromthe CNEWS source directories to /usr/lib/cnews.a so the compiler couldfind them for making NNTP.     Having accomplished all this, I was able to compile the NNTP serverside of our application with few problems. Then came the hard part. Ibuilt trn, telling it that I wanted to use the built-in NNTP extensionsand the NNTP client resources. After a few attempts at compiling thesource, I realized I needed to move the libcnews.a file from our serveronto the client machine. The file is created during construction of CNEWS,but apparently it is needed by trn as well.     The whole mess compiled, and I was ready, I thought, to start somedown-and-dirty news reading.     But wait! What's this?    ``usr/lib/news/inews:/usr/lib/news/inews not found . . .''         I searched through both the trn and NNTP source looking for areference to inews, but found none. Somewhere, the NNTP client (ahard-wired version of inews used to post articles to the remote machine)had arbitrarily decided that our NEWSCTL directory was the place to findinews on the server machine.   Finally short of patience, I simply copied the inews script from ourtrn source to the server, installed it in the /usr/lib/news directory andtried again.     This time it worked. Within seconds, trn was setting up a .newsrc onour client machine, then reading in groups from the server. All told, theproject took two days to master, and countless hours of banging onkeyboards and table-tops, but it was finally accomplished.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991SYSTEM'S ADMINISTRATIONBy  BRUCE HUNTEREveryone must love the X-Window system, because they all use it. Someusers think that they are not using X-Window, but instead are using Motifor Open Look; but these are simply different window managers, which allrun on the same X system, as we shall see.     The presence of X-Window can greatly affect the lives of systemsadministrators, giving them many and varied duties-they must request andinstall physical resources for X, install the new X releases, create andinstall user start-up file scripts, and install and maintain X filesystemson file servers. They must understand X process management, maintain X'sresource files, and be able to troubleshoot X and understand its resourcerequirements.     X heavily affects the resource use of workstations; X is both CPU-and memory-intensive. Eight Mbytes of memory are required for monochromesystems. For color, X requires at least 12 Mbytes for the older andsmaller X10, and 16 Mbytes for X11. Both need a minimum of 4 MIPS andshould have 64 Mbytes of swap space. In fact, X Version 11 Revision 3 isdismally slow even at 4 MIPS, but it looks great at 18 MIPS. X requires ahigh-resolution screen-higher than VGA, so be prepared to invest inhigh-resolution terminals or monitors.     X also affects your fileservers. At least 1/2 to 1 gigabyte ofadditional fileserver disk space is required, and additional CPU capacitywill be needed if you use X terminals. We'll get into what those arelater.     To administer X, you must know how X works, for X redefines the termsserver and client. In fact, the meanings are almost reversed from theconventional fileserver/workstation relationship. Typically, yourworkstation application is the client, and the workstation sends requeststo the server; however, from the X perspective, the terminal server runson the workstation and handles your keyboard, mouse and screen, and theclients are the applications and can run anywhere on the network.    Most workstation users use their system as their terminal server andrun clients there as well, but remember that the base part of X is a text-and graphics-oriented system designed to do its work across the network.Thus, X is designed to run on one system and display on another(fascinating and compelling to users). As a result, users can run clientprocesses anywhere on the net that they have access rights, and they canhave the results in graphics and glorious X colors right at their desks.     X-Window has two major parts. The basic windowing system, X, handlesthe graphics, the graphics libraries and the network end (anythingrequired to make data travel back and forth between the terminal serverand the clients). The window manager (Open Look, Motif, or whatever) iswhat users see, and that's what they perceive as X-Window.     There are many window managers-uwm, twm and mwm (Motif) are just afew. The choice of window managers is determined in part by the X release;for example, X10 favors uwm, and X11 favors twm. Sometimes the user needsa specific window manager for certain applications, such as a specialtool. Also, user preference and prejudice have a great deal to do withselection of a window manager. For instance, some users prefer the slidebars on Motif, whereas others fall in love with the ``look-and-feel'' ofSun's Open Look.     Tune in next time to find out more about actual X administrationtasks.    Bruce Hunter (bhunter@utoday.com) is co-author of Unix Systems:Advanced Administration and Management Handbook, published by Macmillan.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991A Novel Procurement Program -- Canadian Transport Adopts Far-Reaching UnixMidrange System Acquisition ProgramBy  DANIEL R. PERLEY    In 1988, Transport Canada (TC), the Canadian federal governmentdepartment of transportation, initiated an innovative and far-reachingstandards-based procurement program. The Unit Level System (ULS)Establishment Program has now completed all important vendor qualificationand field trial milestones. While not the first large Canadian governmentprocurement program to require open systems, the ULS program representedsome noteworthy firsts, even in the North American context.  The ULSprogram:    o Specified a common operating system use profile to promoteportability, scalability and inter-operability, allowing vendors in bothUI and OSF camps to compete;    o Qualified not one but five competitive vendors (each of which wasrequired to mount an extensive field trial) and will now bid each systembuy on a price/availability basis among them; and        o Employs specially trained and certified paraprofessionals aslocal system administrators.    TC has responsibility for the provision and oversight of a safe andefficient transportation system for Canada and is divided into Aviation,Airports, Marine, Surface Groups and various corporate/support groups,together totaling more than 20,000 employees with almost 200 facilitiesfrom coast to coast.    The department operates numerous Coast Guard ships, a fleet offixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft and many motor vehicles. It managesmost airports, has responsibility for technical regulation, infrastructureand traffic control in the air and marine modes, provides technicalregulation of rail and also sets motor vehicle standards.    By the mid- to late 1980s, TC faced rapidly increasing demand in itscentral IBM MVS mainframes/SNA network as well as an influx of many typesof personal computers. In addition, some operational elements operatedvarious minicomputers, most notably DEC PDP-11 and VAX systems. To ensurethat future capacity demands could be flexibly    Daniel R. Perley served as director of intermediate informatics atTransport Canada from 1988 to 1990 and in that capacity conceived and wasresponsible for the ULS program. He rejoined the private sector inmid-1990 and is president of Perley Technologies/PTC, an Ottawa-areasystems consulting firm. He met, the Director General Information Management Services (DGIMS)organization within TC undertook a review of network and processingrequirements, which identified four levels of information management (andinformation processing) within TC.  These were:    o Enterprise (corporate-mainframe)        o Area (regional-mainframe)        o Unit (branch or directorate-minicomputer/midrange system)        o Workplace (desktop or workbench-personal computer/terminal)        At the workgroup (Unit) level, the department was forecasting arequirement, over a five-year period, for up to 400 midrange computersystems for use in information system, operational support, engineering,scientific and technically embedded computing environments. However, atthat time TC possessed no central midrange system acquisition and supportprogram and no functional    guidance on the subject; local managers could(and did) buy many incompatible types of equipment.    While more than 80 types of PCs had already been acquired, at leastmost of them adhered to the DOS/Intel or Mac standards. The prospect of 40to 50 types of next-generation minicomputers (requiring new supportcapabilities) posed a major challenge to senior informatics managers. TheULS Establishment Program was set up to establish standards,certification, acquisition channels and support mechanisms for five- to50-user ULS (midrange) equipment.    The program began in 1988 with a further internal review of TCprocessing needs that highlighted a significant number of pending andanticipated requests for midrange equipment. The DGIMS IntermediateInformatics Branch was established to take responsibility for the midrangecomputer program within TC. Interim Guidance on Mid-Range Systems was soonissued, limiting all future purchases to those able to run a Unixoperating system derivative, interface with the IBM SNA network andsupport an Ethernet and/or Token Ring LAN Interfaces.    A multivendor strategy was believed superior either to a single-vendorapproach or one permitting many vendors to supply such equipment, as itwould prevent undue vendor dependence and allow price/performancecompetition among a manageable number of suppliers.    The Treasury Board (TB) of the Government of Canada provides centralcoordination and management for government departments and also setsstandards, including technology standards. TB participates in manyinternational standards groups and had established an open systemsdirection for the Canadian federal government. TB recommended POSIX, butTC believed POSIX alone would be insufficient because TC desired toexercise data environment, application software and data portability onthree axes:    o Vertical portability among different sizes of computers at theEnterprise (mainframe), Area (midframe), Unit (five- to 50-user midrange)and Workplace (PC/workstation) levels;    o Horizontal portability among similar computers within one level;        o Forward portability to replacement computers at any level, andlikely from a different vendor.    Clearly, POSIX alone would not permit this to occur. A commomoperating system was still required, and Unix was seen as the only viablechoice. Nonetheless, Unix itself was not monolithic; the hoped-forconvergence of ``the world'' into System V.4 was shattered as OSF (andthen UI) burst onto the scene.    However, TC could not await the outcome of the battle of UI and OSF.After much soul-searching, it was decided not to specify everything thatan operating system should or should not contain, but rather what part ofit would actually be used and thus must be present. This would restrict TCsoftware developers and users somewhat, but would permit vendors usingeither Unix family to supply equipment while safeguarding portability.Vendors were free to include third-party products to make up anydeficiencies against the specification.    In practice, key elements such as kernel and kernel extension, shellutilities and their extensions and certain other elements were certain tobe functionally common to both Unix families. UI and OSF both added otherelements; suppliers were required to provide everything inside thevertical column on the functionality map show in the diagram on page 57.Functionality outside the column would NOT be used by TC.    This approach was called ``Greater Unix'' or ``GX'' because it made anattempt to homogenize the difference among Unix variants by setting acommon ``How we will use it'' profile.    Portability must be supported by several ``pillars,'' of which theoperating system definition or profile (here GX POSIX, with XPG3 added forgood measure) is only one. Also important are adherence to ANSI languagedefinitions, a common RDBMS (TC chose Oracle), a good developmentmethodology and use of OSI communications.    TC first conducted a Demonstration and Evaluation Project (DEP) toprove key concepts and permit staff to gain experience; AT&T 3B2 computersserved this purpose, with one installed to serve the new IntermediateInformatics Branch itself in Ottawa and a second in Montreal. A workgroupdata management and work-flow control application called Basic InformationControl System (BICS) was implemented on these systems, along with theUniplex Office Automation (OA) package.    This was followed by a full-scale pretrial, involving 50 users at theMoncton, New Brunswick, regional Air Navigation office, using IBM RTequipment. The integration of this system proved vastly more complicatedand time-consuming than IBM and TC had expected; however, it was finallybrought to operational status, at least for OA purposes.    The pretrial did not fulfill TC expectations when running a multiuserOracle RDBMS application environment. However, the pretrial allowedconsiderable refinement of administrative and operational procedures. Amuch more comprehensive standard site implementation plan was developed,and the problem of aligning PC terminal emulator key assignments withRDBMS, OA and OS requirements was addressed.    A full ULS program workplan was meanwhile approved, and specificacquisition categories were established for ULS hardware, databasepackages, office automation packages, system integration services andapplication development services. A Request for Proposal (RFP) wasdeveloped based upon a Qualification and Evaluation Criteria (QEC)document that set out the parameters not only for paper qualification ofvendors but also for full evaluation in the field trials. The requirementsdocument placed considerable (and equal) stress on equipment performance,vendor support and vendor commitment to present and future standardsadherence. A parallel specification was developed for the OfficeAutomation (OA) package to be run on the ULS. The resulting materials wereapproved by a TC national task force and an interdepartmental ProcurementReview Committee prior to release to industry in March 1989.    After a rigorous RFP process, 10 responses were finally received atthe deadline, on a Friday in September 1989. TC staff worked through theweekend and faxed the astonished vendors barrages of written questions thefollowing Monday. TC then undertook a full qualification analysis,including visits to nine vendor facilities in North America and Europe.Sites were selected from TC groups, initial qualification and integrationtests were undertaken, and site assignments to the finally compliantvendors were as follows: Vancouver/Finance (Unisys), Montreal/Airports(AT&T), Moncton/Aviation (DEC), Dartmouth/ Marine (Bull) and Sydney/Personnel (HP). All vendors were required to sign a memorandum ofagreement (MOA) with TC regarding their undertaking to integrate andsupport their trial system.    The OA RFP resulted in the qualification of an AT&T/Uniplex and aQuadratron bid. Each hardware platform was assigned one of the two OApackages, and Oracle also participated by providing a license for eachsystem. As the Moncton pretrial had shown, the system integration was anon-trivial exercise; each ULS had to run OA and Oracle, emulate IBM3174/3278 equipment and interface successfully with the SNA, interface toa trial X.25 network linking the five trial sites to HQ, and tie in localPCs.    In one site there was an existing HP-3000 mini, which required aspecial switch to permit users access either to it or to the ULS to beinstalled there. A Generic System Integration Checklist (GSIC) wasdeveloped to give vendors a clear idea of how TC would judge thecompleteness of their SI effort; in one case a vendor was actuallydisqualified for failure to integrate.    After the vendors had integrated and made operational their systems, aseries of user and system administrator valuations, formal benchmarks andvendor service, technology development and standards adherence assessmentswere conducted over a seven-month period at the trial sites. During thisperiod, vendors were not permitted to upgrade the installed technology;this provided a stable basis for evaluation against the QEC. TCcommissioned Aim Technologies to create a custom benchmark for the ULSField Trials, and all five vendors were certified as demonstratingcompliant performance.    Vendors' original qualification ratings against each requirement weremodified as necessary based on actual experience. The Quadratron andUniplex products and Oracle relational database were also evaluated inservice. Each site commissioned an Oracle application to serve localneeds; these were produced largely by contractors under DGIMS oversight.Also, users and system administrators were asked to rate the systems.    In parallel with the system specification, acquisition and integrationphases, it was necessary to train and certify a Unit Level SystemAdministrator (ULSA) to operate and administer each local ULSinstallation. These people had some computer experience, but came from anadministrative or support background; they were not computer systemsprofessionals.    The ULS RFP contained many requirements aimed at making theadministration of the ULS as simple and easy as possible. TC has developeda comprehensive ULSA Course, which will be delivered at the TransportCanada Training Institute (TCTI) in Cornwall, Ontario. The course coversULS and ULSA role orientation, Unix, system administration, OA and Oraclebasic administration, LAN orientation and other subjects. Specificationsfor an intelligent patch panel or System Integration Branch Exchange forintegration of the ULS with local- and wide-area networks were alsodeveloped. A separate RFP was prepared for certification of systemintegration service providers; TC would oversee integration activities,but would not normally perform them in-house.    Although time and resource constraints imposed some restrictions onthe portability testing, it was established that the GX POSIX approachworked well and there was reasonable portability of applications and data.As the trials have concluded, the five surviving vendors are each in thefinal stages of negotiating their Departmental Individual Standing Offer(DISO).    Each TC midrange system acquisition will be competed for only amongthe five DISO holders, on a price and availability basis. The compliant OAvendors are also to receive DISOs.    Funding cuts due to ongoing fiscal restraint have affected the plannedrate of ULS acquisition in the short term. However, TC official MikePlouffe, Director General Information Management Services, is confidentthe program will be widely used as departmental plans stabilize and theneed for an increased distribution of processing power becomes paramount.    There was, in strict principle, nothing that confined the GX conceptto Unix; it was thus decided to broaden the definition to potentiallyinclude non-Unix OSes; any OS that can be modified to operate as per theGX specification could in principle be declared compliant. To reflect thismove toward a more generalized definition of a system executive, as anoperating system is sometimes called, the term ``General Executive'' wassubstituted for ``Greater Unix.'' It was also agreed to further evolve theGX definition to consider key real-time requirements of various federalagencies so as to ensure the broadest possible future applicability. A TBInformation Technology Standards working group has been formed for thispurpose.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Implementing OOP Designs -- Early Users Discover Promise, Pitfalls OfObject-Oriented ProgrammingBy  PHILIP J. GILL    There's good news and bad news when it comes to early implementationsof object-oriented programming (OOP) designs.    First, the good news. Early users appear pleased with the capabilitiesof object-oriented database management systems (OODBMSes). OODBMSes, theysay, enable them to develop applications that support and manipulate newdata types, including images, graphics, video and audio information, inways traditional relational database management systems (RDBMSes) can't.In these cases, users say they choose OOP tools and OODBMSes because theirapplications demand them.    Now the bad news. As much as users appear to like OODBMSes, theyappear to have doubts about C++, which is likely to emerge as a standardOOP language in Unix and open systems because of its close association toC. Some call C++ limited, some claim it isn't an OOP at all, others justdon't use it.        Some users see an OODBMS as their only option. Cold Spring HarborLaboratories in Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., purchased an OODBMS because ithad to. The non-profit private research foundation specializes inmolecular biology and genetics and related computer disciplines.Scientists there are developing a molecular genetics research databasethat will act as a central repository of information for the Human GenomeProgram, a top scientific research priority of the Bush Administration.    When completed, the database will map the molecular and proteinstructures of human DNA, aiding biologists, doctors and others indeveloping new treatments for diseases.    ``The goal is to completely map the characteristics of the DNA ofhumans to be able to develop molecular therapies,'' explains Tom Marr, asenior staff investigator at Cold Spring Harbor Labs. Instead of treatingthe visible symptoms of a disease, Marr explains, doctors will treatmolecules to cure disease.    Marr says molecular biologists discover new aspects of DNA and proteinstructure on a daily basis. New techniques such as polymerase chainreactions (PCRs) unleash an enzyme that artificially amplifies and copiesDNA molecules, enabling scientists to unlock their structure.    Though Marr uses Sybase's Sybase RDBMS for other applications, thehuman genome project research database is being built using Servio Corp.'sGemStone OODBMS on a Sun SPARCstation. It will run in a client/serverenvironment across an Ethernet/TCP/IP local-area network (LAN). When it iscompleted, users will run the client portion of the database on SunSPARCstations, Apple Macintosh systems or DOS-based IBM-compatible PCs,depending on their preferences.    Marr says the limitations of an RDBMS' relational data model prohibitits use in this application. For one thing, the information it willcontain is too dynamic.    ``The technology is changing continuously,'' he says. ``This field[molecular biology] is experimental technology right now.''    Relational systems also can't handle the needed data types.    ``A relational database stores DNA structure as text and proteins astext,'' he says. An OODBMS can represent these structures in a graphicalway.    One strike against the relational model, at least for thisapplication, is the separation of data and analysis. In an RDBMS,management and analysis of data are independent of one another, he adds.The user brings out data from a table, massages or updates it in some way,then sends it back. But in this research database, the methods formanipulating data and the data itself need to be closely integrated-astandard feature in an OODBMS.    The database is currently at the prototype stage. Both prototype andproduction research databases will be written in SmallTalk, anobject-oriented programming language (OOP), instead of C++.    Interact of New York is also an early user of Servio's GemStoneOODBMS. In this case, the New York-based firm's Integration ProductsDivision has used GemStone as the framework to integrate variouscomputer-aided engineering (CAE) applications, including electronicdesign, logic simulations and chip and board design. Besides the GemStoneOODBMS, the framework includes Interact's CAE applications and a graphicaleditor that let users integrate new, third-party CAE tools by adding acommon GUI.    According to Gary Putlock, the division's group development leader,the needs of the framework ruled out their using an RDBMS. ``We choose anobject-oriented database due to the nature of the problem,'' Putlock says.``The types of data modeling that CAE design tools use don't work withrelational databases.''    RDBMSes have other limits as well, says Putlock. In RDBMSes, thedatabase supports relationships and actions between data in fields, but itdoes not contain descriptors of the data or allowed behaviors for thatdata. OODBMSes, however, do.OBJECT VS. OVERLAYS       For some applications, an OODBMS may not be necessary at all. Infact, an object-oriented overlay to an RDBMS may do just fine for manyapplications, according to Dan Gerson, a member of the research staff atXerox's Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) in Palo Alto.    Gerson, who works in the collaborative systems area at PARC, isdeveloping a document database that will allow multiple users to work onthe same document and track multiple versions over a period of years.Because the document database will contain large unstructured blocks oftext-the most common data type in an OODBMS today-an OODBMS would seem anatural fit. But Gerson says he's not so sure.    Gerson, who currently uses a Sybase RDBMS running on a network of SunSPARCstation 1s and Sun-4 SPARCservers, recently began to investigatewhether it would be better to develop his document database using anOODBMS, in particular, ObjectStore from Object Design, Burlington, Mass.    OODBMSes offer potential performance improvements over RDBMSes, usingpointers to locate objects in the database. Pointers in relational systemsare known to be slower, so an OODBMS should offer better response time.    But OODBMSes have their drawbacks as well. ``Currently, OODBMSes arenot very well developed,'' he says.    ``The basic problem in an OODBMS is in the user I/O inside of atransaction,'' Gerson adds. ``Programs in an RDBMS have a looserconnection to data. Users issue an SQL query, the data base gets a table,makes a copy of it, and the user looks at it on his screen.''    During a transaction in an OODBMS, objects are loaded into memory,either real or virtual. ``As soon as you execute a transaction, you can'tsee the object anymore,'' he says. ``In an RDBMS, the system is giving yousome sort of a copy. In an OODBMS, the system is giving you the actualobject, so they're only valid in a transaction.''    Gerson says he believes few people are aware of this fundamental flawin OODBMS technology because so few systems are out there. Those that are,function as single-user, workstation-based development systems, notmultiuser systems where deadlocks can occur. Besides, he says, he thinkssome OODBMS vendors are either unaware of the possible problem ordeliberately ignoring it.THE TROUBLE WITH C++        Users may debate the necessity of OODBMSes, but one thing they allagree on is that C++, something of an emerging standard in OOP languagesfor Unix systems, is something less than they had in mind.    Software engineers at Teknekron Communications Systems of Berkeley,Calif., use OOP languages to develop custom network management softwarefor wide-area network (WAN) vendors. Customers include service providers,such as the phone companies, and manufacturers of modems, muxes,multiplexers and other WAN hardware. Typical programs contain 200,000 to300,000 lines of code and as many as 300 classes of objects in thehierarchy. Teknekron programmer/developers use a network of 180 to 200 SunRISC-based SPARCstations running the SunOS, X-Window and the Motifgraphical user interface (GUI). In the past, most of the code was writtenusing C-Flavors, a C library that generates a LISP Flavors subset. A fewmonths ago, Teknekron engineers switched to Saber-C++.    ``Our customers prefer C++ as the language to use,'' says Peter Ohler,senior engineer, explaining the move from C-Flavors.    Ohler says he's ambivalent about the switch.    C++ does strong type checking before compiling a completed program tocheck for bugs. That's good, says Ohler, but it's also bad, as it providesno way in C++ to foil the strong type checking mechanism. That limits whatOhler calls the ``genericity'' of object classes. Once an object has beencreated, he says, the functionality of that object can't be used in anyother class types other than those with inheritance from the originalobject.    ``The class may be unrelated, but you might want to use the samefunctionality,'' he says.``That's not possible. You can't drag the line ofinheritance.''    Two alternatives exist. The most practical, says Ohler, is to do whathis technical team does: They write some code in standard C to get aroundthe strong type checking. The other is to create hundreds and hundreds ofclasses to prepare for any programming contingency, an untenable option.    SmallTalk, the earliest object-oriented programming language, doesn'thave this restriction, notes Ohler. But, he says, strong momentum isbuilding up for C++ despite its limitations because of its closerelationship with C and open systems standards in general.    ``We have a saying around here that C++ is a better C language, butit's not an object-oriented language,'' adds Ohler. ``There's nofundamental OOP model or paradigm. It's a non-intuitive and inconsistentlanguage.''    Marr of Cold Spring Labs says he prefers not to use C++.  All thedevelopment work for the molecular structure research database is done inSmallTalk. ``A lot of it is personal taste,'' Marr explains. ``C++ does alot of things with multiple inheritance I don't like.''    Xerox PARC's Gerson also believes there are problems with the C++language. For one thing, he says, it does not support full dataabstractions.    ``Let's just say that C++ gives you object-oriented structures,'' hesays. But, he says, there is a solution. ``Adding a preprocessor will takecare of many of the problems with C++.''Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Judging OODBMS Performance    Much has been written about the performance of relational databasemanagement systems (RDBMSes), but many users know little about how tojudge the performance of an object-oriented database management system(OODBMS).    There are a number of ways to judge OODBMS performance, some of whichare similar to an RDBMS, some of which are not, according to Gary Putlock,group leader of development for the integration products division ofInteract, a New York City software developer.    ``There's raw access performance, which can be equivalent to arelational system,'' he says. Just as with relational systems, users canjudge OODBMS performance in response and data access times, says Putlock.    ``Other aspects of performance correspond to flexibility,'' hecontinues. ``How well does it perform in a multiuser situation?''    Putlock says this remains an important question, as some vendors haveimplemented their OODBMS products for single-user workstationenvironments, not as a multiuser, network server.    Another question to ask, says Putlock, is whether or not the OODBMS isnot just a single-user system, but can function in a distributed,heterogeneous network environment.    Putlock says Interact chose GemStone as the base for the frameworkbecause it supports multiple hardware platforms. Interact's The IntegratorCAE framework, developed on top of the GemStone OODBMS, runs on Sun-3s andSPARCstation 1s as well as IBM RISC System/6000 workstations in anEthernet/TCP/IP local-area network (LAN) environment.    Putlock adds that users should also concern themselves with aprospective vendor's stability, the richness of the OODBMS' developmentenvironment, product reliability and support.    -P.J.G.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991E&S Gets IDC ToolBy LEE BRUNO    Salt Lake City-Evans & Sutherland Computer has signed a strategicjoint marketing and development agreement with Image Data Corp. (IDC) ofPasadena, Calif., to port Image Data's imaging technology to its graphicsworkstations.    The agreement will allow E&S hardware to be sold with IDC softwareproducts. Specifically, 2-D imaging software, which is a part of IDC'sPara/Series application software, will be bundled with Evans &Sutherland's ESV workstations, the company said.    With the agreement in place, Evans & Sutherland said that it plans toincrease its ability to address the general visualization market byincluding imaging and graphics technology in each workstation. The companysaid it can now cost-effectively bundle the image and graphics technologybecause of the declining cost of memory and the increase in processingpower.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991INDUSTRY WATCHBy  JOHN CHISHOLMWith IBM's loss of more than $1 billion last quarter, due at the root tothe erosion of market share of proprietary MVS to Unix, the AppleMacintosh is now the last major proprietary system to maintain salesmomentum. The Macintosh is indeed closed: MacOS, A/UX and theirapplications run only on Macs from Apple Computer; and Macs run MacOS andA/UX and no other operating systems. MacOS applications cannot readily beported from Unix or DOS/Windows, and vice versa. How much longer the Mac'smomentum will last is impossible to tell, but being closed does not help.    To be fair, Mac has a strong, loyal installed base and is todaygaining low-end market share with its Macintosh Classic. But Mac overallis being overtaken by Microsoft Windows 3.0, whose development andpromotion is supported by dozens of hardware vendors; and by Intelplatforms, with their wide choice of systems software and strongprice/performance due to competition among many vendors. The very closedstrategy that insulates Macintosh from competition today will hurt ittomorrow. To be successful in the mid1990s and beyond, Apple must play thesame game and subject itself to the same market forces as its PC andsystems software competitors.    That means licensing to other vendors MacOS and the MacROMS, theproprietary heart of the Mac. Doing so creates Mac competitors, but onesfrom whom Apple earns revenue in licensing fees. It also createscomplementary Macs-notebooks, servers, fault-tolerant systems-whichincrease the size of the Mac market. Setting license fees is tricky: toolow and the licensees are all-too-plentiful competitors; too high andthey're unsuccessful customers. The best way for Apple to manage theseconflicting objectives is to do as the Compaq-Microsoft combination doesand as Sun is beginning to do: split into separate hardware and softwareprofit centers and let each contend with its own competitors.    To compete as an open systems supplier, Apple will also need theprice/performance of RISC. SPARC would make Mac a Sun clone; Mips, an ACE(Compaq/DEC) clone. Given the choice of being qualitatively different fromor merely quantitatively better than SPARC or ACE, Apple has the customerbase, brand-name following and product differentiation to be different.This makes the 88000 the best available RISC choice for future Macworkstations and servers, in my view. The 88K's primary fault, accountingfor its distant third place in RISC market share after SPARC and Mips, isnot the CPU itself, but lateness to market in 1988 and lack of multiplesources. Lateness to market then doesn't much hurt Apple today, and Appleshould be able to negotiate with Motorola for multiple sources.    Assuming Apple adopts the 88K, should it join the 88open Consortiumand comply with its compatibility standards? That would help 88open, whosemembers are all second-tier players-DG, Unisys, Omron, Encore,Harris-trying to win sales by being compatible with each other. Like theEastern Bloc countries, they are trying to prosper by trading amongthemselves when what they really need is a major power to join them. Applewould be that major power, as Sun is to SPARC and Compaq hopes to be toACE.    Supporting 88open could also help Apple. True, the five hundred or so88open-compliant applications pale in comparison to the number currentlyavailable for the Mac. But Apple would gain multivendor compatibility anda strong claim to ``openness'' with a group of companies that not only donot threaten Apple but that would be happy to let Apple lead them. UnixSystem V.4 with the Mac GUI and MacOS API could well become a new 88openstandard.    John Chisholm is president of John Chisholm Co., a Menlo Park, Calif.,consulting firm.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991NIST Unveils Graphics Test SuiteBy  LEE BRUNO    Chicago-The National Institutes of Standards and Technology hasunveiled a computer graphics test suite aimed at protecting users andensuring that vendors' hardware platforms and applications conform to astandard way of exchanging picture information.    The validation test suite is based upon the ANSI/ISO standard datainterchange format, called the Computer Graphics Metafile (CGM). The CGMis a standard file format and represents a graphical snapshot of a finalscreen image.    Essentially, the CGM test ensures that graphical picture informationconforms to the CGM standard and can be exchanged between differenthardware platforms and software systems. NIST said the aim of the testsuites is to ensure that graphical picture information can be ported todifferent graphical devices.    The CGM testing suite consists of three components: a generator thatproduces the file; the CGM file; and a CGM interpreter, which is capableof reading the CGM file. NIST said the CGM interpreter and generator testsuites are currently under development.    NIST said it developed the validation test suites because vendors wereusing different CGM formats that did not permit users to exchangegraphical files. The incompatibility arose, NIST said, because thesemantic specification within CGM was ambiguous. Within the CGM standardtest suite, there are three encodings of the metafile syntax that includebinary, character and clear text characteristics. The CGM standard hasbeen adopted for federal use in the Federal Information ProcessingStandard, or FIPS.    The purpose of making the CGM test files available is so vendors candetermine if their products conform to the federal standards required bygovernment departments and agencies purchasing computer equipment.    Upon completion of the test, a report is generated that summarizes thetesting procedures and results for the CGM. The report provides a list oftests performed and errors found. In addition, the test identifies whetherthe CGM met the conformance testing of the CGM standard.    The Computer Systems Laboratory of the NIST said a Unix-based CGMshould be in 1/4-inch tape format to be tested. The CGM test for one tofive metafiles costs $800 and includes the CTS/Metacheck license. With aCTS/Metacheck license, the cost is $500 for testing one to five metafiles.For additional information about NIST's CGM test service, call301-975-3365.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Sun Reports Higher Profits    San Francisco-Sun Microsystems recently announced that profits for itsthird quarter increased a total of 59 percent over the similar period lastyear. The figures were far in excess of industry analysts' estimates.    Sun reported earnings of $58.7 million, or 56 cents a share, for itsthird quarter ending on March 29. Its earnings for the same period lastyear were recorded at $36.7 million, or 40 cents a share. Sun also said itshipped a record 48,000 units this quarter, with sales to the commercialsector accounting for approximately 30 percent of its revenues.    In a prepared statement, William J. Raduchel, Sun vice president andchief financial officer, said that the quarter ended with a ``recordbacklog of orders, almost $700 million in cash and a financial sheetthat's never been stronger.''Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Baan Licenses Triton    Holland's Baan Info Systems plans to step up worldwide sales of itsTriton Unix-based manufacturing software through licensing agreements itrecently signed with five hardware vendors, said Adrian Neele, thecompany's general manager for North American operations.    Most recently, Baan Info Systems signed a joint marketing agreementwith NCR, under which each of the two companies will sell NCR's System3000 computers bundled with Baan's software. Baan will pay $1.5 million toNCR over the next 18 months under the agreement. Baan has signed similarjoint marketing agreements with Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Digital Equipmentand Bull, according to Neele.    ``Hardware vendors are pushing hard on us because we're wellestablished,'' Neele said. ``It's not easy finding a Unix software companywith 10 years in the field.''    Baan has been selling its products in Europe for a decade and in theFar East for five years, according to Neele.    Baan's product line includes Triton-Industry, which supportsmanufacturing operations such as routing, planning, shop floor control aswell as group technology; Triton-Trade, which is a stock purchase andsales control program that optimizes the flow of goods through a company;and Triton-Finance, which helps to automate administration and accounting.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Legislating Computer Conduct    It is not uncommon today for our society to be described as litigious.    The popular-and justified-rationale for that accusation is that peopleare using judges, attorneys, lay juries and millions of taxpayer dollarsto settle business disputes that could much more easily and intelligentlybe settled otherwise.    Not only are many such lawsuits premature, but they are sometimesdownright inappropriate. There are some disciplines where the disputes canbe of such a technical and complicated nature that it is almost impossiblefor lay juries to sort out fact from fiction, or to evaluate which partyin a given conflict is acting more unfairly.    Today, the computer industry is just such an entity. As technologychanges, as high-speed workstations put the power of internationalnetworks at the fingertips of an insurance company executive or apharmaceutical chemist or a department store's head of inventory, therules governing computer conduct are going to have to change.    Two recent events make it clear how the current legal system isill-equipped at the moment to craft the changes that society needs:    o  Attorneys for Robert Morris decided last week to ask the SupremeCourt to overturn the federal appellate panel's ruling upholding Morris'conviction for unleashing the 1988 Internet Worm.    o  Steve Jackson Games, a games and publishing company that had muchof its computer equipment and some unpublished manuscripts seized lastyear by the Secret Service during its anti-cracker sweep Operation SunDevil, has sued the Secret Service and the U.S. Justice Department. Notonly was Jackson's company never accused of a crime, but, the lawsuitcontends, it was never even suspected of wrongdoing.    The Morris appeal hung on a definition of access to a computernetwork, a question made complex because Morris already had accounts onseveral legitimate systems in the network. But with their attempts tocomprehend finger daemon, sendmail and worm, the jury-based on jurorcomments after the trial-didn't even try to wrestle with that issue. Thejudge who presided over the trial opted to not even explain the concept-amajor element of the defense's case-to the jury because he didn't want tocloud the issue. There was substantial question whether the judge himselfunderstood the argument.    The Steve Jackson Games case is probably the most frightening of all.In that case, we have the Secret Service candidly saying that this is sucha new area of the law that they had very little idea how to pursue aninvestigation. Their approach was to conduct search warrants on manylocations, seize everything that could possibly be computer-related and-inthe ensuing months-figure out if they had come upon anything.    As computer technology reaches farther and farther out intonon-computer-literate society, society is going to insist on it beingcontrolled by some authorities. Today, those authorities often do notunderstand the technologies they are now being told to supervise.    If users want their high-technology activities regulated by those whounderstand the intent of their efforts, then it is urgent that thecomputer industry establish its own method of regulating security.Otherwise, it will be done for us.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Benchmarks Key To Making The Right DealBy  M. ANDREW BARLOW    The standard benchmark in today's workstation market is a powerfultool when the customer knows how the benchmark relates to the workload ofthe application. If the customer does not know this, it can lead toconfusion and the wrong buying decision.    The standard benchmark is critical to the buying process, for it canbe used to narrow the playing field of possible workstation alternatives(and get through Door No. 1 of a sales process). If possible, however,final buying decisions should be made based on the results of Door No.2-tests that reflect the primary or heaviest use of the system. Thesetests should include evaluations of application performance,interoperability, the operating system and system reliability.    The most common benchmarks in use today are MIPS, MFLOPS and, mostrecently, SPECmarks. Each of these benchmarks measure a portion of thesystem's total performance. MIPS measures CPU integer performance, MFLOPSmeasures CPU floating performance and SPECmarks measure integer,floating-point and cache performance. A strong showing on these benchmarkscan be a good indication of a system's performance. The challenge forcustomers is to understand how a specific benchmark can help indicate howtheir application will perform on a given hardware platform.Graphics, I/O and networking may also be bottlenecks and therefore mayrequire other benchmarks because they are often measured using differentparameters by each vendor. To date, no one has developed one benchmarkthat measures all these factors to predict total application performance.    Other considerations usually need to be taken into account before thefinal buying decision is made. These are the considerations behind DoorNo. 2. The most important is the application that will be run. Anapplication will put a unique stress on the system. Capturing a typicalworkload and running that workload on the system of interest can be themost important step in understanding how the workstation will perform.Benchmarking at this stage is a far more expensive task and is not easilystandardized.    Due to the complexity of measuring system interoperability, abenchmark for this has not yet been developed. The same applies tooperating systems. A customer typically buys one application, but has manykinds of workstations.    Finally, system reliability is critical. A system that is down foreven a few minutes will quickly lose any gains reflected in a particularbenchmark.    Improvements in standard benchmarks continue to be made. SPECmarks,for instance, have gone a long way toward improving the measurability ofoverall system performance. The SPECmark, however, typically is quoted asone number, when in reality it consists of a suite of 10 tests. Theresults of these individual tests can be very helpful in predicting futureapplication performance. The GPC graphics benchmark is another goodexample of a standard benchmark.    Finally, some vendors are developing measurement tools to helpcustomers better understand how their application stresses the system.Information gained from the use of these tools will add more value to thebenchmark and lower the cost of making a buying decision. Perhaps, withmore support for committees such as SPEC, a buying decision can be madesolely on the results of one benchmark.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Architect Draws On RS/6000's Resources To Reconstruct Lost Abbey    Reaching into the past has always been the domain of science fiction.But imagination, with the help of computers, can sometimes achieveanalogous results.    Such was the case recently in France, where architect Philippe Lorimyused an IBM RS/6000 with computer aided-design software to reconstruct thelost Benedictine Abbey of St. Guilhem-le-Desert. The abbey, located 18miles from Montpellier on the southern coast of France, was an importantstopover for the various religious pilgrimages that wound their way fromSpain into France.    The 3-D computer models provided Lorimy with drawings that werefinished by hand, filling out the details and contours of the time. ``If Ihad to draw these totally by hand, I'd never have been able to do itbecause it would have been so time-consuming,'' Lorimy said. As it was,the designs took approximately 10 days to finish.    The abbey and the nearby Church of Gellone, first erected in 804 A.D.,were rebuilt or modified in the 11th and 12th centuries after beingdamaged in France's religious wars and the French Revolution.    Lorimy's various drawings are due to be published in a book titled St.Guilhem-le-Desert: The Sculpture of the Cloister of Gellone.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991It's A Scientific Fact: This Flock Of Gray Eagles Loves A GoodParty    Americans don't usually like to call attention to their age,especially if it exceeds 29. But a group of graying computer executiveswho call themselves the Gray Eagles is proving there is an exception toevery rule.    No, this isn't a militant new division of the Gray Panthers working onbehalf of senior citizens, but a group of Data General alumni with rootsto DG in the mid-'70s and a great deal of entrepreneurial spirit.    Members of this group have played key roles in such companies asApollo Computer, Convex Computer, Stratus Computer, Alliant, LotusDevelopment, Access Technology and Mips Computer Systems. Twenty-sevenGray Eagles work at Mips alone, including Bob Miller, chairman and chiefexecutive officer, and Chuck Boesenberg, president and chief operatingofficer. One Gray Eagle at Mips prefers to call the Mips group the GrayTeenage Mutant Ninja Eagles.    So, what do all of these Gray Eagles do?  They all meet once a year atComdex in Las Vegas for a national get-together, network among themselvesthroughout the year and, most importantly, throw parties on a regularbasis. Not a bad way to age.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Striking A Blow For Accuracy: Did Early Koreans Find The Key To SoftwareQuality?By MITCH WAGNER    Software engineer Martin Minow writes in the on-line RISKS-FORUMDigest:    Is it possible that the solution to the software quality crisis wasdiscovered in Korea in the 15th century? The following is from Daniel J.Boorstin's The Discoverers, quoting, apparently, Kim Won-Yong, ``EarlyMovable Type in Korea'' (1954):        ``The supervisor and compositor shall be flogged 30 times for anerror per chapter; the printer shall be flogged 30 times for badimpression, either too dark or too light, of one character per chapter.''     Boorstin continues, ``This helps explain both the reputation foraccuracy earned by the earliest Korean imprints and the difficulty thatKoreans found in recruiting printers.''    The RISKS-FORUM Digest is an on-line newsletter that is available overthe Internet through anonymous ftp, and over USENET as comp.risks.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX TODAY! via NewsNetMay 13, 1991Profits Translate To Lots-O'-Pizza At Data GeneralBy  EVAN SCHUMAN    Ever have one of those days when the boss dumps this impossibleproject into your lap at the last minute, and then tells you that he knewabout it a week ago but kept it from you ``as a matter of policy?''    Pantelis Venetis knows that feeling well.    Venetis owns the small pizzeria at the corporate headquarters for DataGeneral in Westboro, Mass. A few minutes after 4 p.m. on Wednesday, April24, Venetis-who says he normally makes about 80 pizzas a day-was told thathe had until the next morning to create 1,800 pizzas for a DG pizza partyfeeding 2,463 employees.    ``I tell them, `Impossible,' '' Venetis said, his voice smothered in athick Greek accent. ``They say I gotta do my best. I got a littlenervous.''    DG officials wanted the bash to celebrate the second consecutiveprofitable quarter for the struggling computer company, good news thatexecutives attribute partly to DG's powerful AViiON line, which uses apizza box-shaped CPU.    Those officials maintained that they could not tell Venetis about theplanned pizza bash one minute before the stock market's 4 p.m. closebecause of the possibility that the 13-year DG employee mightinadvertently leak the news.    Venetis said that when he got out of the meeting that afternoon, hiscrew had already gone home. So he called his wife and told her toimmediately get 10 pounds of yeast-somehow.    Firing up the store's two ovens, Venetis and another employee workedthrough midnight making enough dough for 1,200 pizzas. After catching afew hours' sleep, he returned to DG at 3 a.m. and-with an eight-personcrew-continued the pizza preparation with an eye toward cooking beginningat 7 a.m.    But, Venetis told his bosses, he was not going to make 1,800 by themorning. No way.    It was then that the telephone rang for Scott Whitman, the storemanager for the Southborough restaurant of Domino's Pizza. It was a DGofficial asking for a delivery of 150 pizzas by 11:15 a.m. and anadditional 100 pies at noon. The order was later increased to 275.    ``He was a little stunned at that point,'' said Randy Soper, thefranchise area supervisor for Domino's. ``On an average Thursday, he couldhave expected orders for maybe 65 or 70'' pizzas.    But splitting the order between stores in Southborough and Framinghammade the job doable, said Soper, who spent much of that next morningkneading dough.    ``We were just cranking out pies. One guy slapping them down and oneguy saucing,'' he said. ``It was conveyor-belt pizza-making at its best.This is the largest single order that our company has ever had'' inMassachusetts.    When they delivered the order, they found themselves greeted with notips (So THAT's how they are now profitable!) and a DG manager who staredat his watch and wanted the $3 off because they didn't make it in 30minutes.    ``We don't have our guarantee over 10 pizzas,'' Soper said, addingthat he told the DG manager that he was willing to make an exception forDG. ``I volunteered to give him $3 off the whole order'' costing ``alittle more than $1,700.''    To make matters easier for the Domino's crew, toppings were avoidedand all 275 large pizzas were just plain cheese. Venetis' batch included600 pepperoni and 300 mushroom pies.    Ironically, this job might have been easier for Venetis two years agobefore major DG layoffs dwindled the number of workers at headquarters.howwould it have been easier? The irony is that those layoffs are the mainreason for DG's current profitability. ``A year ago, we used to make 200pizzas a day,'' he said.    When the 22-year-veteran pizza man was asked how the pizzas tastedafter all the insanity died down, he laughed. ``I didn't taste any ofthem. After you make 1,000 pizzas, how can you be able to eat them?''    (Evan Schuman is the news editor at UNIX Today!) Editor's note: In thenext issue, Mitch Wagner will take up where he left off last time with thestory of the Tetris hackers.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-13IA059-000323-B026-221http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec50.html 205.156.212.5 19970114223747 text/html 27736HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:36:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:55 GMTContent-length: 27549Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec50.html Sample Issue Copyright OPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ANALYSIS IOMEGA'S ZIP IS OMN'S PRODUCT OF THE YEAR (896 words) PD PD COULD BE WINNER AT THE `RIGHT' PRICE POINT (788 words) MO APEX AIMS HIGH, WHILE MAJOR COMPETITORS STICK TOGETHER (994 words) COMPONENTS NEW CHIP SET OFFERED FOR ERASABLE CD-R/E (353 words) STRATEGIES LOW-PRICE UPGRADE WINDOW STILL IS OPEN FOR MO AND PD (573 words) BACKWARD COMPATIBLE HONORABLE MENTIONS FOR OMN PRODUCT OF THE YEAR (434 words) CopyrightOPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996IOMEGA'S ZIP IS OMN'S PRODUCT OF THE YEAR      Forget the maxim: "If you build it they will come."  Whatapparently works to sell removable storage devices nowadays is lowpricing and narrowly targeted marketing.  In 1995, this was provendramatically by OMN's Product of the Year: the Zip drive, made byIomega Corp., of Roy, Utah.      Two other storage devices that debuted last year deserve to berunners-up: phase change dual, or PD and Apex.   Both of themrepresent new directions and opportunities for the optical storageindustry.A Sexy Package for Younger Users      The hottest ticket of 1995 was a sales receipt for Zip: the$199, 100-MB 3.5-in. removable magnetic disk cartridge system thatwent on sale at the beginning of the year (OMN, Jan. 17).      Stan Corker, director of removable storage research forInternational Data Corp., told OMN that he expects Iomega to haveshipped "just under a million" Zip units in 1995, and forecasts it toship "three-to-four million" units in 1996.      An Iomega spokesman declined to cite end-of-year sales figures. He told OMN simply: "By November, we'd shipped our one-millionthpersonal storage solution, but that includes not only Zip but Ditto[quarter-in. tape drives], as well."      Whatever the actual numbers, it's safe to say that Iomega soldhundreds of thousands of Zips last year--a figure that is an order ofmagnitude higher than that of any competing removable disk product,especially optical.      There's no arguing with success, and there's no secret to howthey did it.  Iomega wrapped the drive in a standout purple box; gaveit a slangy, sexy name; and backed everything up with magazine adsaimed directly at the hottest demographic bulge: the 18-to-35-year-olds whom TV networks also covet.  Computer users in that age bracketdon't have much experience with removable storage beyond floppies,except maybe quarter-in. cartridge (QIC) tape.  And, of course, Iomegapositioned Ditto to reach them too.  These younger users also aren'tloyal to 3.5-in. MO or to SyQuest Technologies' established lines ofmagnetic disk cartridge drives.      Iomega made one mistake: it didn't realize how big the demandwould be.  The external Zips are still selling at full list price, andthere are backlogs in most channels.        Iomega had to sign up Seiko Epson as a second-source (OMN, Dec.5,; July 18,).  This year, assuming that production rises as expected,Fuji Photo Film USA and Maxell Corp. of America will brand and sellZip drives in the United States.  It's as if Zip opened a new productcategory: bigger than a floppy, but not too big and not too expensive. "No one else recognized the importance of a sub-$200 price point,"said Corker.      Since August, Iomega has been offering an internal SCSI versionof Zip to OEMs; and it showed an internal IDE version at Comdex. Both, according to the Iomega spokesman, "could be retailed at somefuture date."  OMN has learned that Iomega also is working on athinner internal version, to be sold on an OEM basis to portable- andlaptop computer makers.  Even at a premium price, such a subsystemwould find a ready market.      Around mid-year, SyQuest dashed in with a competing product:EZ135, which costs about the same ($239, external version), yet holdsmore data and transfers it faster.  The usenets (user-group bulletinboards) that OMN reads are full of happy testimonials for EZ135,although some users who have tried both report that Zip is easier toinstall.The Might-Have-Beens      But competitive performance alone isn't the name of the game anymore.  Zip is what retail customers are asking for by name, and astroll through the aisles of retail computer stores during the holidayshopping season showed that Zip was more prominently displayed.      This "new" category that Zip seems to have generated could havecome to life years ago, with the arrival of Floptical or of 3.5-in.MO.  But both those products fell short of defining the niche andattracting users.      Floptical blended optical and magnetic technologies: a 21-MB,3.5-in. magnetic disk with a laser-guided head.  21 MB seemed like alot five years ago.  If it had been less expensive it might havegenerated a big installed base.  But it also was inadequatelypromoted, and was soon overshadowed by SyQuest's aggressively marketed(and ultimately very successful) 44-MB and 88-MB, 5.25-in. productline.      A consortium of Matsushita-Kotobuki Electronics Industries Ltd.,Compaq Computer Corp. and 3M Co. is trying to revive the Floptical--inprinciple--with a 120 MB drive that also will read 1.44 MB floppies(OMN, Aug. 1,).  But users today pay practically nothing for theirfloppy drives.  With Zip and EZ135 already on the shelves, it's likelythat this revival will close out of town.      3.5-in. MO drives also could have been the gotta-have-it storagegadgets if they would have been launched at a far lower price ($2,000in 1991), or had dropped below $1,000 quickly.        Instead, 128 MB drives were sold mainly into a captive personalcomputer market in Japan, and never aggressively marketed in theUnited States.  With no significant installed base here, manufacturerswere slow to innovate: they took more than three years to not-evendouble its capacity to 230 MB, and those drives have only now brokenthrough the $500 floor.      The Zip experience also proves that either of these devicesmight have done (at least a little) better if they'd been promotedwith some pizzazz.  (Iomega Corp., 801/778-1000.) Back to Headline List CopyrightOPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996PD COULD BE WINNER AT THE `RIGHT' PRICE POINT      Phase change dual (PD) systems, which debuted in 1995, alsocould define a new product category; but PD has a narrower window ofopportunity than Zip, and faces a potentially more powerful competitorin CD-R.  PD's recent retail price drop below $500, however, shouldgive it a boost in 1996.      PD is made by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., of Osaka,Japan, and is distributed in the United States under four brand names:NEC, by NEC Technologies, of Boxborough, Mass.; Panasonic, byPanasonic Communications & Systems Co., of Secaucus, N.J. (asubsidiary of Matsushita); Plasmon, by Plasmon Data Systems, ofMilpitas, Calif.; and Toray, by Toray Marketing & Sales America, ofSan Mateo, Calif.      With a single tray-load mechanism and a multipurpose headconfiguration, PD offers the equivalent of two valuable drives in asingle enclosure: a 650 MB rewritable optical disk subsystem and a 4Xspeed CD-ROM reader.  It can read CD-ROMs (and recorded CD-R media)because phase change technology exploits domain reflectivity in a waythat is similar to that of CDs.      PD was announced more than a year ago (OMN, Sept. 27, 1994,),but production was stalled while Matsushita finalized specificationsof its disk format (OMN, April 24,).  This delayed the launch untilmid-year (OMN, Aug. 29,).  List prices, which began just under $1,000,were reduced in November to about half that much (OMN, Nov. 7,).      Steven Yuhas, president of Panasonic Communications & Systems,told OMN in December that "we think we've reached the right pricepoint now.  The user gets a 650 MB optical disk system for only about$300" (that is: for the difference between the PD's price and that ofa 4X CD-ROM reader, which also fell in 1995 to about $200 today).      The internal version of PD conserves expansion slots--also abenefit, but mainly for OEMs.  Compaq Computer Corp., of Houston,Texas, has entered into an OEM agreement with Matsushita/Panasonic tosell PD drives in its computers.  Panasonic and the others areadvertising PD, but additional computer makers will have to cut OEMdeals to actually put PD in front of more people.  Most users stilldon't know about storage options anyway, beyond tape backup, and theyface too many choices when they do go looking for storage devices.      The end-user market is extremely price-sensitive.  As CD-ROMreader prices continue to fall (6X readers now retail for less than$350), the pressure on PD's price structure will not abate.  It isalmost impossible to purchase a personal computer (PC) today without aCD-ROM reader; and systems costing more than $1,500 typically comewith a 4X reader.  The extra cost of PD pushes PD-equipped systemshigher, but they're still within most business users' budgets.      Price aside, what the PD vendors need to stress is value.  PD isarguably the least expensive way to store 650 MB on a removable disk. A 5.25-in., 1.3 GB MO drive will continue to cost more than twice asmuch, notwithstanding the closeout price of discontinued IBMdrives:under $750, while supplies last (OMN, Aug. 15,).PD as CD-ROM's Disc Image?g disk-based competitors, the chief rival to PD is CD-R.  While CD-Rhas been used primarily as a database publishing medium, and has morerecently been able to serve (via software) as a data backup device,CD-R disks are not bootable, nor (being write-once) do they behavelike floppy or optical disks.  PD, by contrast, offers floppy-likeuser familiarity, generates bootable disks, and uses rewritable media.      With bundled software, some CD-R drives now cost less than$1,000 (OMN, Nov. 21,; Oct. 10,).  These are relatively slow drives,and the accompanying programs are not the ultra-sophisticatedauthoring or mastering tools.  Nonetheless, a $1,000 CD-R drive, withits sub-$10 media, undeniably is a bargain, since its disks can beread by practically every CD-ROM reader or CD-Audio player ever made.      A PD drive can read CD-ROMs and CD-R discs, but CD-ROM and CD-Rdrives can not read PD media.  PD users will be able to share mediaonly with other PD users, while CD-R users gain leverage from beingable to reach literally millions of Compact Disc users.      But synergy is possible.  PD can be used in the contentdevelopment/software authoring stages of making CD-ROMs.  The disks'storage capacities are roughly equivalent, and the making of CD-ROMsalmost always requires dedicating a hard disk drive (HDD) to the "discimage" under development.      PD is nearly an order of magnitude faster than tape, and almostas fast as an HDD (since phase change is a direct-overwritetechnology).  Being removable, PD media offers an added advantage overHDD by enabling several versions of a project to coexistsimultaneously while they're being tested and compared.  (MatsushitaElectric Industrial Co. Ltd. +81/3-3578-1237.) Back to Headline List CopyrightOPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996APEX AIMS HIGH, WHILE MAJOR COMPETITORS STICK TOGETHER      The biggest storage news story of 1995 was the appearance ofApex, a 4.6 GB 5.25-in. MO subsystem from Pinnacle Micro Inc., ofIrvine, Calif. (OMN, Aug. 1,).  It's a stunning technical achievement;had the drives been shipping in quantity by now, Apex would have beenOMN's Product of the Year.      The rest of the MO manufacturers last year coalesced around a2.6 GB upgrade from 1.3 GB, and resolved to follow a migration paththat could bring backward-compatible 5.2 GB drives to market in 1997(OMN, Oct. 24,).  By sticking together with "standard" products,however, these manufacturers run the risk of being stuck with them ifApex takes off.      Apex offers more than just higher storage capacity.  It'sspecified to have a direct-overwrite capability for extra recordingspeed and to list for only $1,700: two-thirds of the announced debutprices for 2.6 GB drives.      Pinnacle's strategy for marketing Apex is twofold: to buildawareness of what a 4.6 GB removable storage device can do, byadvertising it in end-user and industry publications; and toconcentrate on making OEM sales to computer makers (the announced OEMprice is $800).      In November, Pinnacle signed its first OEM deal, with IntergraphCorp., of Huntsville, Ala., (OMN, Nov. 7,).  OEM sales represent a newdirection for Pinnacle, which has long offered standard products(albeit in innovative packages), and has therefore depended almostexclusively on retail and integrator channels.     Some Glitches      Pinnacle plowed nearly all of its last-year's profits intodeveloping Apex, setting up a manufacturing plant for it in ColoradoSprings, Colo.  Some component glitches--which are inevitable with anynew venture--have delayed Apex's full production until the firstquarter of 1996.  Sample units shipped before year's end do notperform certain functions exactly as originally specified (OMN, Nov.21,).  But vice president Scott Blum assured OMN in December thatproduction units would meet all performance specs.      Blum's enthusiasm for Apex is palpable: he is the driving forcebehind Apex's development; his company, though publicly traded sincemid-1993, is still largely controlled by his family; and his father,Bill Blum, is president.        Pinnacle's stock currently is tradingclose to its high for the year; and last month the company declared a50 percent stock dividend, giving shareholders one extra share forevery two that they held as of Dec. 1.What about Direct-Overwrite?      Contrary to OMN's report of Nov. 21 (OMN, Nov. 21), which wasbased on information provided by Scott Blum, Pinnacle does not licenseits direct-overwrite technology from Nikon Corp. of Japan.      In a manual that Pinnacle distributed to prospective OEMs,Pinnacle stated: "Apex will also be one of the first ... optical diskdrives to support Direct Overwrite (DOW).  Media has been developedthat allows single-pass writes instead of the two-pass write mediaused in existing drives.  The technology uses Light IntensityModulation Method (LIMM)."      This method, abbreviated "LIMM-DOW" (alternatively, "LIM-DOW"),was developed by Nikon.      As OMN reported, Pinnacle's media supplier is Tokyo-basedMitsubishi Chemical Corp. (MCC).  Blum told OMN, "I believe MCC has alicense that allows them to make the LIM-DOW media.  MCC does theinitial stage; Nikon puts on their layers; then the media returns toMCC for the final stages.  There is involvement from Nikon to someextent--that's what MCC told me."      According to Shinya Sasayama, general manager of Nikon's OpticalStorage Division, in Tokyo, the only outside LIM-DOW project withwhich Nikon is currently involved is a joint endeavor with HitachiMaxell Corp. to develop 2.6 GB media.      Asked to clarify this inconsistency, MCC director YoshimitsuKobayashi told OMN:  "Unfortunately, I can not comment on anythingabout [4.6 GB] media and LIM-DOW media just now."Standards vs. Progress      The first 2.6 GB drives were shipped by Most Inc.  The nextcompany to roll out the drives will probably be Maxoptix Corp., whichwill likely be followed by Hitachi America and Sony Electronics Inc.(OMN, Nov. 7,).  Nearly every other MO manufacturer is expected tooffer a 2.6 GB drive in 1996 (see related story, p. 7).      Technical standards for the 2.6 GB capacity point, to whichthese manufacturers prefer to adhere, were developed within the X3.B11committee of the International Standards Organization (ISO).  Pinnacleis an ISO and X3.B11 member, and has proposed that its Apexspecifications be accepted as a new 4.6 GB standard.      But the decision to migrate methodically, doubling capacityevery two years, was made in meetings of the Optical StorageTechnology Association (OSTA), to which nearly all of the othermanufacturers--except Pinnacle--belong.  They are positioning their2.6 GB drives against Apex by emphasizing backward-compatibility:being able to read existing 650 MB media and to read and write 1.3 GBmedia.      Users who are ready to move up, therefore, must weigh the OSTA-compliant alternative: simply swap out an old drive for a new 2.6 GBdrive, with very little downtime or reconfiguration necessary. Switching to Apex probably means running dual systems until allimportant data has been ported over to the more capacious media.  Onthe other hand, Apex poses no such dilemma for new users.     Standards, even de facto standards, are a mixed blessing: theyencourage conformance but inhibit innovation.  It's hard to make a"standard" product sexy.  Yet to succeed, the OSTA-compliant drivemakers must market more aggressively than ever before, especially tonew users.  Even without Apex, there are ongoing challenges that theyignore at their peril.  Magnetic tape will not go away.  In theremovable optical disk market, CD-R is nibbling at the low end, while12-in. is beckoning at the high end.  And high-capacity hard diskdrives are getting cheaper all the time.     Pinnacle, at least, recognized this and is doing something aboutit.  The OSTA members may squirm to acknowledge the fact, but Apexrepresents genuine progress.  Its aggressive price/performance pointcould give the whole industry a long-needed shove in the rightdirection: straight into the minds of new users.  (Pinnacle MicroInc., 714/789-3000.) Back to Headline List CopyrightOPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996NEW CHIP SET OFFERED FOR ERASABLE CD-R/E     To build an erasable version of the recordable Compact Disc (CD-R), prospective drive makers will need to incorporate a new integratedcircuit (IC).  It's model SAA7390, manufactured by PhilipsSemiconductors, a Sunnyvale, Calif., subsidiary of Philips ElectronicsNV, of Eindhoven, The Netherlands.     This IC is specified to support 6X reading and 4X writing, with amaximum burst data transfer rate (into the external interface IC) of16.9 MB/sec.  "Third level error encoding and decoding in hardware isincluded [as is] an easy-to-use memory management system with tenlayers of arbitration," according to marketing manager SunilNethisinghe.     Philips, he said, also will offer prospective CD-R/E drive makers"total systems packages [that] are expected to reduce the drivedevelopment time by about eight months."     The SAA7390 is priced at $25 in 10,000-unit orders, and isscheduled for release in January.Can CD-R/E Compete?     The erasable system, which is expected to debut this year, wascalledCD-E, but has recently been designated CD-R/E by its developer,Philips Electronics NV.  Besides CD-R, its chief competitor willprobably be phase change dual (PD; see related story, p. 3).  But fortwo reasons, the contest may not turn out to be close.     Like PD, CD-R/E employs phase-change technology (OMN, July 18, p.6.  But CD-R/E drives and media will be more expensive than PD or CD-R: at launch, perhaps at least $2,000 for the drives, with $25 media.     More problematic for CD-R/E, however, is the fact that themedia's recording layer has a lower reflectivity than that of CD-R orthat of the data layer in a CD-ROM.  Thus, the present installed baseof readers and recorders can not read CD-R/E discs (OMN, Aug. 15, p.7).  Only CD-ROM and CD-R drives manufactured after 1995 will have thenewer circuitry that makes them sensitive enough to read CD-R/E media.     Of course, no one knows how quickly (or how many) CD-Rmanufacturers will make the switch, nor how soon the unsoldinventories of older CD-ROM readers will be depleted, allowing thechannels to make room for the new ones.  (Philips Electronics NV,+31/40-73-48-66; Philips Semiconductors, 408/991-4540.) Back to Headline List CopyrightOPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996LOW-PRICE UPGRADE WINDOW STILL IS OPEN FOR MO AND PD     There still is a chance for 3.5-in. MO and phase change dual (PD)systems to seize market share along the storage upgrade path.  Verysoon, Zip users will find they need more than 100 MB, and thatmagnetic disk cartridges can't meet every need.  But they won't wantto spend more than $500 on a solution.     The only near-term upgrade on Iomega's horizon is an order ofmagnitude bigger--the 1 GB Jaz--which has not yet shipped, and is alsoincompatible.  SyQuest already is overextended with too manyincompatible product lines and doesn't have an EZ135 upgrade ready toroll out either.  Nomai, which makes SyQuest-compatible products (OMN,Aug. 29,), doesn't have the advertising budget to compete with Iomegaor SyQuest.     Since users will have to buy something incompatible with Zip,there's a window of opportunity in 1996 for optical disk vendors tomeet the move-up needs.  The end-user prices for 1.3 GB MO drivesprobably will fall below $1,000, as vendors clear their shelves tomake room for new 2.6 GB drives and/or Pinnacle's Apex.  But that'sstill a lot of money for the "average" user; and 5.25-in. media stillwill cost about $80.PD is the Better Deal     Today's 230 MB 3.5-in. drives will have to come down under $300very soon or they'll be squeezed out once again: by Zip below and bytheir own 640 MB and 650 MB cousins above.  Those higher-capacitydrives, however, were announced long ago (OMN, Nov. 22, 1994,) andhave yet to appear on the market.  When they do, they'll probably listfor about $1,000.  At half the price, PD is a better deal.     There's money to be made in 3.5-in. MO, but only Olympus andFujitsu seem to have coherent strategies for staying in that business(OMN, Aug. 15,).  Olympus is going for high performance (2.61 MB/secspecified maximum data transfer rate), while Fujitsu is making a fastbut modest-priced model for the desktop and a slower, but very thinmodel for OEM-ing to notebook computer makers.  (Apple [AAPL] isFujitsu's first OEM customer.)     Within the PD community, a viable strategy would be to encouragecontent providers actively to "master" their CD-ROMs on PD, and--atthe same time--to persuade replicators to accept PD disks (along withtape and CD-R media) as mastering media sources.  PD might then becomea respectable niche product in a niche market.  CD-R (if not CD-R/E)still will be gaining.     All the optical disk system manufacturers, ISVs, systemsdevelopers and retailers this year would be well-advised to market theconcept of removable storage aggressively; to target the most likelynew users and advertise to them heavily; and to push prices down tobuild an installed base. **********************************************************************                   OLYMPUS UNVEILS `SUPER-FAST' MO DRIVE     Olympus Image Systems Inc., of Melville, N.Y., has a 2.6 GB 5.25-in. magneto-optic (MO) drive that it claims will be "the fastest ISO-compliant MO drive in the marketplace."  Sample units reportedly wereshipped in December, with production quantities set to ship in "thefirst quarter of 1996."  Pricing is not set yet.  The drive, modelMOS540E, has 4 MB of on-board memory and is specified to have a diskrotation speed of 3,600 rpm, producing a specified data transfer rateof up to 4 MB/sec and a seek time of 26 msec.  Olympus Image Systemsis a division of Olympus Optical Co., of Tokyo.  (Olympus ImageSystems Inc., 800/347-4027.) **********************************************************************Back to Headline List CopyrightOPTICAL MEMORY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996HONORABLE MENTIONS FOR OMN PRODUCT OF THE YEAR     Many products were newsworthy in 1995, and are therefore worthcalling attention to once more.  Besides the significant achievements,there also were a few products of more transitory--if not dubious--value.     * 12-in. Systems Get Bigger.  ATG Cygnet, Nikon Corp., PhilipsLMS and Sony Corp. all announced higher capacity 12-in. optical disks. Nikon launched its 8 GB rewritable MO drive in the United States,though it has been available for years in Japan.  Philips beganshipping a substantial upgrade from its original RapidChanger.  Sonyannounced a 15 GB drive--though it has yet to explain how that drivewill read Sony's older disks.  ATG Cygnet topped the capacity charts,promising a 16 GB system in 1996 (OMN, Oct. 10,; April 24,; April 10,;March 27,).     * Real Progress in Jukeboxes.  ATG Cygnet's 12-in. jukeboxesalready support other manufacturers' drives--not only ATG's.  So it'slogical that the Cygnature jukebox series should be able to supportnot only optical disks but CDs and magnetic tape (OMN, April 10,). Gateway commissioned Sanyo to build a three-disc CD jukebox (OMN, May23,).  Several vendors began selling Nakamichi's seven-disc CD jukebox(Jan. 3, p. 6), and NEC released its four-disc half-height CD changer(OMN, Nov. 21,).  Hewlett-Packard gave its SureStor jukeboxes a two-disk transport mechanism (OMN, Feb. 14,).  And Smart Storagediscovered how to get a CD jukebox to read and write simultaneously(OMN, Nov. 7,).     * SD is Finalized.  The next generation of CDs will be prettymuch what Toshiba Corp. and its allies wanted, with one technicalconcession to the competing Sony/Philips group.  Yet ironically, inDecember, the participants announced that the new multigigabyte mediawill be known as "DVD"--just what Sony and Philips proposed.  "DVD"doesn't stand for anything (one vendor suggested "digital versatiledisk"), but the products will be distinguished by extensions, e.g.DVD-Audio; DVD-Video; DVD-ROM, etc. (OMN, Sept. 26,).     * `Intelligent Media' Appears.  Software Architects releasedsoftware that lets PCs read Macintosh disks.  This was one of those"if they can land a man on the moon, why can't they ...?" conundrumsthat the computer industry failed to answer for ten years.  Hats offto the product, Here & Now (OMN, July 4,).     * Where Are They Now?   OMN also was able to offer one fleetingglance at a handful of products that subsequently vanished from theradar screen: Toray's 1.3 GB 3.5-in. drive (OMN, March 14); Fujitsu's3.5-in "Dyna-Mite" MO jukebox (April 24 p. 6); Exabyte's 20 GB Mammoth8 mm tape drive; Pioneer's 2.2 GB 5.25-in. MO drive (OMN, April 10,;and every MO drive that IBM ever made (OMN, Aug. 15,). Back to Headline List WT03-B33-14IA059-000323-B026-251http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec94.html 205.156.212.5 19970114223814 text/html 20226HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:36:21 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:13 GMTContent-length: 20039Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec94.html Sample Issue Copyright PC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DIGITAL ANNOUNCES THREE NEW PRINTERS WITH INDUSTRY-LEADING CONNECTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE (638 words) WORLD AIDS DAY EVENT FOCUSES ON WORKPLACE ISSUES (397 words) DIGITAL SEMICONDUCTOR'S FX!32 TRANSLATION SOFTWARE WINS TOP BYTE AWARD (220 words) BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL ALPHA SERVERS, PCs TO POWER NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM (1022 words) ILENE H. LANG JOINS DIGITAL AS HEAD OF CONNECTIVITY SOFTWARE BUSINESS UNIT (380 words) CopyrightPC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIGITAL ANNOUNCES THREE NEW PRINTERSWITH INDUSTRY-LEADING CONNECTIVITY AND PERFORMANCELG08plus, LG12plus and LA30N Printers Meet User Demand forMission-Critical, High-Volume Printing SolutionsDigital Equipment Corporation has reinforced its position as aleader in printing solutions with the announcement of theLGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printers and the LA30N dotmatrix companion printer. These three new impact printers, allof which will be demonstrated at the Digital EquipmentCorporation User Society (DECUS) trade show in San Francisco,enable unparalleled connectivity in open office or industrialcomputing environments. Offering unsurpassed openness and thelowest cost of ownership in their respective classes, theprinters are ideal for users seeking mission-critical,high-volume printing solutions."Not only does Digital continue to support its customers witha new generation of ANSI printers, but is committed toensuring these products are compatible in open systemenvironments," said Jeb Hurley, acting vice president,Printing Systems Business. "Digital uniquely offers users theability to distribute printing throughout the enterprise and,because of our wide range of products, enables them to selecta printer with just the right price, speed and performance tomeet their needs."LGO8plus and LG12plus Line Matrix PrintersThe LGO8plus and LG12plus printers expand Digital's successfulLGplus family of high-speed line matrix printers (firstlaunched in May, 1995, with the LG04plus printer). Theseprinters are ideal for a variety of mission-criticalapplications such as bar coding, multi-part forms, accountingstatements and internal reports -- in many cases supplantingthe need for more costly laser printers for these types ofapplications.Benefits of the LGO8plus and LG12plus line matrix printersinclude:* unsurpassed reliability with an unlimited duty cycle and10,000 hour mean time before failure (MTBF)* high-quality output and the lowest cost per page in itsclass* support for a variety of platforms including OpenVMS, UNIX,Windows NT and Windows '95* compatible with a number of emulations including ANSI,ProPrinter, LP, LG, Epson and P Series protocols as well asoptional emulations (including Magnum Code V [VGL] andPrintronix Graphics Language)* maximum flexibility in multi-user environments with bothserial and parallel ports* high-speed 800 line per minute and 1,200 line per minuteprinting (for the LG08plus and LG12plus printers,respectively)* allows users to upgrade their printing speed with the use ofan upgradeable printhead for LGplus series printers* backward compatibility with software applications written tosupport existing LG models* LAN connectivity via the RapidPrint 200 interface box, anoptional Ethernet interface device supporting TCP/IP, LAT, andNovell network protocolsLA30N Dot Matrix Companion PrinterAs a third generation product in Digital's ANSI dot matrixprinter family, the powerful LA30N dot matrix companionprinter is designed to withstand rigorous use and provideoutstanding performance for customers in a wide range ofindustries. The LA30N printer supports not only Digital's ANSIprinting protocol, but also the IBM Proprinter X24E and EpsonESC/P2 protocols, enabling it to function in workstation aswell asSpecific benefits of the LA30N dot matrix companion printerinclude:* outstanding reliability and performance with a 3,500page-per-month duty cycle and 8,000 hour MTBF* high-quality print output at speeds up to 330 characters persecond* superior flexibility with two user-selectable configurationsas well as auto-switching serial and parallel interfaces* advanced paper-handling capabilities that allow for eitherrear or bottom paper feed as well as push or pull tractor feedPricing and AvailabilityPricing and availability for the LGO8plus line matrix printer,the LG12plus line matrix printer and the LA30N dot matrixcompanion printer will be announced in January, 1996. Allthree products will be available through Digital's worldwidenetwork of reseller and distributor partners. For moreinformation within the U.S. call 800-777-4343, or yourauthorized Digital representative.Back to Headline List CopyrightPC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNetJanuary 1996WORLD AIDS DAY EVENT FOCUSES ON WORKPLACE ISSUESWorld AIDS Day Event Focuses on Workplace Issues featuresguided dialogue with local talk show host David Brudnoy, WBZRadio's News and Program Director Brian Whittemore, andBrudnoy's physician, Dr. Deborah CottonThe New England Corporate Consortium for AIDS Education -- incommemoration of World AIDS Day -- will hold its annualbusiness breakfast on Friday, December 1 at the Museum of FineArts in Boston. The theme is "Shared Rights and SharedResponsibility," focusing on creating supportive workenvironments for employees affected by the HIV disease.The meeting will center around a guided dialogue entitled"Managing AIDS in the Workplace -- the Triumph of Reason andCompassion: The David Brudnoy Story." Brudnoy, a nationallyrecognized critic, author and well-known television and radiotalk show host, will speak of his own experience living andworking with HIV disease. With his manager, Brian Whittemore,and his physician, Dr. Deborah Cotton of the Harvard MedicalSchool of Public Health and the Infectious Disease Unit ofMassachusetts General Hospital, Brudnoy will discuss theissues and decisions that are key to managing AIDS in theworkplace.The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that there areapproximately 17 million HIV/AIDS infections worldwide, andpredicts up to 40 million infections worldwide within fiveyears. Among the 50 states, Massachusetts has the 10th highestnumber of AIDS cases. From July 1994 to July 1995 there were1,396 new cases reported. This represents a 23.1 percentincrease over the previous year. It is estimated that 90percent of those infected with HIV are employed."The New England Corporate Consortium for AIDS Education wasformed in 1987 because AIDS/HIV disease is a business issue,"said Paul Ross, chairman of the New England CorporateConsortium for AIDS Education and manager of the AIDS ProgramOffice at Digital Equipment Corporation. "Business must take aleadership role in combating both AIDS/HIV disease andAIDS-related discrimination by encouraging effective AIDSeducation and ensuring compassionate treatment for thoseaffected by AIDS/HIV."The New England Corporate Consortium for AIDS Education is agroup of 20 companies spearheading the region's fight againstAIDS. The group's charter is to stimulate private sectorleadership in responding to AIDS. The companies, each of whichhas its own internal AIDS awareness program, have developedAIDS education materials that are available to businessesthrough the AIDS Action Committee and the American Red Cross.Back to Headline List CopyrightPC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIGITAL SEMICONDUCTOR'S FX!32 TRANSLATIONSOFTWARE WINS TOP BYTE AWARDDigital Equipment Corporation's new FX!32 translationsoftware, which gives Alpha computer systems and PCs full,high-performance x86 compatibility for 32-bit Windows andWindows NT applications, has won BYTE magazine's prestigious"Best Technology" award.Calling the new technology "revolutionary," BYTE announced theaward at a ceremony in Las Vegas. The award was accepted byMaurice Marks, technical director for Digital Semiconductor, aDigital Equipment Corporation business, and leader of theFX!32 development effort.FX!32 advanced translation and emulation technology will giveAlpha users transparent access to 32-bit native x86applications, greatly augmenting the broad Alpha portfolio ofnative Windows NT applications. Sixteen-bit Windowsapplications will be accessible through Insignia Solutions'SoftWindows product. The combination of these approaches willprovide for Alpha users the entire suite of x86 Windowsapplications, at comparable or better performance than on x86systems.Digital Semiconductor, a Digital Equipment Corporationbusiness headquartered in Hudson, Massachusetts, designs,manufactures and markets industry-leading semiconductorproducts including Alpha microprocessors and PCI chips fornetworking, bridging, and graphics/multimedia, as well aslow-power StrongARM microprocessors under license fromAdvanced RISC Machines Ltd. Digital Semiconductor operatesdesign centers in Hudson; Palo Alto, California; Austin,Texas; and Jerusalem, Israel. A new, $450-million fabricationfacility in Hudson will begin revenue production in 1996.Mitsubishi Electric Company is a second source for Alphamicroprocessors.Back to Headline List CopyrightPC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNetJanuary 1996BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL ALPHA SERVERS,PCs TO POWER NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEMBest Western International, Inc., the world's largest hotelbrand, has selected multiple AlphaServer 8400 "TurboLaser"systems, the world's most powerful servers, together withthousands of Digital personal computers, to power BestWestern's new worldwide central reservation system (CRS).Digital and Best Western announced this agreement, among thelargest AlphaServer 8400 sales to date, at the InternationalHotel/Motel & Restaurant trade show here.When fully implemented, the deal will be worth more than $12million in Digital revenue. A total of 10 AlphaServer 8400systems will power Best Western's operations center centralhost server, located in Phoenix, Ariz., as well as BWI'sreservation centers located in Phoenix, Wichita, Kan., Dublin,Ireland, and Milan, Italy. The new servers will run Oracle7relational database management system with the 64-bit DigitalUNIX operating system, handling in excess of 2,000transactions per second. AlphaServer systems will replaceoutdated and over-extended mainframes.In addition, Digital will deliver some 3,500 Digital Venturis535 PCs to every Best Western property worldwide, where theywill provide a full range of inventory and rate managementcapabilities. This part of the system will enable hoteliers toenroll in Best Western marketing programs and create their ownprograms and pricing packages."Today we unveil the hotel industry's most ambitious, advancedcustomer reservation system. We selected theDigital/Oracle/UNIX solutions because of its superiorperformance, flexibility, and growth potential -- at one-tenththe cost of competing systems," said William S. Watson, BestWestern International's executive vice president."We expect the Digital/Oracle solution to dramatically improveour ability to respond more rapidly to customer needs, toquickly provide our client agents more and more relevantinformation on our customers' travel preferences, to increaseour sales and revenues, and to enhance our company's image,"Watson added.The new system is expected to to generate more than $50million in incremental annual room revenue and willsignificantly reduce corporate and property level operatingcosts.Pace-setting Global Reservation SystemBest Western's new central reservations systems, scheduled fora March 15, 1996, start-up, offers unprecedented features andfunctions, both at the property level and at the Best Westerncentral reservations offices. It will be a serviceenhancement for the 40 million travelers worldwide who stay atBest Western hotels each year.With the new CRS, Best Western will be the only hotel chain toprovide comprehensive geographic, pictorial, and textualinformation to its reservation sales agents. These featureswill enable guests who call a Best Western central reservationoffice from any location, whether at home or on the road, tofind the Best Western hotel that is closest to their desireddestination.The new system will enable Best Western to provide detailedguest histories, group booking capabilities, revenuemanagement service, travel agent commission data, and a widerange of property-specific and destination information.Yet the new system is much more than a traditionaltransaction- oriented network. It will provide the businesstools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing andfuture customers."Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bringradical changes to the way products are distributed to itscustomers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital andOracle as technology partners for the new millennium," saidPauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServerBusiness Segment. "While Best Western customers may never knowwhat's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, BestWestern managers will sleep better knowing our systems areproviding those customers the fastest, most reliable servicesin the travel industry."Digital's AlphaServer 8400 SystemsAlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastestmicroprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12service, travel agent commission data, and a wide range ofproperty-specific and destination information.Yet the new system is much more than a traditionaltransaction- oriented network. It will provide the businesstools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing andfuture customers."Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bringradical changes to the way products are distributed to itscustomers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital andOracle as technology partners for the new millennium," saidPauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServerBusiness Segment. "While Best Western customers may never knowwhat's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, BestWestern managers will sleep better knowing our systems areproviding those customers the fastest, most reliable servicesin the travel industry."Digital's AlphaServer 8400 SystemsAlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastestmicroprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 1264-bit processors and 14 Gbytes of memory, and can beclustered for far greater performance.Recently, Digital and Oracle together shattered thetransaction processing world performance record in benchmarktesting (tpcC) defined and audited by the independentTransaction Processing Performance Council. This wasaccomplished on an AlphaServer 8400, Digital UNIX operatingsystem, and Oracle 7 database system. The Digital/Oraclesolution bested the previous record held by Hewlett Packard by75 percent, and was far better than the best systems from IBM,Sun, AT&T, and Tandem.Taken together, the 64-bit Alpha technology, 64-bit DigitalUNIX, and 64-bit databases such as Oracle7 enable thebreakthrough performance and price/performance of VLM64.Digital is unique in the industry in its ability to deliverthis capability to customers today.Applications such as data warehousing, financial management,and online transaction processing take particular advantageof VLM64 solutions. This is because more than 4 billion timesmore data can be stored in memory than even the most powerfulmainframe systems, at a fraction of the cost. This providesdramatic improvements in processing speed, applicationperformance, and system affordability.Digital's Venturis PCsDigital Venturis is Digital's value-oriented desktop PC familydesigned to meet the computing requirements of generalbusiness users in standard office applications, as well asthose of users in a client/server environment. Ideal for thevolume purchaser, Venturis systems are simple to install, easyto use and easy to maintain, while providing room to expand ascomputing needs evolve.Back to Headline List CopyrightPC BUSINESS PRODUCTS via NewsNetJanuary 1996ILENE H. LANG JOINS DIGITAL AS HEAD OFCONNECTIVITY SOFTWARE BUSINESS UNITDigital Equipment Corporation has announced the appointment ofIlene H. Lang, 52, as vice president of the company's newlyformed Connectivity Software Business Unit. Lang, formerlysenior vice president of Lotus Development Corporation'sDesktop Business Group, joins Digital on November 27. She willreport to Digital Chairman Robert B. Palmer."Our goal for the Connectivity Software Business Unit is tocreate industry-leading solutions for client/server, Internetand enterprise connectivity," said Palmer. "I am pleased tohave Ilene join Digital to establish our leadership in solvingthe connectivity problems faced by enterprises. Her provenexperience in the development and marketing of softwaresolutions makes her the ideal choice to build this businessfor Digital."Under Lang's leadership, the Connectivity Software BusinessUnit will develop, market and sell software that enablescustomers to connect with and exploit the information assetscritical to running their business and satisfying theircustomers."I'm delighted to be joining Digital at such an exciting timein its history," said Lang. "Establishing a business unit todeliver the enterprise connectivity software needed toleverage critical information assets is precisely on target.Digital's leadership products and talented people, coupledwith its core competencies in networking, messaging, andInternet technology, provide a strong foundation for success."For the past year, Lang led the worldwide development andmarketing of Lotus' SmartSuite product line. During thattime, she established the company's presence in the emergingteam computing market, restructured operations to meetprofitability goals and accelerated new product development.Previously, she served as vice president for InternationalProduct Development for Lotus. In that role, she wasresponsible for the development of all Lotus products outsidethe U.S, and established a strategy and process forsimultaneous product shipment worldwide.Before Lotus, Lang was interim chief operating officer of theIndustrial Technology Institute, a leading organizationdevoted to improving manufacturing through application andeffective use of technology; and president of AdelieCorporation, a vendor of marketing and sales productivitysoftware solutions to Fortune 100 companies and largecommercial banks. Lang also served in several seniormanagement positions at Symbolics, a pioneer in advancedcomputer systems for artificial intelligence and symbolicprocessing systems.Lang holds an MBA from Harvard Business School and receivedher undergraduate degree from Radcliffe College.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-15IA059-000323-B027-67http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec121.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224040 text/html 255341HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:36:53 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 08-Jan-97 21:56:06 GMTContent-length: 255152Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec121.html Sample Issue Copyright PC QUEST via NewsNet October 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES THE BOFH CHRONICLES (1349 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: GUIDE TO CLIENT/SERVER DATABASES (128 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: MODERN ALL ABOUT KEYBOARD AND MOUSE (114 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: BLACK BELT C++ THE MASTERS COLLECTION (121 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: MASTERING OLE 2 (119 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: WINDOWS 95 ANSWERS: CERTIFIED TECH SUPPORT (109 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: LEARNING DELPHI THE DUMMIES WAY (301 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: MULTIMEDIA ADVENTURE WITH VISUAL C++ (399 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: NETWORKING IN PLAIN ENGLISH (490 words) LEISURE - BOOKS: A CRASH COURSE ON NETWORKING (354 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: BORLAND ANNOUNCES 3 NEW-USER VERSIONS OF DELPHI (258 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: BACKUP/ANTIVIRUS SUITE FOR NT SERVERS FROM MCAFEE (195 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: NEW VERSION OF BANYAN VINES INTRODUCED (226 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: BORLAND SHIPS UPDATES TO BORLAND C++ PRODUCTS (382 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: CYBERPUPPY UNLEASHES FIRST INTERNET KID BROWSER (159 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: USERS SIMPLY INSERT THE FLOPPYMAX BOARD & CONNECT THE DRIVE (72 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: OR TECHNOLOGY & PROMISE ANNOUNCE LS-120 UPGRADE (101 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: HP CUTS DESIGNJET 755CM PRINTER PRICE BY $1,000 (139 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: VIRTUA FIGHTER KIDS FOR SEGA SATURN RELEASED (269 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: EPSON INTRODUCES LQ2070 DOT-MATRIX PRINTER (146 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: ALPS ELECTRIC SHIPS NEW COLOR PRINTERS (394 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: IOMEGA SHIPS NEW DITTO TAPE DRIVES (216 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: KODAK SELLS COPIER BUSINESS TO UK'S DANKA (166 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: TOSHIBA TAKES A PAGE FROM SONY'S US HOME PC STRATEGY (228 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: TOSHIBA'S NEW DVD LASER CAN PUT 15 GB ON SINGLE SIDE DISK (128 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: CIRRUS LOGIC LAUNCHES NEW CD-RECORDABLE/ERASABLE CHIPS (214 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: SEAGATE EXPANDS INTO IRELAND (99 words) NEWS WORLDWATCH: IBM & 15 BANKS TEAM UP ON E-BANKING (303 words) SOFTWARE: NEW VERSIONS OF NASHPACK AND NASHLINK (493 words) SOFTWARE: NFS MAESTRO SOLUTIONS FROM LOGIX (133 words) SOFTWARE: AMPERSAND INTRODUCES HOME ACCOUNTING SOFTWARE (59 words) SOFTWARE: SDRC RELEASES I-DEAS 4 (69 words) SOFTWARE: PANCHATANTRA FABLES ON CD-ROM (78 words) SOFTWARE: PARSLEY QUERY PROCESSOR FROM POLARIS (108 words) HARDWARE: MULTIMEDIA PROJECTOR FROM GENESIS (102 words) HARDWARE: FAST ETHERNET SWITCHING FOR GEOLAN/500 HUB (121 words) HARDWARE: POLAROID LAUNCHES NEW DIGITAL IMAGING PRODUCTS (158 words) HARDWARE: MX520 THE NEW MAXOPTIX JUKEBOX (95 words) HARDWARE: CRAY SHIPS NEW RANGE OF SUPERCOMPUTERS (75 words) HARDWARE: LOGIX OFFERS ZIP DRIVE AND TRACKPAD (71 words) HARDWARE: MANHATTAN S6200 FROM AST (96 words) HARDWARE: PRINTER SHARERS FROM DATACON (106 words) HARDWARE: NEW MONITORS, SCANNERS, & CD-ROM DRIVE FROM SAMTEL (145 words) HARDWARE: POWERTEL BOCA SHIPS HIGH-SPEED SECURITY MODEMS (115 words) HARDWARE: AVER FUNTV TUNER BOARDS IN INDIA (72 words) HARDWARE: SASTEK SHIPS COLOR SCANNER (72 words) HARDWARE: CD-ROM JUKEBOX FOR NETWARE AND MAC (103 words) HARDWARE: WELI UPS FROM PEGASUS (65 words) RIT PATCHVIEW GOES MODULAR (89 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: SEMINARS AND EXHIBITIONS (342 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: LAN MULTIMEDIA & EXPERT SOFTWARE TIE-UP (42 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: WIPRO BT & LANBIT OFFER E-MAIL PACKAGE (64 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: FAULT-TOLERANT SOFTWARE FROM TANDEM & CA (72 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: MODICORP REDEFINES IT STRATEGIES (60 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: TSRM TEMPLATES FOR MS PROJECT USERS (58 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: CALS-DELL ALLIANCE (45 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: PARAMETRIC SETS UP GLOBAL RESOURCE CENTER IN INDIA (59 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: NIIT's CENTRE OF COMPETENCE FOR MANUFACTURING SOLUTIONS (77 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: MICROSOFT LAUNCHES MSF 2.0 (76 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: INNOSERV APPOINTED SANCTUARY WOODS' DISTRIBUTOR (58 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: COMSAT PROVIDES VSATS TO IPCL (92 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: TCS MICROSOFT'S PREMIER CONSULTANT (77 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: IDM OFFERS CERTIFIED NOVELL COURSES IN SRI LANKA (62 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: MS INTERNET SOLUTIONS FOR BT INTERNET CUSTOMERS (53 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: DIGITAL SHIPS ALPHASTATION 500/500 (103 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: DCM TIES UP WITH MICROSOFT (75 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: HCL COMNET LAUNCHES HYBRID VSAT SERVICES (76 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: NOVELL UNVEILS MANAGEWISE FUTURE (74 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: SGI INFINITEREALITY MAKES ENTRY IN INDIA (65 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: TULIP INTRODUCES ECO-BUTTON FOR ITS MONITORS (51 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: IIS INFOTECH BECOMES IFS'S MASTER DISTRIBUTOR IN INDIA (64 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: WIPRO TO MARKET SPSS'S NEURAL CONNECTION (66 words) NEWS - MARKETWATCH: HP DONATES FOR IIT LABORATORY (86 words) MULTITASKING WITH DOS: GENERATE A BACKGROUND WITH TINY DARTS SHOOTING ALL OVER THE SCREEN (1506 words) FAXES FOR FREE: USE EMAIL TO SEND FAXES (1134 words) MAKING MUSIC ON THE PC (2662 words) INDIA INTERNET: INDIAN SITES ON THE WORLD WIDE WEB (344 words) PAINTSHOP PRO 4: UPDATED FEATURES GIVE PSP COMMERCIAL FEATURES AT A SHAREWARE PRICE (460 words) LOMEGA ZIP DRIVE: AN EFFICIENT, FORDABLE DRIVE FOR 100 MB "FLOPPIES" (1516 words) LEXMARK OPTRA E: A ULTRA-COMPACT, LOW-COST, 600 DPI LASER PRINTER FOR PERSONAL USE (651 words) LEXMARK COLOR JETPRINTER 1020: GOOD VALUE FOR MONEY (559 words) PERSONAL RESOURCES PLANNER: AN INFORMATION MANAGER WITH FA FEATURES (632 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: HOW HELPFUL ARE HELP DESKS? (548 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: WIPRO BT EXM MAIL (258 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: VSNL GIAS (462 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: SPRINT RPG (240 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: GLOBAL MAIL (429 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: DATAPRO XEE-MAIL 96 (383 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: AXCESS (381 words) E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: PCQ LABS REVIEWS FIVE MAJOR E-MAIL PROVIDERS (406 words) PRAKASHAK: ADD INDIAN LANGUAGE CAPABILITIES TO WINDOWS APPS (550 words) NEC VERSA 4080H: NEC'S LATEST VERSA IS AN ELEGANT MULTIMEDIA PENTIUM (473 words) TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: EN ESPANOL (93 words) TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: ESSENTIAL TOOLS: PUBLICIZING YOUR WEB PAGE (222 words) TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: FOLLOW-UP: HOW'S JAVA DOING? (233 words) TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: RELIGION ON THE NET (301 words) TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: PIONEER ANONYMOUS REMAILER SHUTTERS THE SHOP (152 words) TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: AOL ENJOINED FROM BLOCKING SPAM (99 words) TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: ARE NT WORKSTATION & NT SERVER THE SAME? (157 words) TRAINING BLUES - THE IDEAL COMPUTER COURSE (618 words) REVIEW MODEMS (1258 words) WATCH YOUR PC ON TV (324 words) AND HOW THEY FARED: WITH EVERYBODY PERFORMING QUITE WELL, PRICE & FEATURES DETERMINE EDITOR'S CHOICE (619 words) REVIEW - MODEMS (910 words) ZYXEL OMNI 288S: GOOD BALANCE OF PRICING & FEATURES, COMPLEMENTED BY PERFORMANCE (261 words) ZYXEL ELITE 2864: GOOD FEATURES & MATCHING PRICING, BUT AVERAGE PERFORMANCE (388 words) US ROBOTICS SPORTSTER 28800: A NO-FRILLS MODEL WITH BELOW AVERAGE PERFORMANCE (234 words) US ROBOTICS COURIER V. EVERYTHING: EXCELLENT PERFORMANCE & FEATURES WITH A STIFF PRICE TAG (399 words) MULTITECH 2834 BL: LEASED-LINE MODEM THAT'S EXPENSIVE FOR DIAL-UP USE (339 words) MOTOROLA PREMIER 33.6: A HEFTY PRICE TAG LETS THE PREMIER DOWN (531 words) HAYES ACCURA 288 MESSAGE: GOOD PERFORMANCE & COULD DO BETTER ON FEATURES (361 words) GVC 28800: AN ATTRACTIVE LOW COST OPTION WITHOUT SACRIFICING ON PERFORMANCE (468 words) BOCA MV.34EE: GOOD PERFORMANCE & ATTRACTIVE PRICING SETS THE BOCA APART (335 words) THE PC QUEST 1996 MODEM SHOOTOUT: THE TESTS (519 words) PC QUEST 1996 MODEM SHOOTOUT: PCQ LABS TORTURE-TEST 10 V.34 MODEMS (623 words) CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996THE BOFH CHRONICLESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996I get into my office and it's my first day I want to make a goodimpression, so I empty my IN tray into the bin. Now that's what I callefficient!I log in to my account and there's three helpdesk mail requests, allticking away to expiration, then escalation, then further escalation,then followup mail message, then even further escalation, then 2ndfollow-up mail and casual phone call, then still further escalation,then non-casual phone call, then threats, then, ultimately, and sadly,violence. But not so sadly that I won't resort to it. And they know Iwill too...Because I used to be... the Bastard Operator From Hell! ...and sometimes, late at night I get these twitches. Like dead peopleget. (Or, as I prefer to call them, perfect computer users)In the mornings I get them too. Like when the phone rings. And when Iget e-mail. And when people talk to me. AND when people are hogging theexpresso machine to make fluffy milk. But apart from that I'm cured. Anew man.I smile at the thought and look, in reminiscence, at some reminders ofmy past.A couple of backup eight-mm tapes with cartoons on them. The thank-youcards for my attendance at 23 separate funerals of computer centerstaff. The 230V AC mains plug with the thinwire ethernet plug at theend. I didn't ever get round to trying that one either, so I don't evenknow what it would've done.I'm bored.The Bastard Operator From Hell steps up the ladder... he's now theBastard System Manager From HellI get up and slip a fingerprint-free magnet on top of the reed switchthat the Boss had installed in my display cabinet while I was onholiday, then pry the glass door open with a screwdriver. As far as Ican figure, the switch is supposed to ring an alarm if the door isopened.Silence. I grab my etherkiller and wander down the hallway to theswitchboard, applying another magnet and opening that to silence aswell.That's what's missing in society today trust.I pull the 15-amp breaker for the meeting room, then wander on round andplug the etherkiller into a cheap timer set to 5 minutes from now. Onthe way back to the switchboard I hear the first few murmurs aboutexcessive collisions. I plug in my unpatented nail "fuse" (estimatedfault current 200-300 amps) with a set of heavily insulated pliers andwander off to the tea-room to start my expresso brew. Halfway throughthe make, the machine stops. Now that's what I call a collision.I look around in a bewildered manner as panic erupts on all sides,half-made expresso in my hand. I step out into the hallway and beholdpandemonium. Two programmers are fighting over a CO2 fire extinguisherin an effort to put their terminals out. I wander down to my room justas my X terminal, the unreliable piece of excretia it is, flames it'slast and lapses into a dull smoulder."My cabinet!" I cry in `horror' and hear the extinguisher struggle endabruptly. In a flash the two programmers concerned are behind me staringinto my room. Shortly thereafter the boss runs up as well."What's this magnet for?" I ask, picking it up and hearing a bell startchiming in the distance."You bastard!" one of the programmers utters."I'm sorry?" I ask, turning."YOU did it didn't you?""What? Break into my own cabinet? But I've got a key."That's the terrible burden of proof really in this day and age, youneed some to make an accusation.The late-breaking news comes in that one of the consultants had a setof head-phones plugged into a CD-ROM drive hanging off their networkedPC. But not anymore. Now there's an unexpected vacancy in thedepartment. I blame the Ethernet Isolation specs. Three kV my backside!Soon, I'm helping the police with their enquiries."What is this, can you tell me?" a burly officer asks, right up in myface. He holds up a magnet."It's a magnet. There was one on my cabinet!" I cry."Yes. And where did you get them?" he asks, seizing control... ...and losing it.On my cabinet! I just said!""No, not this one. The others. Where did you get them?""Others? What others? You mean there were more on my cabinet! Why?" (Ican play the "stupid game" forever, having had years of education at thehands of users.) ...A couple of hours later I'm back at my desk with Mr Lucky, no chargespressed. I close my cabinet, satisfaction mine for the first time in along while.Then the phone rings...I get a call from the big boss he's been getting complaints about thetrainee bastard operator from hell. I ask him to forward all thecomplaints to me and that it would be best to let me deal with them. Iring the operator and get him to make an appointment with me.Two weeks later, he does, and I show him the complaints that haveaccumulated so far.Seventy Three complaints in your first three weeks!" I say "It'sgood but it's NOT Good Enough! You should be getting at least 10complaints a day AT LEAST!Now, let's see what you're doing wrong: You get a call from a user whatdo you do?""Kill them off?" The TBOFH replies"NO! How can you kill them off if you don't know their USERNAME? YourFIRST priority is to get their username. Then what would you do?""Kill them off?""NO! Get them to tell you what their problem is!""Why?"Because later I can say they didn't explain their problem to youproperly. It's a great defence works every time. A user rings me up tocomplain; I listen to their problem, then say "Oh, when you said `my PCdoesn't work' he must have thought you meant `how can I make my PC neverwork again and destroy my life's work at the same time?' it happens allthe time!' Then they tell me implausible that is, I say how terriblysorry we are, then fake some connect and CPU time records so theirmonthly bill is about the same as the Uraguayan national debt. So, afteryou've heard their problem, what do you do?""Kill them off?""NO! Then you make up some excuse. Have you got an excuse cardcalendar?""Uh. No..""And you said you were qualified to operate a computer! You'd betterhave mine." I pass my computer card calendar over, flipping it to pageone "ENTROPY"....... ...I like it.Now, you give the cretin an excuse. Then what do you do?""Kill them off?""YES!" (He certainly has a fixation) "Then what?""Hang up?" "NO! Then they'll call you back when the problem recurs. Your job isto make them FEAR calling you. How can you work when people are calling?So, you make them pay for calling in the first place. What would youdo?""Delete their files?""Yeah, it's a start, but then they may call back when they get newfiles. You want them NEVER to call back. What could you do?"Swear at them?""No. I can see we'll have to demonstrate. Have you got a metalballpoint?"Yes""See that wallsocket over there. Take the refill out of the pen and pokein into the wallsocket.""But it's live!""Would I really make you do it if it were live?" "Oh." *fiddle* *fiddle* BZZZZZZZEEEEERT!Of course I would. He was no good anyway.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: GUIDE TO CLIENT/SERVER DATABASESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996By Joe Salemi, BPB Publications, 312 pages, Rs 150The client/server market has experienced enormous growth in the past fewyears. New database servers are emerging as powerful tools and thenumber of high-quality, high-power front-end apps has tripled. This bookoffers a systematic approach to understanding the nitty gritty ofdatabase technology including the different types, models,architectures, and programming languages available for four majorclient/server platforms PCs, RISC and UNIX systems, minicomputers, andmainframes. The quick summary charts, a comprehensive glossary ofclient/server jargon, and a database server decision tree to help youidentify the best network connection, make this title a handy guide fornavigating the client/server trends.PRCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: MODERN ALL ABOUT KEYBOARD AND MOUSEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996By Manahar Lotia and Pradeep Nair, BPB Publications, 188 pages, Rs 99Often troubles shoot up from an error in the keyboard or the mouse. Thistitle focuses on everything from upgrading to troubleshooting, fromprogrammers reference to BIOS error codes related to keyboards and mice.Topics such as like keyboard organization and ergonomics, software andhardware interfacing, keyboard and mouse controller, and troubleshootingdiagnostic have been discussed in details. A good reference for thosewho are into PC troubleshooting business, and those who wish to goaround hardware technicians and fix their keyboard and mouse problemsthemselves.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: BLACK BELT C++ THE MASTERS COLLECTIONfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Edited by Bruce Eckel, BPB Publications, 345 pages, Rs 150Written for the intermediate C++ programmers, this book brings togetherthe papers submitted by gurus of C++ programming language at theSoftware Development Conference in 1991. It will help you discover newdepths in seemingly basic topics, ways to evaluate development tools, abetter way to look at the confusing issue of multiple inheritance, amethod to reduce needless recompilation and hide the underlyingimplementation from the end-user, and guidelines for designing good C++class libraries. You'll also find out what's there inside the C++compiler and how to explore the intricacies of heap allocationtechniques.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: MASTERING OLE 2from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996By Bryan Waters, BPB Publications, 368 pages, Rs 180This title is a comprehensive guide to building and debugging 16-bit and32-bit OLE applications. Written for C and C++ programmers, this bookprovides a practical, hands-on approach in explaining the processes ofobject linking and embedding. It offers a wide coverage on fundamentalconcepts of the Components Object Model (COM), implementation andsupport for compound files using IStorage and IStream interfaces,building OLE containers to support embedded and linked objects using OLEPublisher container application as a model, and building OLE objectservers that support liking and embedding using the OLE Draw objectserver.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: WINDOWS 95 ANSWERS: CERTIFIED TECH SUPPORTfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996By Martin S Matthews and Carole Boggs Matthews Osborne McGraw-Hill, 352pages, $19.95This book is a nifty compilation of the answers to about 400 mostfrequently asked Windows 95 questions. The title aims to help you intransition to Windows 95 and take the advantage of most of the powerfulnew features, commands, concepts, and components of this 32-bitoperating system all neatly organized in a systematic way withillustrations wherever needed. It will also help you in fixing a varietyof software glitches that you may face while working in Windows 95.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: LEARNING DELPHI THE DUMMIES WAYfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996by VKTThis book is already into its second edition, and Rubenking has done agood job. However, it is not intended for any dummy programmer.The book starts with a formal introduction to Delphi (as is traditionalwith a Delphi tutorial) covering the most important component ofDelphi the form component. Then it goes on with using other componentsexplaining the basics of how they are arranged on the component palette,how to include them in your application, how to set their properties,and how to write the event handlers. The author then discusses thecomponents on the standard palette, the dialog components and the menucomponents.This follows a comprehensive discussion on a variety of the additionaland advanced components, file components and database components all onthe palette along with all their important properties and events. Thetext is laced with examples that range from simple to smart. In deed thethoroughness with which the author covers the ground makes this an idealtext book for discussion on Delphi components the informal presentationnotwithstanding.The book also deals with Win 95 components and two chapters on Delphiprogramming that cover units, form files, projects, resources, majorfeatures of Object Pascal, and writing and debugging code. The usualDummies feature "Parts of Ten" offers a chapter each for Ten CommonMistakes, Ten Windows API functions and Ten Fabulous Functions Families.This is probably the best starter for aspiring Delphi programmers thatwe've come across recently. And even for experienced programmers, itscomprehensive coverage of all the components on the palette make it aworthwhile quick reference. The best part is its price; to use a clicheit is a steal.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: MULTIMEDIA ADVENTURE WITH VISUAL C++from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996by VK ThakurThis book covers advanced Windows multimedia programming techniques inVisual C++ 2.x and is aimed at advanced Visual C++ programmers. SinceVisual C++ is very close to the Windows API, even Visual Basic, Delphiand Pascal programmers with a penchant for resorting to Windows APIwould find the book extremely useful.The authors have gone to a considerable extent in explaining thefundamentals and the techniques rather than just throwing a lot ofarcane C++ code at the reader. So, it is easier for a developer using adifferent development environment to port the code that comes in thisbook to the environment of his/her choice.The initial chapters cover basic HyperMedia and teach you how to createHyperText jumps with the CScrollView class of the MS Foundation Classes.This is followed by an introduction to the Windows Multimedia Systemwith examples on how to use sndPlaySound() function and the high levelmciSendString() and mciSendCommand() interfaces.Next, the authors concentrate on Imaging. After an introduction tobitmaps and palette management the pace gets lively as the authorsprovide a delightful insight into Palette Animation, ROPs and specialvisual effects (such as Dissolves). With the pace still lively, theauthors return to HyperMedia this time focusing on HyperImaging. Theystart with the code for a simple hotspot editor and went on building afull-fledged hotspot editor that can mark irregular regions of an imageas hotspots. The discussion ends with a full-featured HyperMedia engine.The reader is then taken through a breathtaking journey into thewonderworld of animation simple as well as sprite. The book also covershow to play audio CDs, the MIDI standard, and the MCIWnd interface forplaying AVI files.It comes with a CD-ROM packed with the source code and executable ofthe impressive projects, such as the sprite and HyperMedia engines,covered in the book. Besides, the CD-ROM lets you have a look at someuseful shareware apps as well as video clips, sound files and music.Multimedia programming is arguably the most difficult type ofprogramming that requires skills as well as imagination. If you want tojoin the select band of multimedia application developers, not by usingauthoring tools but a programming environment, this book is for you.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: NETWORKING IN PLAIN ENGLISHfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996by PRDoug's style of presenting technophobic stuff is both funny andencouraging. However, the absence of effective illustrations may divertyour attention from the boring text-only approach. Althoughwell-written, unlike most of his other titles, this book does not assumereaders to be dummies. It takes a straight-forward approach to demystifythe magic that allows you to share a printer or to exchange documentselectronically with your colleagues and friends.All the 30 odd chapters in the book by and large center around NovellNetWare. Written in a logical sequence, each one covers a specificaspect of networking network hardware, printer sharing, networksecurity, trouble shooting, connecting to the Internet, and building anintranet infrastructure. Interestingly, it's more like a reference youwon't have to go through cover to cover just turn to the chapter you'reinterested in and start reading.Each chapter is further divided into self-contained modules that allrelate to a basic theme. For instance, Using Network Printers containsnuggets such as ports and printer configuration, redirecting printeroutput, playing with the print queue and what to do when the printerjams. Network Security deals with user accounts, passwords, privilegesand access rights, and tips for managing multiple servers.The title also packs a variety of icons corresponding to different typesof technical tips, tricks and warnings. For instance, a warning to thenetwork administrator regarding the authorization of user accounts says:"Beware of the all-encompassing "*" wildcard. If your network has anaccount whose user ID is simply "*", delete it as soon as you've createdyour permanent accounts. The "*" account allows anyone to access thesystem, no matter what user ID he or she enters."The other stuff you can extract from this guide is a variety ofinteresting and informative tips on advanced networking features,including remote networking, connecting to the Internet, and creatingyour own intranet. However, the information on sharing CD-ROM drives ora Fax, setting up a voice mail system, playing network games,understanding Internet addressing, setting up an Internet/intranet siteusing popular Web servers including MS Internet Information Server andNCSA HTTPd, could have been more informative.An extensive "Part of Tens" is the most encouraging module of thisparticular Dummies title. This includes 10 Big Network Mistakes, 10Network Gizmos (Only Big Networks Need), tips on networking Windows forWorkgroups 3.11 and Macs, and information on a variety of programs thatmake networking easier. There are also three comprehensive commandreferences on NetWare, LANtastic and Windows (WFW 3.11, Win NT, and Win95) networking to help keep your network under control. This title won'tmake you a network expert; nor would you find it interesting if youdon't like reading long text-only articles. However, it's definitely agood and handy reference for most local area networking needs.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEISURE - BOOKS: A CRASH COURSE ON NETWORKINGfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996by Pinaki RayIf you use Novell NetWare and find it very complicated, this book is foryou. The first 24 chapters are so well written that you can master theseconcepts in so many days, by devoting at least two hours a day to each.Take another six days to practice what you've learned, and you will findyour so-called `stupid' network as friendly as it could ever be .And tomake your job even easier, there are handy command references forNetWare (versions 3.x and 4.x), Personal NetWare, LAN-tastic, Windowsfor Workgroups 3.11 and Windows NT.The book follows a step-by-step approach to help you get going smoothly.It begins by unveiling the basics Cabling, Network Interface Cards,Topology, Hub, Network Operating Systems, and File Server the very leastyou need to know about networking. However, if you want to skip any,"The Least You Need To Know" section, at the end of each chapter, mightprove sufficient. (Although the author could have packed moreinteresting information in each of them.)To illustrate different end-user features, the book takes a parallelapproach for both DOS and Windows for Workgroups users. The mostfrequently used NetWare features such as MAP, NLIST, FLAG, NDIR, NWUSER,NETUSER, SALVAGE, and FILER have been discussed in detail withappropriate illustrations. Chapters on network security, printersharing, communicating on a network (using Lotus cc:Mail), and NetWaretroubleshooting are written carefully, so that readers won't getconfused while applying them in real-life situations.Finally, the author helps you build your own network from installing andconfiguring network cards to setting up a peer-to-peer LAN using Windowsfor Workgroups. You may never need to build one from scratch, but seeinghow it's done can also guide you through the tasks for connecting a newcomputer to an existing network.Although the book has a ctually nothing to do with NetWareadministrators, it is still highly recommended for novice NetWare userswho want to use common sense to stay connected.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: BORLAND ANNOUNCES 3 NEW-USER VERSIONS OF DELPHIfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Borland International Inc has announced three new versions of its DelphiRAD tool, including a 30-day trial edition that users can downloadfree-of-charge from the company's World Wide Web site at www.borland.com/delphi20/ (also available on CD-ROM for a $10 shipping and handlingfrom Borland's Customer Service Department at 1-800-2332444). The newDelphi product line Learn to Program with Delphi, Delphi 2.0, DelphiDeveloper 2.0, and the Delphi Client/Server Suite 2.0 supports alllevels of users, from novice programmers to professional client/serverdevelopers.Other new versions include an educational "Learn to Program with Delphi"package for students, hobbyists and other novice programmers, and Delphi2.0 an easy-to-use, low-priced version designed to encourage softwaredevelopers to evaluate Delphi.The new Learn to Program with Delphi is designed for anyone interestedin learning Windows programming. And Delphi's new easy-to-understanddocumentation and visual drag-and-drop tools make it possible forbeginners to create and compile their first Win app in a matter ofminutes. It costs about $50.Delphi 2.0 has been enhanced with additional tools to make it moreaccessible for new developers, and easier than ever to createhigh-performance, 32-bit Win apps. Borland has also included newfunctionality to show how Delphi can be an excellent value-adding toolfor Visual Basic and C++ developers. It is available at an estimatedstreet prices of $100.PigMail is currently available free for Mac users(www.cyberpuppy.com/pminfo.html). A Windows version will be availableearly next yearCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: BACKUP/ANTIVIRUS SUITE FOR NT SERVERS FROM MCAFEEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996McAfee (www.mcafee.com) has released NT-ssential, a management suitewhich packs anti-virus and backup utilities for Windows NT servers.NT-ssential integrates McAfee's NetShield NT anti-virus solution withthe Enterprise Edition of Seagate's (www.smg.seagate .com) Backup ExecNT server backup solution.NT-ssential is optimized to address the two most essential requirementsfor managing a server's integrity and security. Its NetShield moduleprovides real-time scanning , and also supports NT's multi-threadedsystem services, access controls, and advanced file system. It detectsand eradicates viruses of all known types, including boot, file,mutating, multi-partite, stealth, polymorphic, encrypted, and even thelatest MS Word and Excel macro viruses.Backup Exec for Win NT is the de facto standard in enterprise-wide NTserver backup. Its centralized administration and monitoring providestrue client/server functionality. And like NetShield, Backup Exec isoptimized to run as a native NT service.The new suite's introduction follows a storage management technologystrategic alliance between McAfee and Seagate Software. McAfee willincorporate Seagate's Backup Exec storage management technology intoseveral present and future McAfee network security and managementproducts.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: NEW VERSION OF BANYAN VINES INTRODUCEDfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Banyan Systems Inc (www.banyan.com) has introduced VINES 7.0, the nextgeneration of its integrated networking solution to seamlessly integratelarge, diverse and geographically dispersed networks into a single,cohesive system. This latest version of VINES bundles enhanced networkservices for exceptional directory and management control of multiplenetworking platforms including Windows NT.VINES 7.0 offers robust networking, StreetTalk Explorer for simpleadministration, file/print sharing, security and industry-standardcommunications support for easier location and sharing, and managementof information and resources across networks. The product also providesflexible and scalable server configuration controls to complement anyorganization's changing infrastructural requirements. It runs onstandard TCP/IP protocols. For existing VINES/IP-based networks, VINES7.0 also supports the VINES IP protocol.StreetTalk Explorer, the enhanced graphical administration tool forStreetTalk based on the look and feel of Windows 95, makes it easier toexplore and manage resources across the enterprise. StreetTalk alsooffers a powerful directory assistance service (STDA) that speeds thesearch of StreetTalk directories throughout the networked environment.VINES 7.0 will be available in English, French, German, and Spanish andis priced at $2,995 (10 users), $7,995 (50 users), $9,995 (100 users),$14,995 (250 users), and $27,995 (500 users). The Japanese, Chinese, andKorean versions will be available by the year-end.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: BORLAND SHIPS UPDATES TO BORLAND C++ PRODUCTSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Borland International Inc (www.borland.com) has announced theavailability of Borland C++ Development Suite 5.01 and Borland C++ 5.01.The company also announced Borland C++ Development Suite with DesignTools 5.01, which combines all of the Borland C++ Development Suite 5.01with Together/C++, object-oriented analysis and design tools (OOAD) thatease development by providing visual two-way object modeling and codegeneration.Borland C++ 5.01 includes a native 32-bit hosted environment, that letsdevelopers target Win 95, Win NT, Win 3.1 and DOS. It also includesObject Windows Library 5.01, Borland's application framework, that offerssupport for Win 95-based common controls with 16-bit emulation; VisualDatabase Tools for programmers to visually create apps; support fornamespaces; the standard C++ library; OCX support; integrated 32-bitresource editing; and integrated 32-bit debugging. Version 5.0 alsoincludes free Java-compatible development tools, including Sun's JavaDevelopment Kit , Borland Debugger for Java, a new AppExpert forJava-specific apps, and color syntax highlighting for Java code.The Borland C++ Development Suite 5.01 includes CodeGuard 32/16, a newversion of Borland's best-selling automated bug detection and diagnosistool; PVCS Version Manager to oversee changes to elements comprising asoftware system; and Install Shield Express that visually creates installprograms using pre-built components. The suite also includes the newAppAccelerator for Java, a just-in-time compiler which makes Javaapplications run up to ten times faster on development machines.All the products will also include MS Foundation Classes (MFC) C++ classlibrary with more than 100,000 lines of pre-written and pre-testedreusable source code. This library provides ready-made functionality andcan be ported to other programming environments including RISC, Mac, andUNIX systems. To facilitate its use, Borland is also including a demo ofViewSoft's PowerCharger for MFC on Borland C++ update CD-ROMs.PowerCharger for MFC codelessly connects MFC visual components tounderlying application data types and automates GUI development. BorlandC++ 5.01 carries an estimated street price of $349.95. Borland C++Development Suite 5.01 has been priced at $499.95 ($849.95 with DesignTools 5.01). The new suite will also include a special trial version ofDelphi 2.0 and a free copy of DeltaPoint's QuickSite, a Web pagecreation and site management tool.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: CYBERPUPPY UNLEASHES FIRST INTERNET KID BROWSERfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996CyberPuppy Software, makers of the CODIE award-winning product MonstrousMedia Kit (formerly Kid's Studio), is breaking new ground withPigMail the first Internet browser for kids.PigMail puts you in a visual space that uses a geographical metaphor.Other PigMailians are visible as little dots on other continents. Usercan zoom into cities and buildings, eventually finding like-mindedindividuals (and over 2,200 links to geographically-oriented Web sites).A handy magnifying lens enables you to explore deeper levels of theproduct as well.And once you finds someone, double-click on their avatar. An ID cardappears as you learn about your new friend's favorite hobbies. You cansend e-mail or link to their home page. Future versions will includeparental controls for e-mail and chat. Avatar customization, personalspace construction kits, and other modular components can be droppedinto place as background downloads.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: USERS SIMPLY INSERT THE FLOPPYMAX BOARD & CONNECT THEDRIVEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996FloppyMAX's intelligent BIOS eliminates potential conflicts withexisting IDE/ATAPI controllers and automatically recognizes the A:driveas the boot drive. OR Technology A:drive replaces conventional 3.5"drives, and offers 120 MB storage with LS-120 media while retainingbackward compatibility with 1.44 MB and 720 kB disks. FloppyMAX retailsat $49, and the A:drive costs $210. LS-120 disks cost $20.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: OR TECHNOLOGY & PROMISE ANNOUNCE LS-120 UPGRADEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Promise Technology Inc and OR Technology Inc have announced a completeLS-120 floppy disk drive BIOS and driver support solution for newcomputer systems and system upgrades. FloppyMAX, Promise Technology'sbootable, plug-and-play ATAPI controller, enables PC manufacturers,systems integrators and VARs of personal computers to support ORTechnology's 120MB LS-120 floppy disk drive. It is designed for use innew or existing systems that include a 16-bit ISA slot in DOS, Win 3.1or, with the separate software driver provided for Win 95 and Win NTenvironments.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: HP CUTS DESIGNJET 755CM PRINTER PRICE BY $1,000from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Hewlett-Packard (www.hp. com) has lowered the price of the HP DesignJet755CM large-format color inkjet printer by $1,000, to a suggested listprice of $10,995. The DesignJet 755CM provides color output in varyingsizes between 8.5" x 11" and 3' x 50It is Plug `n Play ready with a pre-installed Adobe PostScript Level 2raster-image processor; an HP JetDirect card for easy connection to aMac, PC or network; 68 MB of RAM; and HP's DesignJet Color ManagementKit for color matching. This kit contains profiles for Pantone, AdobePhotoshop, PageMaker, Kodak Precision Color, Agfa FotoTune and ICC.These profiles help users to create near-photographic-quality imagesvirtually identical to the originals. HP's color-rendering technology,ColorSmart, also ships with the DesignJet 755CM printer.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: VIRTUA FIGHTER KIDS FOR SEGA SATURN RELEASEDfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996You'd have a big head too if you were the newest addition to one of themost successful fighting franchises in the video game industry. US-basedSega (www.sega.com) has given `birth' to Virtua Fighter Kids (VFK) forSega Saturn. The mega-hit arcade game in Japan is a sequel (or`pre-quel' biologically speaking) to Virtua Fighter 2, the best-sellingSega Saturn game.All 10 Virtua Fighter 2 characters are in `half-pint' proportions excepttheir heads which are 10 times normal size and designed as the childversion of each fighter. The result: 20 percent faster action withcrystal-clear facial expressions that add more emotion. VFK is a directtranslation to the 32-bit Sega Saturn video game console. And as Sega'sST-V arcade board is compatible with the Saturn hardware, perfectconversion is possible. The moves are the same as Virtua Fighter 2, butthe smaller body proportions of VFK characters give players an abilityto create new move.The Options menu lets players chain together various moves and adjusttheir timing. Complex combinations that previously required multipledirectional and action key strokes can be activated with one button. Thenew Kid's mode lets players unfamiliar with the controls perform theappropriate moves by pressing the buttons randomly perfect for youngerchildren or inexperienced players. Other new features include a shortinstant replay during play, , a computer graphics opening movie thatshows each character in both traditional and `kids' sizes, and a rewardmovie showing the Kids' characters private lives. The game costs $50.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: EPSON INTRODUCES LQ2070 DOT-MATRIX PRINTERfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Epson has introduced the LQ-2070, a letter-quality dot matrix printer.With a street price of $549, this 24-pin, wide-carriage printer offersfaster output, built-in barcode fonts and a longer ribbon life than itspredecessor, the LQ-1070+. And with print speeds of up to 300 cps at 10cps in high-speed draft mode, the LQ-2070 is 33 percent faster too.LQ-2070 is Win 95 Plug `n Play, and the driver disk has a softwareutility for programming the default settings instead of the usual DIPswitches. It also has 13 page-length settings. There are four paperpaths to accommodate continuous paper, single sheets, envelopes, labelsor up to four multi-part forms. SmartPark's advanced paper handlinghelps eliminate paper wastage. And a "micro" adjustment allowspositioning paper precisely to 1/180 of an inch.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: ALPS ELECTRIC SHIPS NEW COLOR PRINTERSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Alps Electric Inc (www. alpsusa.com), US, is selling color printers,including one with an integrated color printer/scanner. The printersdeliver 16.7 million photo-realistic colors in 600 x 600 dpi resolution,and laser-sharp 1200 x 600 dpi resolution for rich black-and-white text,graphics, and grayscale.The Micro Dry inks ensure sharp, waterproof prints that won't smudge,smear, or streak. And are not susceptible to fading with age or exposureto sunlight, so deep, rich color is permanent and long lasting. Theseinks also give consistent high-resolution color on all media types,including ordinary laser paper, overhead transparencies, and iron-onT-shirt transfers, as well as on photographs and other coated papers.Micro Dry inks are also available in metallic shades. In addition to thestandard color (cyan, yellow, magenta, and black) cartridges, there arefour `foil' colors (gold, silver, cyan, and magenta).Both Alps MD-2010 Color Printer and Alps MD-4000 Color Printer/Scannerare easy to operate and come bundled with Adobe PhotoDeluxe. Thiscontains over 500 pictures, clip art, and templates, and more than 25built-in guided activities for creating photo projects. It also letsusers to fix common photography mistakes such as blurred images or `redeye'. Users can also edit images to adding and removing people orobjects from a scene, adding text, or changing the background. TheMD-4000 has a 600dpi TWAIN, single-pass, 24-bit full-color scanner. Alsobundled is Alps Copy Studio, a utility to scan in, crop, enlarge, orcopy an image. It also has `tiling' to allow users to print a singleimage as two, four or eight separate pages to create poster-sizeenlargements.Both printers feature a small foot print and a 100-page automatic sheetfeeder that accommodates letter, A4, B5, and legal size papers. They usea multi-pass serial printing method and accept a variety of print mediaincluding plain paper, ordinary laser paper, overhead transparencies,greeting cards, iron-on transfers, and backprint. The PC versions have abi-directional interface, and are DOS, Windows, and Win 95 compatible.The Macintosh versions have a SCSI interface and are ColorSync 2.0compatible. The MD-2010 and MD-4000 are priced at $499 and $699respectively. The standard color ink cartridges have a suggested listprice of $6.60 each, while the metallic ones cost $9 each.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: IOMEGA SHIPS NEW DITTO TAPE DRIVESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Iomega Corp (www.iomega. com) has launched a 2 GB version of its Dittodrive, using TRAVAN technology. Following an agreement with Iomega, SonyRecording and Energy Group will manufacture Ditto 2 GB tape cartridges,utilizing Iomega's 2 GB format, while Iomega will manufacture the Ditto2 GB drives.Ditto 2 GB offers the same enhanced features as Iomega's other Dittoproducts, while adding a variety of new features designed to make iteven easier for consumers to protect their important information. Asingle click on its 1-step icon backs up the crucial information on thehard drive while the user keeps on working. Ditto 2 GB's new enhancedsoftware on CD-ROM includes a fun and informative multi-languageinstallation program that allows users to choose between seven foreignlanguages. Ditto 2 GB is specifically designed to read/write Ditto 2 GBcartridges and will also read other tape formats created on Iomegadrives, including QIC-80, QIC-80W, TR-1, QIC-3010, QIC-3020, TR-2 andTR-3. It is compatible with Win NT, Win 95, Win 3.x, DOS, NetWare andLANtastic. The estimated street price is $200 (external) and $150(internal). The Ditto 2 GB cartridges are available for $20, as comparedto competitive cartridges that cost $30..35.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: KODAK SELLS COPIER BUSINESS TO UK'S DANKAfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996With its corporate focus on the company's traditional photographicbusiness as well as new digital imaging markets, Eastman Kodak inRochester, New York, has sold its money-losing $1.8 billion-a-yearcopier and printer business to UK-based Danka Business Systems for $684million. The move comes as Kodak, which ranks as the world's secondlargest supplier of high-speed copiers, has fallen further behindindustry leader Xerox while losing additional marketshare to competitorssuch as Canon and Konica.Under deal, Kodak will continue to manufacture and sustain its copierline, while Danka, will sell and service the machines. Danka will alsotake over some of Kodak's assets and operating liabilities, while Kodakwill retain $123 million in receivables stemming from long-term copierleases in Britain and Canada. Danka officials said they plan to offerjobs to the more than 10,000 Kodak copier sales workforce, includingsome 4,000 employees in officers outside the United States.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: TOSHIBA TAKES A PAGE FROM SONY'S US HOME PC STRATEGYfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Following in the footsteps of Sony, Toshiba announced its entry into theUS home PC market with its Infinia line that offer advanced multimedia,and bear close resemblance to the company's other consumer electronicsproducts.Like Sony, Toshiba's plans to slowly roll the PCs out into the US marketwhich has been stubbornly resistant to Japanese-made desktop PC. Thecompany will make only three models available initially, and sell themthrough a handful of carefully selected retailers in key regionalmarkets. Unlike Sony, however, Toshiba already enjoys a leadershipposition in the US notebook computer market. Tom Scott, head ofToshiba's US PC operations, said, Toshiba hopes to rank as the fifthlargest PC vendor in the US by the end of 1997.To entice users, Toshiba has built a number of button controls into theInfinia system, most of them located on the monitor. These controlfunctions such as volume, base, tremble, and brightness. The Infiniaalso doubles as a TV or radio. In those modes, the buttons changefunctions to those of a TV.The three models have Pentium processors, with varying RAM, disk drivecapacity, and a 28.8 kbps modem, are priced between $1,699 and $2,799. A15" monitor with stereo speakers adds $449 to the price tag.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: TOSHIBA'S NEW DVD LASER CAN PUT 15 GB ON SINGLE SIDEDISKfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996In another potential blow to the Sony-Philips digital video disk (DVD)alliance, Toshiba has announced the availability of a blue-purplesemiconductor laser that allows for up to 15 GB of data to be stored ona single-sided disk. By comparison, the red laser used in theSony/Philips DVD system stores a mere 5 GB on each of a two-sided disk.Toshiba's laser generates a 417 nanometer wavelength at roomtemperature, compared to the 650 nanometer wavelength of the red laser.The blue-purple laser is based on a gallium-nitride compound. With acapacity of 15 GB, the Toshiba disks would offer enough storage capacityfor full length movies with substantially less compression requirement.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: CIRRUS LOGIC LAUNCHES NEW CD-RECORDABLE/ERASABLE CHIPSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Cirrus Logic Inc (www.cirrus. com/) has introduced the industry'sfastest encoder/decoder chips for CD-ROM applications. These supportCD-Recordable/Erasable (CD-R/E) formats that allow the end-user torecord, erase and re-use the CD-ROM. Available in SCSI interface(CL-CR3560) and ATAPI interface (CL-CR3460) versions, the encoders alsosupport the industry's fastest 18X read and 8X record disk speeds. Thenew chips are fully compatible with all CD-writing methods. And alsosupport Sony-Philips CD-ROM, CD-I, and CD-DA (Digital Audio) formats,for use with all implementations of CD technology. The chips areequipped with a CD-ROM encoder/decoder, CIRC encoder, EFM modulator,ATIP decoder, SCSI or ATAPI interface.The CL-CR3560 has a single-ended SCSI interface with integrated 48 mAbus drivers. The chip supports the SCSI-2 industry standard, making itcompatible with a wide variety of peripherals. The CR3560 is alsoSCAM-compatible, conforming to the latest updates of the SCSIspecification. The CL-CR3460 is the ATAPI equivalent high-performanceCD-R/E encoder/decoder. The ATAPI interface permits the CD-ROM to sharethe ATA bus of the host computer with existing ATA/IDE hard disk drives.Both devices combine fast error correction and the capability to readdamaged disks on-the-fly to provide the industry's most advanced dataintegrity protection.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: SEAGATE EXPANDS INTO IRELANDfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Seagate Technology said it will invest some $100 million in a diskproduction facility to be built near the company's current thin filmhead manufacturing facilities in Londonderry in Northern Ireland. Theplant will be Seagate's first disk production facility and representsthe fifth investment the company has made in Ireland in past threeyears. The new disk plant will create between 700 an 800 jobs over thenext two years. The company said it will start producing thenickel-plated aluminium disk substrates in 1997.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS WORLDWATCH: IBM & 15 BANKS TEAM UP ON E-BANKINGfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Two years ago, Microsoft CEO Bill Gates said that today's bankinginstitutions were `dinosaurs' waiting to be overtaken by a newelectronic banking order where Microsoft would play a central role.Gates has since regretted the statement, as the banking industry haslooked every which way since to keep him out.Now 15 leading US banks have formed Integrion Financial Network analliance with IBM to support a new financial network that will provide abroad range of electronic banking services to customers. And that toowithout paying royalties to Microsoft, Intuit, or other e-bankingsupplier. Integrion will enable bank customers to check their balances,transfer money between accounts, pay bills, shop electronically on theInternet, send e-mail messages to their bank, and even arrange for loanson major electronic purchases. In the future, the network can be used totrade securities, get stock quotes, and get access to their mutualfunds. Although only 15 banks have signed up, Integrion will be open toany bank.The move appears a setback to Gates' hopes for the banking community, asoutlined in a 1994 Fall Comdex video presentation, where Microsoftenvisioned people using Windows-controlled devices instead of cash,credit or bank cards. In Gates' vision, computer users can establishelectronic credit accounts to shop both in cyberspace and in the realworld.With Integrion, customers can shop on the Internet, and access theiraccounts through their bank's Web site which can be directly accessed orthrough services such as America Online and CompuServe. User can eitherpay directly or click a "Financing" button at the vendor's Web site.This connects the user to a bank on the Integrion network thatdetermines the customer's credit worthiness.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996SOFTWARE: NEW VERSIONS OF NASHPACK AND NASHLINKfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996NashPack is a suite of 10 Windows and 30 DOS utilities. Its PartitionManager lets you use more than one OS on your computer with dynamicbooting, while NashForm lets you format even "track 0 bad" diskettes.The pack is priced at Rs 5,495. NashLink 2.0 allows you to transfer databetween two PCs using a specially designed cable supplied by Nashsoft,and offers passwords protection features and other access privileges.Available for DOS, Windows and Windows 95, NashLink 2.0 costs Rs 1,995.ADDRESSESRIT Technologies, 24 Raoul Wallenberg Street, Tel Aviv 69710, Israel.Tel: 972-3-6455361 Fax: 972-3-6851227 Internet:anni@koteret.mhs .compuserv e.comSamtel India Limited, 50-51 Community Centre, New Delhi 110065.Tel: 11-6842791, 6832886 Fax: 11-6837534DATACON Systems, Thakers House, 2418 East Street, Cantonment, Pune411001. Tel: 212-648603 Fax: 212-650357Polaroid India Pvt Ltd, DBS-Corporate Club, Raheja Chambers, 213 NarimanPoint, Mumbai 400021. Tel: 22-2844949, 2845383 Fax: 22-2872640Pegasus Power Devices Pvt Ltd, 201 Apollo Complex, RK Singh Marg, OffParsi Panchayat Road, Andheri (E), Mumbai 400069. Tel: 22-8360356Fax: 22-8371747Vision Infotech, Plot 4, Road 53-B, Punjabi Bagh (West), New Delhi110026. Tel: 11-5454757, 5194331 Fax: 11-5435727Informatics (India) Pvt Ltd, D-285, 2nd Floor, Defence Colony, New Delhi110024. Tel: 11-4621182, 6211679 Fax: 11-4691824. E-mail:fax.nd@iipl.sprintrpg.sprint.comSastek Electronics Pvt Ltd, B-10 Hemkunt Tower, 98 Nehru Place, NewDelhi 110019. Tel: 11-6464505, 6404454 Fax: 11-6444969Advantec Network Systems, 9 DELSTAR, 1st floor, AS Patkar Marg, KempsCorner, Mumbai 400036. Tel: 22-3674625, 3643373, 3643375 Fax: 22-3643375PowerTel Boca Pvt Ltd,11, Service Road, Domlur Layout, Bangalore 560071.Tel: 80-5543104, 80-5543105, 5543106 Fax: 80-5288654AST Middle East Ltd, India Liason Office, 27, 80 Feet Road, HAL, StageIII, Indiranagar, Bangalore. Tel: 80-5292501, 5292502 Fax: 80-5292503Genesis, B-1, Parvathi Plaza, 105 Richmond Road, Bangalore 560025, Tel:80-2218556, 2217705 Fax: 80-2217330Logix Microsystems Ltd, Post Box No 845, Bhramhalingeshwara Complex,493/3 Airport Road, Bangalore 560008. Tel: 80-5260127 Fax: 80-5263429E-Mail: 72102.2056@compuserve.comSilicon Graphics Systems (India) Pvt Ltd, A-30 Kailash Colony, New Delhi110048. Tel: 11-6211354, 6216325, 6430538, 6433749 Fax: 11-6472217,6210752 E-mail: pradeep@newdelhi.sgi.comPolaris Software Lab Ltd, B-19, Sector-2, Noida 201301. Tel: 11-8539078,8527426, 8527429 Fax: 11-85514401Ampersand Software, No 68, 14th cross, 1st Block, RT Nagar, Bangalore560032. Tel: 80-3334978, 3336173, 3336388 Fax: 80-3333891, 3430760E-mail: info@ampersand.soft.netKirloskar Multimedia Ltd, Cresent Towers, 32/1 Cresent Road, HighGrounds, Bangalore 560001. Tel: 80-2255272 Fax: 80-2251996E-mail: kml@stpb.soft.net, info@ampersand.soft.net and        kml.india@axcess.net.inNashsoft, 41, Lavelle Road, Bangalore 560001. Tel: 80-2213345,80-2271655 Fax: 80-2271657Structural Dynamics Research Corporation, India Liason Office, U&IBusiness Centre, F-41 South Extension Part I, Ring Road, New Delhi110049. Tel: 11-4699421, 4622813, 4610940, 4649227 Fax: 11-4648941,4623305 E-mail: narendar.reddy@sdrc.sprintrpg.sprint.comLogix Microsystems Ltd, Post Box No 845, Bhramhalingeshwara Complex,493/3 Airport Road, Bangalore 560008. Tel: 80-5260127 Fax: 80-5263429E-Mail: 72102.2056@compuserve.comCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996SOFTWARE: NFS MAESTRO SOLUTIONS FROM LOGIXfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Hummingbird's family of 32-bit Network File System (NFS) products arenow available in India. These include Columbus Lite, an Internetapplication that delivers access to and management of Web resources;Telnet, a graphical terminal emulator application that supportsVT50/100/220/320, Wyse 50/60, ANSI, SCO ANSI, and BBS emulations;Hummingbird Basic Scripting Workbench, a fully functional BASIC languageimplementation for building script; debugging tools and a drag-and-dropdialog box editor which offers front-end graphical design support withsupport for FTP and Telnet; and host of network utilities includingFinger, Ping, Archie, IRC, Traceroute (a graphical tool to trace path ofa data packet across networks), and Wiki (a paging program which allowsmessages to be sent directly to a paging system).Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996SOFTWARE: AMPERSAND INTRODUCES HOME ACCOUNTING SOFTWAREfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Ampersand Software has released Amon Home Finance, a Windows-basedpersonal accounting package for home users. It keeps track of alltransactions such as daily incomes and expenditure, assets, loans,credit cards, planning, budgeting. It also has a reminder function andis priced at Rs 1,500.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996SOFTWARE: SDRC RELEASES I-DEAS 4from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996I-DEAS Master Series 4 are a wide range of flexible and sophisticatedmodelling tools for Windows NT and UNIX New features include fasteranimation of large assemblies, open sheet metal modelling functions andsupport for the CORBA open standard. The pricing for I-DEAS 4 starts atRs 95,000 for the drafting module on Windows NT.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996SOFTWARE: PANCHATANTRA FABLES ON CD-ROMfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Some of the ancient Indian fables of the Panchatantra are now availableon a CD-ROM from Kirloskar Multimedia. Panchatantra The World's OldestFables is aimed at children in the 4..8 year age group, and is availablefor both Windows and the Mac. Rich in content, music, and surprises,this edutainment title packs stories on basic values of life includingfriendship, common sense and honesty.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996SOFTWARE: PARSLEY QUERY PROCESSOR FROM POLARISfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Parsley is an electronic query logging, resolving and tracking systemhaving comprehensive MIS facilities for analysis purpose. All queriesfrom the customers are processed systematically. The system also helpsin implementing service level agreements by assigning responsiblepersons with target date and time of resolution. In addition, Parsleyhelps in tracking of quotations and tenders from suppliers, and packspowerful MIS tools that generate analytical reports, charts, and graphsenabling management analyze complex management and productivityproblems, process improvement and time management. Pricing starts at$2,995 and is dependent upon the number of users.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: MULTIMEDIA PROJECTOR FROM GENESISfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Genesis, Bangalore, has released In Focus Systems' multimedia projectionsystem, LitePro 610 and LitePro 620. At Rs 460,000, each of theseprojectors offer 800 x 600 SVGA display with 16.7 million colors at 450lumens. The audio part is taken care of by four built-in JBL 20 Wspeakers. The projector includes Cable-Wizard, an five socket adapterto plug in your PC or Mac, a mouse and even a video source. Its SmartRemote unit allows you to control your system mouse from up to 40 feetaway.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: FAST ETHERNET SWITCHING FOR GEOLAN/500 HUBfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996UB Networks plans a new series of low cost 10 and 10/100 Mbps Ethernetswitching modules later this year. The GeoBus multi-gigabit backplaneand high speed ATM and FDDI uplinks for its GeoLAN/500 super switchinghub are other products slated for release. The GeoBus backplanearchitecture allows up to 7.2 Gbps of bandwidth with high port density100 Mbps switching. The 16-port auto-sensing 10/100 Fast Ethernet switchis priced at $600 per port and the 24-port 10Base-T Ethernet switch at$250 per port. The 12-port 100 Base-TX Fast Ethernet connector goes for$350 per port, while the two port ATM or FDDI high-speed uplink willcost $8,000.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: POLAROID LAUNCHES NEW DIGITAL IMAGING PRODUCTSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Polaroid India's newest digital imaging products include the PDC 2000digital camera, that uses Polaroid's "megapixel" sensor-based imagingtechnology to captures 24-bit digital images at 1600 x 1200 pixels. ThePolaview 105 is a polysilicon LCD projector that produces sharp imageswith up to 16.7 million colors. The Polaview 4000 is an 800x600 SVGAactive matrix LCD panel with 16.7 million colors. The ProPalette 8000 isa Win-and Mac-compatible digital color film recorder that produces 35mmpositives and negatives of 24-bit images with a 36-bit per pixelprecision, 8,000 lines of resolution, and prints 16.7 million colors.SprintScan 35 is a 35mm slide and film scanner with 2,700 dpi opticalresolution, and SprintScan 45 is a color scanner that captures 24-bitcolor images (from positives, negatives, and transparencies) sampled at12 bits per color with up to 2000 x 4000 dpi optical resolution.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: MX520 THE NEW MAXOPTIX JUKEBOXfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Maxoptix Corp has announced the availability of the MX520, its new20-platter optical jukebox. This is based on a proprietory 2.6 GBT4-2600 MO drive and provides immediate access to 52 GB of near-onlineinformation. To further enhance performance and throughput, the T4-2600has a one MB buffer and a sustained data transfer rate of over 4.6 MBps.An in- built advanced robotics system helps the MX520 load anyISO-compatible disks (rewritable or CCS WORM) in less than two seconds.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: CRAY SHIPS NEW RANGE OF SUPERCOMPUTERSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Cray has introduced a new range of supercomputers in India. The productline includes Air-Cooled and Liquid-Cooled Cray T3E systems, Cray T90Series (includes Cray T94, T916 and T932 models), Cray J90 Series(includes Cray J916 and J932 models) and Cray C90 Series. The pricingstarts from $4000. In addition Cray has launched UNICOS, Cray's scalableoperating system for high-performance servers.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: LOGIX OFFERS ZIP DRIVE AND TRACKPADfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Logix Microsystems, is marketing the Iomega Zip Drive, Iomega Zip disksand Cirque Trackpad. The Zip Drive (Rs 16,485), along with the Zip disk(Rs 1,248), combines the reliability of the hard disk with theflexibility of floppy diskettes. The Cirque Trackpad allows you to tapyour finger and `click' or `double click' and costs Rs 4,100.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: MANHATTAN S6200 FROM ASTfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996AST has introduced the Manhattan S6200 LAN servers in India. The systemfeatures a 200 MHz Pentium Pro with 256 kB cache, 32 MB ECC RAM, 2 GBSCSI HDD, 4X CD-ROM drive, Intel LANdesk Manager, Windows NT, and IntelEtherExpress PRO/100 B Fast Ethernet adapter. The server can be scaledup to two Pentium Pros, 256 MB RAM, six hot swap drive bays (maximum 24GB) and comes with five PCI, two EISA and one shared slot, and costs Rs404,102.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: PRINTER SHARERS FROM DATACONfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996DATACON has introduced a wide range of printer sharing devices.DATACONtrol DC21PL and DATACONtrol DC41PL allow a parallel port printerto be shared between two and four PCs respectively. DATACONtrol DC41Mallows four PCs to access a single parallel port printer. The DATANETtransmitter and receiver can daisy-chain up to 40 PCs to one printerover a network. The DATACONtrol DC-256K has a buffer memory of 256Kthat can be shared by four users. The company has also launched MicroPrinter (above), a compact, high-speed, dual color numeric printer fromAlps, Japan.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: NEW MONITORS, SCANNERS, & CD-ROM DRIVE FROM SAMTELfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Samtel has launched 14" SVGA monitors, an Acer VUEGO Scan 300F desktopscanner and SamDrive CD 685A, an 8X CD-ROM drive. Ultima a 14" mono SVGAmonitor is compatible with VESA, VGA, SVGA and 8514A modes, operates at38 KHz in 1024 x 768 interlaced mode and costs Rs 3,450. Futura is a 14"color SVGA monitor. Other monitor models are the SV 550 (14" mono, Rs3,450), SV 310 (14" color, Rs 11,200), and SV 340 (15" color). The Acer300F uses Acer's Revolving Optical System Technology that allows theuser to scan a color picture at 300 dpi optical resolution, and costs Rs18,000. The CD 685A CD-ROM drive is compatible with all disk formatsincluding audio and video CD-ROMs, CD-I, Karaoke and Photo CDs andcosts Rs 7,200.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: POWERTEL BOCA SHIPS HIGH-SPEED SECURITY MODEMSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996PowerTel Boca's Boca Pro16 and Boca Pro16 Rack are V.34 modems that comewith 14.4 kbps fax capability and security features. They providesynchronous and a synchronous communications, and support both dial-upand leased lines. Boca Pro 16 Rack allows network administrators to viewmodem statistics, line information and allows remote configurations.Multiple Pro16 Racks can be connected together in one cabinet andmanaged by a single controller card. The Boca Pro16 costs Rs 45,000 andthe Pro 16 Rack costs Rs 36,000 (Rs 160,00 with one power supply, and Rs192,000 with two power supplies and a controller module).Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: AVER FUNTV TUNER BOARDS IN INDIAfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996AVerMedia has launched its AVer FunTV series of TV tuner boards inIndia. Once plugged into your PC, you can view direct TV broadcasts,CATV, laser disks players, and other audio-visual sources. You can alsolisten to your local FM radio while using other applications. Theproduct line includes AVer FunTV, AVer FunTV Lite, and AVer FunTV w/FM.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: SASTEK SHIPS COLOR SCANNERfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The AV6240 from Sastek is a TWAIN-compatible, single pass, desktop colorscanner that offers 600 x 1200 dpi optical resolution and 30-bit perpixel color output format. The scanning area is 216mm x 356mm and iscompatible with both PCs and Mac. Other features include five built-inhalftone patterns, built-in color matching driver, and A VARIETY OFfiltersCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: CD-ROM JUKEBOX FOR NETWARE AND MACfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996NSM Jukebox GmbH, Germany's Mercury 20/40 NET, provides NetWare clientswith simple, instant access to the data on the 150 CD-ROMs held in thejukebox from any workstation. Bundled is DiscView, a Windowsadministration tool, and CD Serve for NetWare Server software thatassists in managing disk inventory and controlling the jukebox and filesystem. MACready is a client-server solution that provides all AppleTalkprotocol-supported Mac clients with access to the stored CD-ROMs. Itcombines a CDR 100XA or a Mercury 20/40 with Miles Apart, a CD-ROMmanagement tool.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HARDWARE: WELI UPS FROM PEGASUSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Pegasus WELI UPSs are available in 300VA to 2 kVA ratings, have built-inSMF batteries and have a transfer time of less than two millisecondstransfer time. A DB-9 communication interface supports a NetWareinterface kit that automatically saves files during power cuts. Themodels also feature a two-step battery charger.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996RIT PATCHVIEW GOES MODULARfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996PatchView is an electronic, real-time, physical layer network managementsystem with intelligent patch panels and SNMP-based software that allowsmanagement of up to 9,000,000 users. By reducing network wiringmaintenance it cuts the time needed for changes and provides networkmanagers with an online data base. In addition, it also reduces downtime by an ability to locate and report wiring problems on-the-fly, withinterconnected satellite scanners (160/320 ports) that reporting to amaster scanner.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: SEMINARS AND EXHIBITIONSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996NOVEMBER 1996Matlab Users Conference '96. November 19-21, 1996Contact : Cranes Software International, 5, Airport Road, Domlur Layout         (Service Road), Bangalore 560071. Tel: 80-5549338 Fax:80-5546299E-mail  : Matlab@cranes.xeeblr.xeemail. ems.vsnl.net.inObject India '96. November 28-29, 1996Contact : Ms Ravneet Sikand, Tecknowledge Consultants, A-87, Malviya          Nagar, New Delhi 110017. Tel: 11-6230713, 6413742, 6448353          Fax: 11-3291535DECEMBER 1996IT INDIA 96/COMDEX, December 7-11, 1996Contact : Suite 109, Ashok Hotel, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi 110021.          Tel: 11-6885474, 6110101, 6112109 Fax: 11-6885475          E-mail: nasscom@nass com.ernet.inCommunications India 1996, December 8-11, 1996Contact : C-390, Defence Colony, New Delhi 110024, Tel: 11-4622710,          4622711, 4621732, 4621760, 4623118 Fax: 11-4623320, 4633506,          4648692  E-mail: india.exhibit@ axcess.net.inInt'l Conference On Knowledge-Based Computer Systems, December 16-18, 1996Contact : KBCS-96 Secretariat, National Centre for Software Technology,          Gulmohar Cross Road No. 9, Juhu, Mumbai 400049 Tel: 22-6201606          Fax: 22-6210139 E-mail: kbcs@konark. ncst.ernet.in Internet:          http:/konark.ncst.ernet.in/kbcs kbcs96.htmlInt'l Conference On High Performance Computing, December 19-22, 1996Contact : Chief Executive Officer,Techno park Campus, Tiruvananthapuram          695581 E-mail: hipc@serc.iisc. ernet.inMARCH 19973rd ISSAT Int'l Conference On Reliability & Quality In Design, March 12-14, 1997Contact : Dr Hoang Pham, Department of Industrial Engineering, Rutgers          University, PO Box 909, Piscataway, NJ, 08855, USA.          Tel: 1-908-4455471 Fax: 1-908-4455467          E-mail: hopham@princess.rutgers.eduVINTRON-RITCOMP ROAD SHOWGoa          : October 19, 1996Bangalore    : October 25, 1996Mangalore    : October 28, 1996Cochin       : October 31, 1996Madras       : November 3, 1996Hyderabad    : November 6, 1996Patna        : November 17, 1996Calcutta     : November 20, 1996Raipur       : December 15, 1996Nagpur       : December 18, 1996Contact      : AP Malik, F-34 Okhla Industrial Area I, New Delhi 110020.               Tel: 11-6814520, 6811980, 6813680, 6817981 Fax: 11-6810460PC EXPO '96Mumbai       : January 15-18, 1997 at Nehru CentreBangalore    : January 23-25, 1997 at Holiday InnContact      : PC EXPO, 4th Floor, MBC Centre, 234 Infantry Road, Bangalore               560001 Tel: 80-5511511, 5568238, 5579862 Fax: 80-5562971Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: LAN MULTIMEDIA & EXPERT SOFTWARE TIE-UPfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Following the successful launch of HeAD CD-ROM titles, LAN Multimediahas tied up with US-based Expert Software to distribute latter's CD-ROMtitles on business, home, hobby and entertainment.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: WIPRO BT & LANBIT OFFER E-MAIL PACKAGEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Wipro BT has entered into a strategic alliance with LanBit India toaddress SOHO and small corporate businesses' e-mail requirements. WiproBT will now offer LanBit's Mail Modem a specially designed 14.4 kbpsexternal modem with its X.400 service for about half the price of what'savailable from other vendors.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: FAULT-TOLERANT SOFTWARE FROM TANDEM & CAfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Tandem Computers and Computer Associates International have joined handsto deliver fault-tolerant software for high-volume enterprise computingon multiple platforms. The agreement also calls for the availability ofCA-Unicenter for management of Tandem and other clustered environments,including Windows NT Server, UNIX systems, and Tandem NonStop Himalayaservers. Tandem will standardize on CA-Unicenter for all its serverplatforms.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: MODICORP REDEFINES IT STRATEGIESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996With the inception of Graphtech India, ModiCorp's joint venture withSingapore-based IPC Corporation, the company has redefined its ITstrategies. Modi Olivetti will now focus on software for systemsintegration and networking services, while Graphtech will undertake themanufacturing and marketing activities of hardware and peripherals.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: TSRM TEMPLATES FOR MS PROJECT USERSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996HCL James Martin has entered into an agreement with Microsoft to makeavailable its Year 2000 solution, TSRM (The Systems RedevelopmentMethodology) to MS Project users. The TSRM Year 2000 Project Planningtemplates can be downloaded from the MS Project Web site ahttp://www.microsoft.com/msproject.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: CALS-DELL ALLIANCEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996CALS, a networking solutions provider, has entered into a partnershipwith US-based DELL Computer Corporation to distribute latter's productline in India which includes desktop PCs, notebooks and high-speednetwork servers.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: PARAMETRIC SETS UP GLOBAL RESOURCE CENTER IN INDIAfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Parametric Technology Corporation has set up a Global Resource Center tosource and train engineering talents in India for its global operations.The Center will recruit engineering professionals who will be trained on3D mechanical design automation and its application in manufacturingprocess engineering.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: NIIT's CENTRE OF COMPETENCE FOR MANUFACTURINGSOLUTIONSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996NIIT's Centre of Competence for Manufacturing Solutions will offer ITsolutions for the manufacturing sectors through its tie-ups with CincomSystems and Ross Systems, two leading manufacturing solutions providers.The Centre, located at NIIT's software export complex in New Delhi, willhandle the product localization, interface with related software andhardware vendors and customization of the products to cater toclient-specific issues.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: MICROSOFT LAUNCHES MSF 2.0from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Microsoft has announced the availability of a new, expanded version ofMicrosoft Solution Framework (MSF) to help organizations develop anddeploy successful distributed computing solutions using Microsoftproducts. MSF 2.0 includes Microsoft's Enterprise Architecture planningmodel which helps customers in implementing a technology infrastructureto achieve short-term results, such as improved internal communicationand information sharing, that support longer-term strategic businessgoals.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: INNOSERV APPOINTED SANCTUARY WOODS' DISTRIBUTORfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996US-based Sanctuary Woods Multimedia, a leading developer of multimediaedutainment titles, has appointed Innoserv Systems, Delhi, as their soleIndian distributor. The titles range from sophisticated graphicsadventures to innovative learning programs for children, and have beenpriced between Rs 900 and Rs 1,650.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: COMSAT PROVIDES VSATS TO IPCLfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Comsat Max, a leading Indian satellite communication service provider,has bagged a Rs 5.5 crore order from Indian Petrochemicals CorporationLimited (IPCL) for providing VSAT services. Initially, 13 VSATs will beprovided to connect IPCL's corporate office with its plants located atGandhar, Baroda, and Nagothane, as well as to five regional offices andthree sales centres across the country. Subsequently these services willbe extended to IPCL's nine sales offices and 70 distributors usinganother 37 VSATs.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: TCS MICROSOFT'S PREMIER CONSULTANTfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Microsoft has appointed Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) as its PremierConsulting Partner. According to the agreement, TCS will now provideconsultancy services and develop applications on Windows NT, SQL Serverand Microsoft Internet products. In addition, TCS will set up asExcellence Centre for benchmarking, interoperability, and solutions onMicrosoft products. The company will also develop vertical applicationsbased on MS BackOffice technologies.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: IDM OFFERS CERTIFIED NOVELL COURSES IN SRI LANKAfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Onward Novell Software (India) has appointed IDM Computer Studies, SriLanka, as its Authorised Education Centre for the Certified NovellEngineer (CNE), Master Certified Novell Engineer (MCNE), and CertifiedNovell Administrator (CNA) courses in Colombo. IDM instructors have beentrained as Certified Novell Instructors (CNI) by Onward Novell.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: MS INTERNET SOLUTIONS FOR BT INTERNET CUSTOMERSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Under a strategic collaboration with Microsoft, BritishTelecommunications now offers dial-up BT Internet service customers acomplete software solution. The package comprises Internet Explorer 3.0with Microsoft's companion e-mail, news, and chat applications, andcommunication stack and dialer facilities.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: DIGITAL SHIPS ALPHASTATION 500/500from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Digital's new desktop workstation, AlphaStation 500/500 with a Alpha21164 microprocessor and 8 MB cache offers a performance rating of 15SPECint95 and 19.5 SPECfp95. The product supports 512 MB RAM, andincludes a 256-bit wide memory bus, five storage slots and four PCIbays. Other standard features include twisted pair and thin wireEthernet, stereo-quality audio, an array of external ports forserial/parallel communications and SCSI connectors. The company has alsoannounced the availability of its new PowerStorm graphics acceleratorsthat provide high-performance 3D graphics for Windows NT.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: DCM TIES UP WITH MICROSOFTfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996To provide enterprise-wide networking and manufacturing solutions basedon a variety of Microsoft's back-and front-end products includingWindows NT, Exchange, SQL Server, Internet Information Server, andOffice 95, DCM DataSystems has entered into a strategic alliance withMicrosoft. This agreement also allows DCM DataSystems to joinMicrosoft's worldwide referral programme for messaging and groupwaresolutions in the manufacturing and automotive segments.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: HCL COMNET LAUNCHES HYBRID VSAT SERVICESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996HCL Comnet had joined hands with ViaSat, USA, to offer hybrid VSATservices in India and the Asia-Pacific region. The service  SkylinkHybrid will meet the requirements of high-quality voice, data and videoover an integrated system comprising TDM/TDMA and SCPC DAMA VSATsystems, and ViaSat's StarWire product family. Key sectors that willbenefit include telecommunications, power, oil, construction,newspapers, and hospitals.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: NOVELL UNVEILS MANAGEWISE FUTUREfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Novell has announced that future versions of ManageWise will use Javatechnology to simplify PC LAN management, and enable administrators toperform management tasks from any Internet/intranet using Web-basedmanagement consoles. These will be platform-independent and supportNetWare Directory Services. The tools will also enable service providersto remotely manage networks, including those run by Novell's NetWareConnect Services partners.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: SGI INFINITEREALITY MAKES ENTRY IN INDIAfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Rajtaru Videosonic, a Mumbai-based post-production house, is the firstIndian customer for Silicon Graphics' Onyx InfiniteReality a high-speedgraphics supercomputer. When bundled with Discrete Logic's powerful filmand video editing and composing software, InfiniteReality offerexcellent post-production services and has created sequences for ForrestGump, True Lies, Speed, and Apollo 13.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: TULIP INTRODUCES ECO-BUTTON FOR ITS MONITORSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The VisionLine, MotionLine, ImpressionLine, Universal, and Ideal PCsfrom Tulip Computers now have an ECO-button. This automatically shutsdown power-hungry components including the hard disk and monitor, andreduces the processor speed, whenever the machine is idle.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: IIS INFOTECH BECOMES IFS'S MASTER DISTRIBUTOR ININDIAfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Sweden-based Industrial and Financial Systems (IFS) has appointed IISInfotech as master distributor in India for IFS' range ofenterprise-wide software applications. These include 32 modules thatallow effective management of manufacturing, materials, sales, finance,human resources and engineering projects. The agreement also includessupport for consultancy, training and customization.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: WIPRO TO MARKET SPSS'S NEURAL CONNECTIONfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Wipro Infotech's Software Products Division is selling NeuralConnection a neural networking software from SPSS. Neural networksassist in data analysis by learning complex patterns and use this tosolve fresh problems. Neural Connection has 15 tools for datamanagement, modeling forecasting and presentation to allow users tobuild and explore models.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEWS - MARKETWATCH: HP DONATES FOR IIT LABORATORYfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996To help establish a new laboratory at the Instrument Design DevelopmentCenter, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, Hewlett-Packard India hasdonated equipment worth Rs 3,600,000. The radio frequency circuitsimulation and electromagnetic engineering equipment was installed earlylast month. This donation came as a step towards IIT Delhi's newinitiatives to work closely with the industry. The major industries thatwill benefit that will include cable, electronic systems and processcontrol units.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996MULTITASKING WITH DOS: GENERATE A BACKGROUND WITH TINY DARTS SHOOTING ALLOVER THE SCREENfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996While today's operating systems usually  have multitasking built-in,good old  DOS users too could  do with a bit of it. Hooks and TSRprograms can be used to provide some rudimentary multithreading evenwith a normal DOS program.Interrupt 8h is the timer interrupt and is called by the system 18.2times a second (actually 91 times in 5 seconds). This is used to updatethe system clock and perform other regular updates. This interrupt canbe captured and pointed to your own procedure, making sure it is calledseveral times a second. However, there is one disadvantage Int 8h is asensitive interrupt where delays can cause the machine to hang. Theprocedures chained need to return the control very fast so as not tointerrupt the normal functioning of the system.To get around these restrictions, Int 1Ch which is invoked by Int 8hevery time it is called can be used effectively. While this too iscalled 18.2 times a second, it can be used quite safely without thedangers involved with Int 8h. When chaining a procedure to Int 1Ch, keepin mind that the procedure should be one that does something fast andreturns the control soon. For instance, a procedure that updates a clockin the corner of a screen should not have a loop built into it, butshould rely on the fact that it is called repeatedly several times asecond. Every time it is invoked, it should get the current time anddisplay it before handling the control back.To make things simple, here is a program (compilable in Turbo Pascal6.00 and above) which demonstrates background operation using Int 1Ch.The program generates a background akin to what programs like ScreamTracker use, with tiny darts zipping all over the screen. While these"movers" move around, the program can go on processing in theforeground, interacting with the user normally.Assuming fifteen movers are going to be around at any given point oftime, an array with details about each mover is maintained. Each moveris determined by its X and Y coordinates on the screen, the characterthat is used for the mover, the direction the mover is moving, its speedsetting and whether the mover is currently on the screen or not.The array is initialised with a randomly chosen Y coordinate and an Xcoordinate which describes either the extreme left or right corner. Careis taken so that no two movers lie on the same row. The speed is arandom figure and the direction of movement is selected according towhich corner the mover starts off. If the mover lies on a position wherea character already exists, one can either choose to have it overwrittenor have it hidden giving the illusion of passing in front and behind thecharacter respectively setting the OnScr truth variable accordingly.The procedure MoveIt is an interrupt procedure that is written toreplace the original Int 1Ch. The address of the real interrupt isstored in the variable Int1C. MoveIt has a counter that keeps cyclingbetween 0 and 15. A mover's position is updated when the current valueof the timer is exactly divisible by the speed of the mover. This meansthat the lower the speed setting, the more frequently the mover ismoved.Every time MoveIt is called, it cycles through the data for all 15movers making adjustments when necessary. When a mover hits the end ofthe screen, it is pulled off and a new one is created. Once in a while,the speed of a mover is changed while it is travelling across thescreen. When a new Y coordinate is being generated for a mover, oneneeds to check whether another one already exists in the same row.A problem with movers when the screen is being used for something isthat if a mover gets overwritten when it is on the screen, the next timeit moves, it blanks out the offending character because when the moverwas put on the screen, the position was blank. Again, if the screen isscrolled, the data on where the movers were located will no longer bevalid, leaving lost movers all over the screen. While nothing can bedone about the second problem except for ensuring that the screen is notscrolled, the first problem can be countered by creating a set of rowson which movers should not appear. Any changes on the screen by theforeground processing should be done only here.The set nothere contains the rows on which movers should not appear. Itshould be initialized to an empty set in the beginning before using it.The sample program has the first two rows marked off limits for themovers.One of the problems with the default frequency of Int 1Ch is, it is notfrequent enough to provide very effective control over speed. Thesolution is to boost the number of times the timer invokes Int 8h, whichin turn invokes Int 1Ch. The procedure FTimer, increases this speed, andthe STimer procedure returns this to normal. While this increases thenumber of times the procedure MoveIt is called, it also has the sideeffect of speeding up the system clock. To get rid of this, you canwrite a replacement Int 8h which calls the real Int 8h only 18.2 times asecond, but calls your procedure every time the speeded up timer ticks.The same technique can be used for other interrupts as well. Forexample, Int 28h, the idle time interrupt is called whenever the systemis free and the computer is waiting for the user to do something. It canbe chained to kick in with a screen saver after a specified period ofinactivity. Int 24h, the DOS critical error interrupt can be chained toinstall a proper error handler, while Int 23h, the critical breakhandler can be hooked to install a custom Control-Break handler.While these techniques can be used to implement some degree ofmultithreading, DOS was never made for this. Extreme care should betaken when implementing things like this so as to avoid potentialconflicts with other programs and TSRs which may use the same hooks.{$A+,B-,D+,E-,F+,G-,I-,L+,N-,O-,P-,Q-,R-,S-,T-,V-,X+}{$M 20480,0,0}Program BackgoundFn;uses dos;const types:array[1..6]of byte=(45,196,95,205,240,196); (characters touse)spd=3;   {Number of different speeds possible} typepieces=record {Record for each mover}x,y:byte; {X,Y coordinates}ch:char: {The mover char}direction:char; {Which side}speed:byte; {Speed of movement}onscr:boolean; {On screen or not}end;ScreenLoc = RECORD Cha : Char;Atr : Byte;END;ScreenRow = ARRAY[1..80] OF ScreenLoc;Screen    = ARRAY[1..25] OF ScreenRow; {Representation of video screen80x25}var nothere: set of 1..25; {set of rows to leave blank}vidmem: screen absolute $B800:$0000; {Video memory}movers : array[1..15] of pieces;i,j:integer;timer:byte;Intic:procedure; {Orig address of Int 1C}Procedure FTimer; assembler;asm {Speed up timer}climov al, 36hout 43h, almov ax,05000hout 40h, almov al, ahout 40h, almov al, 25hout 40h, alstiend;Procedure Stimer;assembler;asm (Slow down timer)climov al, 36hout 43h, almov ax, OFFFFhout 40h, almov al, ahout 40h, almov al, 25hout 40h, alsti end; Procedure MoveIt; Interrupt;{New Int 1C for bckg work}label rep, repback;var x:char;beginasm sti end; {stop interrupts}inc(timer);if timer>10 then timer:=0;for i:=1 to 15 doif (movers[i].direction='R') and (timer mod movers[i].Speed=0) thenbeginif movers[i].onscr[i].x].cha:=' ';inc(movers[i].x);if movers[i].x=81 thenbeginmovers(I).x:=l;rep:movers[i].y=random(25)+1;for j:=1 to 15 do If (movers[I].y= movers[j].y) thenif j<>i then goto rep;if movers[i].y in nothere then goto rep;movers[i].speed:=random(spd)+1;movers[i].ch:=char(types[random(6)+1]);end;if vidmem [movers[i].y,movers[i].x].cha=' ' thenbeginvidmem[movers[i].y,movers[i].X].cha:=movers[i].ch;movers[i].onscr:=true;endelse movers[i].onscr:=false;if random(100)=10 then movers[i].speed:=random(spd)+1;end else if (movers[i].direction='L') and(timer mod movers[i].speed=0) thenbeginif movers[i].onscr thenvidmem[movers[i].y,movers[i].x].cha:=' ';dec (movers[i].x);if movers[i].x=0 thenbeginmovers[i].x:=80;repback:movers[i].y:=random(25)+1;for j:=l to 15 do if (movers[i].y=movers[j].y) thenif j<>i then goto repback;if movers[i].y in nothere then goto repback;movers[i].speed:=random(spd)+1;movers[i].ch:=char(types[random(6)+1]);end;if vidmem[movers[i].y, movers[i].x].cha=' ' thenbeginvidmem[movers[i].y,movers[i].x].cha:=movers[i].ch;movers[i].onscr:=true;endelse movers[i].onscr:=false;if random(100)=10 then movers[i].speed:=random(spd)+1;end;inline($9C);int1c;end;Procedure StartBack;var i,j:word;goahead:boolean;beginftimer;for i:=l to 15 dobeginmovers[i].onscr:=false;repeatmovers[i].y:=random(25)+1;goahead:=true;for j:=l to i-1 doif movers[j].y=movers[i].y thengoahead:=false;if movers[i].y in nothere thengoahead:=false;until goahead=true;movers[i].ch:=chr(types[random(6)+1]);movers[i].speed:=random(spd)+1;if i mod 2 =0 thenbeginmovers[i].direction:='R';movers[i].x:=1;endelse beginmovers[i].direction:='L';movers[i].x:=80;end;end;for i:=1 to 15 doif vidmem[movers[i].y,movers[i].x].cha =' ' thenbeginvidmem[movers[i].y,movers[i].x].cha: =movers[i].ch;movers[i].onscr:=true;end;getintvec($1C,@int1C);setintvec($1C,@moveit);end;Procedure StopBack;var i:integer;beginsetintvec($1C, @int1C);for i:=1 to 15 doif movers[i].onscr thenvidmem[movers[i].y,movers[i].x].cha:= ` ';Stimer;end;beginrandomize;nothere:= [];nothere:= nothere+[1,2];startback; {Start background ops}readln; {Your code}stopback; {Stop background ops}end.Ashwin MCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996FAXES FOR FREE: USE EMAIL TO SEND FAXESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996To the many wonders of the Internet, add another the  ability to sendfree faxes to many parts of the world. This experiment started in 1993to integrate e-mail and fax. Its now grown into a reliable andfull-fledged service that is used regularly by both individuals andorganizations. Since it can be accessed using e-mail, readers withe-mail access to the Internet can send faxes.Send e-mail to a special address incorporating the phone number of thefax machine you are trying to reach instead of a fax. The e-mail addressformat is remote-printer.1st_Address_ Line/2nd_Address_Line@ .iddd.tpc.int.The "remote-printer" bit is required to generated an automatic coverpage. The Address Lines generate a "Please deliver this fax to:" messageon the cover page. When the cover page is created, underline characterswill be converted to spaces and backslash to a new line. Use the addressto specify the recipient's name/title and department, or any otheraddressing information. The pound sign represents the fax number, andthis should include the country code, the area code, and the fax number.Indian users should not use the `00' ISD prefix used. The entire number,including the country code must be included even if you are sending afax within your own country. (For users in India of course this is moot,since as of writing India is not accessible through this service.)Suppose you want to fax the BBC World TV's News Editor whose fax numberis +44-181-5762782. Here `44' is the UK country code, `181' London'scode and 5762782 the fax number. You would send e-mail toremote-printer. News_Editor/BBC_World_TV@441 815762782. iddd.tpc.int.Similarly, if you wanted to fax Time magazine's Hong Kong office, youwould send e-mail to remote-printer.Hong_Kong_Office/Time_Magazine@85225129790.iddd.tpc.int, where 852 is Hong Kong's code and25129790 is the number.The project depends on a number of "cells" available worldwide. A cellis a remote-printing server, that has been set up to service aparticular geographical calling area. A fax sent to this server will beredirected to the appropriate cell which then transmits it locally as afax. Since the fax has traveled mostly through the Internet, and notover the telephone, its free (unless you pay to send e-mail). And sinceyour message has traveled as a fax only on the final leg of its journey,it will have less data loss than a conventional fax.FeedbackOnce a fax is delivered, the sender receives a status report by e-mailfrom the cell operator confirming delivery. If the fax could not bedelivered (the number is not a fax machine, or its is continuously busy,or the machine is out of paper), the cell operator will inform you viaby e-mail, of its inability to deliver. Most cell operators try a numberof times to send a fax, informing you of the outcome of each attempt,before they give up.If you don't receive a report, it's possible that either your originalfax or the cell operator's confirmation message is delayed. It's asreliable as e-mail, and delays do take place with e-mail too. Or yourfax could be waiting in a fax queue on a busy cell. However, usually youwill receive confirmation of a successful transmission within 15minutes, but it could be as long as a day too. If you don't received anyacknowledgment even after 24 hours assume that something went wrong andsend the fax again.AREAS SERVICEDAs of writing, just three countries UK, Sweden and Hong Kong havecomplete coverage. There is partial coverage of Australia, the US,Canada, and parts of Europe. In the US, some major metros including NewYork and San Francisco are covered.Before sending faxes by e-mail, find out which areas are covered. A faxsent to an area not covered generates an error message from the projectadministrator. Coverage changes as new cells come on-line, and astechnical glitches occasionally take cells off-line, or when networkfailures make them inaccessible.To receive a list of countries covered, send blank e-mail totpccover@info. tpc.int for a list of service areas. The list is e-mailedto you, and if you're a regular use update your listing every otherweek.FAXING GRAPHICSThis service is not limited to ASCII-based text. You can also sendPostScript file using a MIME-compliant mailer. (If you're not sure ifyour mailer is MIME-compliant, check with its vendor, your systemadministrator, or a knowledgeable friend.)With PostScript you can send formatted text (including non-Roman fontssuch as Devanagiri) or complex images. You can even send your fancyletterhead if you have a graphical format copy and a scanned version ofyour signature.To generate a PostScript file, select a PostScript printer driver inyour application and use the `print-to-file' option. This file shouldalways have a .PS extension. For the most reliable results, use basicfonts such as Times New Roman. And if you want to spice things up thenselect the print option that allows you to include font descriptions inthe PostScript file. This results in a huge file that can besuccessfully converted to a fax by a cell which doesn't know about thefont you are using. A caveat: some e-mail providers restrict the size ofmessages sent, as do Internet service Providers, and the destinationcell. Also some PostScript drivers create non-standard files. Ifpossible, use Apple's LaserWriter driver which works.SETTING UP A CELLThe project's coverage depends wholly on cell operators individuals andorganizations worldwide who have established cells in their local areas.Most operators participate as an Internet-community service as they earnno profits. However, they are allowed to acknowledge a sponsor on thecover page of every fax delivered and to use advertising revenue tooffset costs.To join the project and establish your own cell you will need a permanentconnection to the Internet (as opposed to a dial-up connection) and somebasic hardware (a PC and a fax modem). The project will provide thesoftware. The coverage of your cell depends on you. Most cover an entirearea code so that every fax sent is a local call. Contact the projectadministrator at tpcadmin@info.tpc.int for details.A FAQ is available by mailing a blank message to tpcfaq@info.tpc.int.Information on the project is available www.tpc.int. There's also amailing list for those interested. Join it by sending a message tomajordomo@aar net.edu.au. This message must have a body of a single linesubscribe tpc-rpKim Agrawal is a consultant specializing in program-flow design, interfaces,and documentation. He can be contracted at Kim@auroville.Org.inCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996MAKING MUSIC ON THE PCfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996More about MIDIIn last month's article we covered  the fundamentals behind making musicon the PC. We also learnt b about MIDI composition and digital audio.This month we'll take a  closer look at how you can use MIDI. But beforeyou can do something constructive, you will need a better idea of thetechnology. And a demystifying of its associated jargon and concepts.Connecting ThingsMIDI (Musical Instruments Digital Interface) is a way for MIDI devicesto communicate with one other. A 5-pin DIN socket is used for MIDI andis the gateway through which data passes. And if you don't know what isa DIN, look at your PC's keyboard connector socket and plug. There arethree types of MIDI ports IN, OUT and THRU and a port on one device canbe connected to a MIDI port on another using a MIDI connector. Thislooks like an ordinary DIN connector, but is better shielded. However,you can also use a normal two ended DIN cable without problems.Use a PC with a MIDI-compatible sound card as your primary MIDI device.However, as most sound cards often don't have standard MIDI sockets, youwill need a MIDI adapter which is connected to the sound card's DB15joystick socket. The DIN plugs at one end of the cable can be pluggedinto other MIDI devices. When acquiring a MIDI adapter, its important toensure that it uses electronic components known as opto-isolators in it.Some cheaper adapters do not use these, and may not work properly withyour sound card.Keyboard To PCWe have two MIDI devices a keyboard controller and a PC with a soundcard. A typical keyboard such as the Roland PCM200 has a MIDI OUT port.And the PC sound card has both MIDI IN and a MIDI OUT ports. If youconnect the MIDI OUT of the keyboard to the MIDI IN of the PC, thekeyboard can send MIDI data to the PC. The PC cannot send MIDI data tothe keyboard, since this particular keyboard only has an OUT port. ThePC can in turn send MIDI data out through the OUT to another MIDIdevice, such as. another keyboard with a MIDI IN or another PC with aMIDI IN. In short, the OUT port transmits data and IN port receivesdata. But what about the THRU port.If the PC has a THRU port, then any device connected to this port willreceive only MIDI data being received via the MIDI IN port. THRU portsare a bypass for the raw MIDI data sent to a MIDI device. Most MIDIdevices, including PCs, can reconfigure the OUT to a THRU port. Thisallows a keyboard to be connected to one PC that is in turn connected toanother PC, and the MIDI data flows through the first computer to thesecond without being modified. But if the first PC has an OUT portinstead, MIDI data transmitted would originate from that PC.In principle a network of MIDI devices can be daisy-chained (connected)using the IN, OUT and THRU ports. And any MIDI data can be routed to anydevice with the right port. However, data flow is one-way: from OUT toIN or from THRU to IN.The MIDI DataNow that we've learn a bit about the hardware mechanics, lets look athow the data is moved. Actually, for some reason, most people call MIDIdata messages, so we too shall do so from here onwards. Essentially,there are two types system messages and channel messages.System messages tell the MIDI device how to run itself, and are prettymuch like DOS or UNIX OS commands. They can tell the MIDI device to stopor start playing a musical piece, or do a data-dump (dumping all fromone device to another). Channel messages describe to the MIDI devicedetails of notes being performed.The MIDI specification assigns 16 channels (1-16) through which notedata is passed. Although you usually assign a channel per instrument,you can also assign many instruments to a single channel. And if you'rereally perverse many channels to an instrument.Each channel is like a TV channel. The MIDI device connected andreceiving channel messages will only perform data in that channel if itis set to receive it. Or to put it in MIDI-speak: if the channel numbersmatch. For example, you can have a flute on Channel 2 with a piano onChannel 3, but if A is receiving only on Channel 2 and B too isreceiving on Channel 3, then A will reproduce the flute and B the piano.A common misconception is that MIDI connectors pipe audio. This isuntrue and they only carry the instructions for playing a sound. Inessence, if you set A to receive on channel 2 and B on channel 3, andthen send an instruction to play a flute on channels 2 and 3 throughMIDI, the flute sound generated is looked up separately. A's sound cardwill transmit a flute sound and B's sound card too will mimic it. And ifA's card has good sound reproduction and B is low-quality, then you'regoing to end up with something that's discordant, and not really music.And speakers connected to B's card will only reproduce the low-fidelitysound generated. They won't be able to play the great stuff coming fromA.MIDI Composition And SequencerNow to the nitty-gritty's of how MIDI is used to make music. A sequencersends MIDI messages in the right sequence to MIDI devices to get them toplay their sounds. Sequencer tell the device to play drums on channel10, bass guitar and double bass on channel 1, flute on channel 2 andpiano on channel 3. Sequencing is also known as MIDI composition, and asuitable sequencer lets you compose music for an entire orchestra.But how many kinds of sequencer are there. Although special, dedicatedhardware sequencer are available, there are also PC software basedones. A hardware sequencer' main advantage is that they are a completeportable package such as the Roland MV-30 (39cm x 31cm x 7.7cm) thatweighs 3 .46 kg. Marketed as a "studio production system," it cancontrol up to eight instruments on external MIDI devices.But software sequencer are becoming more popular. Although available ondesktop machines, these were too bulk to carry to a concert. Butnotebook PCs whose portability, affordability and capabilities arebeginning to make an impression, and the software option will eventuallyedge out hardware sequencer.Composing On The PCThe most popular PC software sequencer available are Cubase, Logic, andCakewalk. They are also very expensive, with the Pro versions costingmore than $200 apiece. While its possible to get earlier (and cheaper)versions of abroad. I would recommend Logic and Cakewalk as earlierversions of Cubase are notoriously buggy on the PC because they wererather badly ported from the Mac. Logic and Cakewalk too have portingbugs but are not as bad.But for beginners, I would recommend PowerTracks Pro. This retails at$29 and has enough features to keep you busy. And when you finallyoutgrow it, it's cheap enough to not feel bad about moving on. It isalso the one sequencer we've never been able to crash. Version 4 (latestas of writing) also allows one track of digital audio to be recordedalong with the sequencer.The real problem with all the sequencer mentioned is that they are notlegally available in India. And if you can't buy them abroad, then allyou can use are pirated (and possibly) duplicate units. Are softwarevendors in India listening.But don't despair, there is a solution. As an example, let's walkthrough Music Sculptor, a (rather dated) shareware sequencer, for you toget a feel. Do remember that shareware is not free, and if you decide tokeep using this app, you should pay the author. Registration costs about$30, but we for one would rather save up for PowerTracks Pro (which is alot better) instead. Music Sculptor 1.7 is available on the PCQ Winter'96 CD-ROM.To use Music Sculptor, you need a PC with a sound card and speakers,running Win 3.x. You don't need a music keyboard (though if you have onethen use it) or a MIDI adapter (because if you are not using a musickeyboard, then the MIDI connection from the sequencer to the sound cardis emulated by the PC).In Music Sculptor the top track-view window is a MIDI music editor.However, more powerful sequencer have many different and useful ways toedit music in the. These include Score-View editors that show notes inmusical score form for each track; Event-View editors which allow directhandling of MIDI data; and Piano-Roll editors that use horizontal barscorresponding to the pitch and assigning a length that corresponds tothe duration. (Piano-rolls were rolls of scrolling special paper withpunch marks used to play automated pianos. The computer versionresembles it mechanical ancestor and uses an electronic rather thanmechanical version, hence the name).The bottom window is a piano keyboard, and you can use the mouse to playit. Just click the mouse on a piano keys. And if you hear a familiarsound you are in luck. But if you don't hear anything it's time to checkthings. This is a familiar ritual for anyone who links together musicaldevices and more often than not you wonder why is there no sound.Check easy stuff like speaker connections: are they plugged in andreceiving power. Are the cables connect to the correct jacks. If allseems well next check that your sound card drivers exist look in ProgramManager's Main window's Control Panel applet under Sound. If you can'tsee any drivers then they may have not been installed and check thecard's manuals and software. If your card software includes a mixer forthe various outputs and inputs, check that the MIDI output is switchedon and that the master volume is set on maximum. And if in doubt, setall outputs on full and adjust later. Also check that the output fromthe sequencer is set to the sound card.Once everything is set, touch piano keyboard with the mouse andgenerally mess around. Scroll up and down the keyboard using the scrollbar at the bottom, to see what are the highest and lowest notes you cansound. And drag the mouse across the keyboard to hear a glissando.Sound Up, Let's PartyIn Pro recording studios, you usually start with a rhythm track. And weshall too. If your sound card driver supports the General MIDI standard,which it should if it's MIDI compatible, then the default assignmentof the instruments on channel 10 will be drums of some kind. Move themouse pointer to the channel (ch) button for track 1, then click andselect channel 10. (Some sound cards may use channel 16 instead). Youalso need to enable the track 1's recording mode by clicking its "Rec"button. Try playing some of the piano keys you should get a variety ofsounds from bass drums to toms, hi-hats and cymbals.To lay the drum track in, use the metronome facility to keep time. Thiscan be toggled from the Settings menu. Now, press the record button. Youwill hear the metronome clicking. Listening to the metronome, use themouse to hit the drums at the right points in time. As the measures goby, you will see the track grow. You only need to put the track in rightover one bar (or measure as defined in Music Sculptor) at a time, andstop (by pressing the stop button) whenever you like.It doesn't matter if the other measures are wrong, because you canselect the wrong ones with the mouse and delete them. Similarly, you canselect the correct measures and paste them in wherever you like in thesequence to build a perfect drum track bit by bit. And to play click thePlay button.Next, lay down a bass track on track 2. To select the right bass, clickthe instruments column of track 2 and select from the collection ofGeneral MIDI instruments. Record this track while playing the drum track(with Play mode enabled) as backing to help you keep time.You similarly can lay down other instruments on the remaining tracks.There are 16-track and 24-track studios. Music Sculptor is like a99-track virtual studio. But the number of channels remains 16, as inMIDI.Going Down The RoadKeying in your sequences using the mouse will soon become quite tedious.It's also harder to make your music expressive. And if this is the case,then its time to invest in a better MIDI controller. Usually this is adumb MIDI keyboard (dumb because it has no built-in voices, like normalconsumer keyboards). It does not need to be a keyboard and can be aguitar (where each string is assigned a MIDI channel), or a windinstrument like a saxophone (in which case the pressure with which youplay becomes very important MIDI data). Even tap-dancing shoes have beenused as MIDI controllers. But this is not as odd as using your mouse asa MIDI controller device, though not connected to the sound card's MIDIport like a normal controller.A decent MIDI controller makes it easier to be more expressive. TheRoland PCM200 has velocity-sensitive keys and a pitch bending stick.This makes quite a difference, and lets you record a sequencer trackwhich doesn't sound hopelessly mechanical. Another sound investment is abetter sequencing software as Music Sculptor, though easy to use, it isreally dated. If you want more control, you'll have to buy one of theother sequencer mentioned. These will not only give you better trackediting, but also allow you to automatically correct the timing of thenotes (quantization) and do data dumps.If you find that your sound card's output is poor, get a professionalsound module MIDI devices that play sounds stored on wavetables like thesound card, but better. And as you feel the need, add more equipment tothe system. If its MIDI-compatible then connect it to your MIDI networkand do interesting things in combination with the other devices. Beinginventive and using your imagination goes a long way in a MIDI set up,and is really the most important ingredient for MIDI composition.Music technology is changing, and MIDI is no exception. The best way tofind out more is to subscribe to magazines such as Sound On Sound orFuture Music. You can also subscribe to a music makers' mailing list onthe Internet. A really useful reference is What's MIDI, available for7.50 (cheque or postal order, payable to Nexus Media Ltd.), from BestSellers, Making Music, 50 Doughty Street, London W1N 2NG, UK.The concluding part of this opus shall cover samplers and digital audio.Meanwhile, here's a teaser about MIDI and digital audio to get you inthe mood: If you have a multimedia system, listen to the IKE8.WAV(\Sharewar\ Music, PCQ Summer '96 CD-ROM). It's my band playing (with mesinging). See if you can figure out which of the instruments weregenerated from MIDI sequencing, and which were real.Pawan Jaitly can be reached by e-mail at DELAAB48@giasdl01.vsnl.net.in. Hisband's Web page is at http://zaphod.phys.port.ac.uk/personal/pj/maya/maya.htmlCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996INDIA INTERNET: INDIAN SITES ON THE WORLD WIDE WEBfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996www.meadev.gov.in : The Discover India Web site contains backgroundinformation on India, and is aimed at overseas visitors. There aresub-menus for Culture, Tourism including places to visit and monuments,social issues, the film industry, and even Indian clothing. There's alsoan overview of the Indian economy, its infrastructure and working in theEconomy menu. Media includes information on India's newspapers andjournals. There are news headlines, although these were not updated onthe day we visited the site.www.indiaconnect.com/herbline:Herbal beauty care products feature at theHerbline Web site. There's hair care, skin care, face and body scrubsand special therapy products. For information on these, you can write toHerbline.www.vsnl.net.in:Vishesh Sanchar Nigam Ltd (VSNL), India's onlycommercial Internet service provider, has had its own Web site for awhile. You'll find profiles and information about VSNL here.www.indiaserver.com:Indiaserver's menu includes Saregama, some Indianmusic, links to some newspapers, a business and an investment section,sports, and news briefs. The Web site invites articles on InformationTechnology.www.saregama.com :The Gramaphone Company of India is one of its oldestand largest. Their page features information on the company, the musicand artistes represented, and new releases.www.iitb.ernet.in and www.iitd.ernet.in :In an effort to make themselvesmore visible, the Indian Institutes of Technology in Delhi and Bombay,are on the Web. Don't get put off by the slow page loading, because lotsof information is available here.www.helloindia.com:Reflecting the growing power of the overseas Indiancommunity, especially in the US, MCI too has a special page on India.And to mark India's 50th Anniversary of Independence, MCI and IndiaToday are having a contest winners will get a free subscription to themagazine.www.microsoft.com/india:Microsoft, as part of its world-wide presence,too has established a country page for India. This features Net relatednews, product support, free downloads, and more on the Win95 Anniversarycelebrations.www.mumbainet.com: Mario's contribution for Independence Day onmumbainet.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996PAINTSHOP PRO 4: UPDATED FEATURES GIVE PSP COMMERCIAL FEATURES AT ASHAREWARE PRICEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996PaintShop Pro 4 now brings a professional paint app to your desktop, atthe price of share-ware. And the features that put this app way aheadof comparable shareware bitmap editors include support for fullmasking, 21 image filters, 11 deformation utilities, options forcustomizing your own filters, plus support for third party Adobe- orAldus-compatible plug-ins filters.Besides supporting standard functions available in bitmap editors,PaintShop Pro 4 has new special effects such as Hotwaxing, GradientEffects, Buttonize, and Drop Shadow. Using some of these effects is morefor fun than actual use. And Web designers, multimedia enthusiasts andthose who need to create presentations will appreciate some of includedfeatures.Buttonize is used to convert any graphic into a 3D button that can besaved as a transparent GIF. These can later be used in Web pages or avariety of multimedia applications. And Drop Shadow lets you createraised text effects.PSP 4's interface is far more streamlined than its predecessors, and thefilters are faster. And with drag-and-drop enabled, to open a graphicfiles just drag it onto the PaintShop window or icon. This feature isalso available for multiple files too.This version's speed too is amazing, with a typical filter like Embossbeing applied over a 1 MB file in seconds. It also incorporates some 29paper textures mimicking a variety of surfaces. There are lots of minorchanges (Ctrl+Shift+F for full screen preview instead of Shift+F) thatwill take existing users some time to get used to.Screen capture has been enhanced, and you can now capture multiplescreens at one go. And this process can be triggered with the rightmouse button. Support for TWAIN-compatible scanners is also included.All common bitmap and vector file formats including PCX, CDR, CGM, BMP,GIF, and PhotoCD are supported. PSD (Photoshop) image support is alsobuilt in, but PSP 4 can't read multiple layered images. It also failedto open some .CDR files.This is far more powerful than comparable shareware bitmap editors. Andif you perhaps miss some features, such as support for objects andunlimited undo, available in other non-shareware, professional bitmapeditors, remember this one came free. And when registered is stillcheaper.Paint Shop Pro 4 for Windows 95 and Windows NT. Shareware from JASCSoftware Inc, Eden Prairie, MN (www.jasc.com). Registration $69 ($23upgrade).The new version has several exciting features including image filters,deformation utilities, and support for third party plug-ins such asKai's Power Tools and Andromeda Filters. Also creates transparent GIFsfor use with Webpages and multimedia applications.PRASANTH P at PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LOMEGA ZIP DRIVE: AN EFFICIENT, FORDABLE DRIVE FOR 100 MB "FLOPPIES"from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Storage remains a problem, and you can either store on tape, diskette, orCD-ROM each with its own problems and limitations. Or you could get aZIP drive that uses a proprietary format disk a little bigger than a3.5" floppy and stores up to 100 MB of randomly accessible data. And thedrive fits into most briefcases with the greatest of ease.Our review unit was a parallel port version. SCSI versions too areavailable. Strangely enough, the target PC must have a SCSI cardinstalled, which is still uncommon (unless it's a Mac where this isstandard). A Mac version is also available.The drive is encased in a high impact resistant plastic colored anaesthetic, easily recognizable blue. And can be stored vertically orhorizontally. There are two LEDs green power and orange for driveaccess. The drive was powered by a surprisingly big power supply thatworked only at 220 volts units sold in the US and elsewhere aredual-voltage, and much smaller. Since the drive is meant to be portable,this was a strange decision from the vendor. And although thedocumentation stated that the smaller, dual voltage power supply wasavailable separately if required, the vendor could not supply it.There's a short, stubby cable with clearly marked 25-pin connectors atboth ends. And a quick check with a multi-meter showed it as an ordinary25-to-25 pin cable, with every pin connected to the corresponding one atthe other end. Iomega warns that while it is indeed a straight-throughcable, the length and quality are important. We tried using anidentically configured serial cable that failed to work probably becausethis was almost three times the length of the ZIP drive's cable.The drive comes with two 3.5" diskettes one for DOS and Windows 3.x, andone for Windows 95 that contain the driver's drivers. There was also asingle ZIP disk labelled "Tools". Installing all the drivers was quickand easy. The setup program scans all ports, detects the drive, copiesthe driver software into the right place on the hard disk, and thenenables the drive by assigning it the next available drive letter. Youdon't even have to reboot. The second option is better for those whocarry the drive around. Just run GUEST or GUEST95 to detect the drive,assign a drive letter and move out of the way all in about 10 seconds.In Win95 we clicked on "My Computer" and sure enough there was a newicon for the ZIP drive, complete with drive letter. Clicking that got anerror message. Sometimes one misses the obvious two red-faced reviewersinserted the supplied ZIP disk into the drive and chose "retry". Now wegot the disks contents, just as off a hard disk or floppy. The drive'sProperties page indicated that the disk supplied was almost full, with amere 20 MB free.This disk contains various drive utilities, and their Mac version. Evenmore disconcerting was that the disk was write protected as we wereunable to copy any files to it. And the manual, while useful for thephysical installation, was silent about this aspect. The README file didmention that the Installation program would erase the Mac stuff and makethe drive writable, but we used the GUEST app instead. According toIomega's Web site, run RECLAIM located in the SCSI subdirectory of theTools disk under DOS. That freed some 37 MB of space. Interestingly, theZIP disks have no write-protect tab. This is done through software, andyou can assign a password to the disk for more safety.Speed TestsOur disk now had 70 MB free, and we started copying small 100-200Kfiles, then a few 1 MB sized ones, finally a 50 MB monster. It soonbecame clear that the ZIP drive is no speed demon the average was about2 MB per minute faster than a floppy drive, but still with a sense ofdisappointment. We though this was caused by the Guest app, so we nowwent for a full install. And at the end a panel popped up saying that asupplied program could speed-up the disk, but warned about possiblemachine lockup if the parallel port wasn't up to spec. It did, and theREADME said this option was only available for bi-directional parallelport. While the test PC's parallel port was such a port, the BIOS wasset to compatibility (unidirectional) mode. This was changed, the PCrebooted, and another test showed the transfer rate had risen to slightlymore than 5 MB per minute. We also noticed that Win 95 was now bufferingwrites and releasing up the machine much faster and there was heavy ZIPdrive activity for quite a while after Windows returned control to ourapplication.Wishes And Work AroundsAmong the things really missed is an ability to quickly find how muchspace remains. With conventional drives, clicking the icon in Win95gives an instant report. However, IOMEGA has thoughtfully provided awork around. An option (right-clicking the drive) temporarily marks itas non-removable. Win 95 now treated the ZIP drive as a hard disk andcorrectly reported the disk space. This also solved another problem.While installing an e-mail program on the ZIP, the installer refused toinstall on a non-removable drive. The work-around solved that problemtoo. While the drive is marked non-removable, you can't eject the disk,but the eject button remembers your attempts and as soon as you revertthe settings, the disk ejects.The ZIP drive comes with a comprehensive set of disk managementutilities. Of these utilities, some pop-up when your right click on theZIP drive icon. And include copy, format, write protect and eject disk,as well as temporarily mark as a non-removable. However, we were unableto find a cataloging app advertised as part of the software even theaccompanying demo-cum-ad mentioned FINDIT which apparently had not beenshipped. We later found that the Win 95 versions was not yet ready, andhad to download these later from the company's web site(www.iomega.com). These added a catalog of the disk's contents, and anew one-step backup and restore option that is fast and very convenient.The backup software works in the background and ejects the filled updisk as a signal to replace it with a blank one.FINDIT was very fast, but far from convenient. It allows you to quicklycatalog and locate files, but you can't launch files or copy them. Youneed to first start Explorer, insert the disk indicated by FINDIT, andnavigate to the correct directory. A shortcut is to press Ctrl-Escape,select "Run Explorer z:\yourpath\" (or whatever the drive and path ofyour target is).Zipping On PriceThe ZIP's international price is $200 and $15 for the disks.Unfortunately, the local prices are a bit higher, yet still quiteaffordable. At around Rs 16,000 for the drive and Rs 1,500 per disk,this is the cheapest portable direct-access storage you can buy. We hopeprice crash, sooner rather than later as they become more popular. Butwatch out for fake disks. So far disks are being made only by Iomega butrumour has it that they may soon be made by other floppy diskmanufacturers.Overall the ZIP drive and disks have been so useful that we wonderswhere they were all this time. As for reliability, the ZIP disks appearextremely reliable. We haven't had them long enough to know when and ifthey will start giving trouble with the oldest ZIP disk dating from June1996. Iomega claims that the disks are very reliable and have survivedall their field tests.Many manufacturers have decided that rather than shipping machines with5" drives, the standard 3.5" drives will now be accompanied with Zipdrives. Iomega also makes a version that fits nicely into the bay nextto the normal floppy drive. But don't put them in your back pocket.They're still too fragile for that.PRODUCT      : Iomega ZIP DriveFEATURES     : A removable media storage device, available in fixed and               portable versions, capable of storing up to 100 MB per disk.               The portable version connects to the PC via the parallel port.SUMMARY      : An excellent and convenient way to transport huge amounts of               data, while retaining randomly access. Extremely easy to               install and use, and is also a very good backup device. The               Indian price is a bit high (double that as in the USA and the               disks themselves are almost three times as expensive)PRICE        : Rs 16,000 for the parallel port version, Rs 7,500 (five disks).MANUFACTURER : Iomega, US.VENDOR       : TVS Electronics, 10/B Phase I, Peenya Industrial Area,               Bangalore 560008. Tel: 80-839500 Fax: 80-8396334Atul Chitnis and Kishore Bhargava for PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEXMARK OPTRA E: A ULTRA-COMPACT, LOW-COST, 600 DPI LASER PRINTER FORPERSONAL USEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Optra E lists among the smallest laser printers available today. It'staller than most other models, yet fits snugly into a corner on yourdesk. Because of its compact design, paper travels along a U-shapedpath, going in face up and coming out face down. Although we anticipatedfrequent paper jams and curled-up pages, the paper jammed just once. Andthat too when taking the last few sheets in the stack.Optra E ships with drivers for DOS and Windows, MarkVision a printermanagement tool. This (if you use a bi-directional interface) keeps youinformed of the printer's status. For instance, if the printer cover isopen, an icon of the printer with its cover open glows red. And can alsogive audio prompts if your system has sound capabilities. The printer,however does not ship with a bi-directional cable.We had trouble getting Optra E up and running. One of its Windows driverlibrary files was corrupted and we had to acquire a fresh set from thevendor. Then when we powered on the printer, the Press Button LED keptflashing and issuing a print command would hang the system. Searchingthe manuals both paper and online were of little help, as there was nomention of what error this indicated.A call to the vendor revealed that a front panel reset was needed toclear the buffer. This too was not easy. According to the manual, toreset you need to keep the operator button pressed for a long time. Butthat didn't work and we managed a reset only after powering on theprinter while keeping the button pressed. Once we had figured this out,there were no probems.We tested the Optra E on our standard test bench a Pentium/100 MHz with16 MB RAM running Windows 3.11. Text prints were sharp and clear, andselecting PQET (Print Quality Enhancement Technology) smoothened theslight edges in larger fonts. At 300 dpi (standard mode), the Optra Eprinted the first sheet in 25 seconds average, not much off its rated 19seconds for the first page. The average speed at 300 dpi came toapproximately 4 ppm (manuals give this as 6 ppm).For a full-page graphic in 300 dpi, the Optra E took 171 seconds. That'svery slow compared to the HP LaserJet 5P (a 600dpi laser printer testedon the same test bench) which managed it in 26 seconds at 300 dpi, and56 seconds at 600 dpi. While printing at 600 dpi, the Optra E took anunbelievable 21 minutes to tackle the full page graphic and the printquality was worse than the 300dpi output. And after printing the page,it gave a complex page error. Going by the manual, this indicates thatyou need to upgrade the printer's memory. The Optra E ships with 1 MB ofmemory which is sufficient for text printing. For graphics, get a memoryupgrade.It's a reasonably priced laser printer, with lots of features that wellperforms under 300 dpi. But it's not the serious graphics user's cup oftea.PRODUCT     : Lexmark Optra ETYPE        : True 600dpi monochrome laser printerFEATURES    : MarkVision printer management utility, 26 scalable fonts,              Enhanced PCL5 emulation, PQET enhancement, Quick Print +              and Toner Saver modes, RAMSmart advanced memory management              utility, 1 year warrantySUMMARY     : A light-weight and compact laser printer that gives good              performance under 300 dpi but needs a memory upgrade for              600dpi graphics.PRICE       : Rs 34,095 (Toner cartridge: Rs 3,570; Photo Conductor Unit: Rs              5,150; 2 MB RAM: Rs 10,570; 4 MB RAM: Rs 17,130)MANUFACTURER: Lexmark International IncVENDOR      : Indmark Infocom, 115-117 Skylark, 60 Nehru Place, New Delhi              110019 Tel: 11-6212576 Fax: 11-6212578PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996LEXMARK COLOR JETPRINTER 1020: GOOD VALUE FOR MONEYfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The 1020 is shaped differently from its contemporaries. It has a curvedfront panel that flips opens to become the paper out tray. There arethree buttons and two indicator lights, but most printer managementfunctions are carried out by the bundled software. The power cable is a"UK-type" three pin plug, with flat pins. And needs an adapter when usedin India. Or you will have to get a power cable that fits Indian powersockets. You will also need to buy a Bitronics cable, as one is notprovided with the printer.For a printer this inexpensive, the printer management software thataccompany the driver is among most comprehensive ones that we haveseen. Installing the drivers is simple and straight forward. Thesoftware undertakes tasks that include cleaning and properly aligningthe print cartridge, setting print options such as paper type and size,and the brightness and contrast of the colors in the print out. It alsohas voice alerts. Also installed is an elaborate on-line help file.There is no other printed documentation, but for an airline ticket-likeinstallation guide.This printer can be bought according to the user's specification. Thatis if you know what you want. The options are with monochromecartridge, or with Color cartridge and CorelDRAW 3.0, or with colorand monochrome cartridges, and all at different prices.At the price of the Jetprinter, we did not expect professional qualityoutput. Yet, were pleasantly surprised by the results. The colorcartridge prints black by combining Cyan, Magenta and Yellow. Its nottrue black, but passes muster. In our first tests with the colorcartridge, the Jetprinter's performance was good when printing solidcolors, but was way off the mark while printing gradients andphotographs. Apparently, some of the installed cartridge'sink nozzles were not firing. The vendor replaced the cartridge, and aftera thorough cleaning, the new one gave real good printouts.On our test machine P100/16 MB running Win 3.1 the Jetprinter gavespeeds of about a page per minute in normal mode for monochrome text,which makes it slightly faster than the HP DJ 200. A full page colorgraphic took 3:20 minutes to print.Included with the printer is a CD-ROM containing CorelDRAW 3.0, 1,000clipart images and 100 True Type fonts. Version 3.0 is pretty old forCorelDRAW. And the manuals need to be purchased separately, using a forminside the CD-ROM. Its too not clear if this option is available forIndia.All said and done, the Jetprinter 1020 is an affordable low-end inkjet,that gives good quality output in both color and monochrome.PRODUCT     : Lexmark Color Jetprinter 1020FEATURES    : 330x300 dpi low-cost inkjet (600x300 dpi airbrush mode).              Bundled CorelDRAW 3.0 (with color option)PRICE       : Rs 9,095 (monochrome only); Rs 10,095 (color cartridge,              CorelDRAW 3.0). Rs 1,040 (monochrome cartridge 1000 pages);              Rs 1,340 (color cartridge 200 pages)SUMMARY     : Gives good quality in monochrome and color modes. Bundled              management software features several options and provides              for extensive control. Voice enabled.MANUFACTURER: Lexmark International IncVENDOR      : Indmark Infocom, 115-117 Skylark, 60 Nehru Place,              New Delhi 110019 Tel: 11-6212576 Fax: 11-6212578Krishan Kumar at PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996PERSONAL RESOURCES PLANNER: AN INFORMATION MANAGER WITH FA FEATURESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Personal Resource Planner (PRP) is a true-blue personal informationmanager (PIM). Apart from managing contacts and appointments, it helpsyou track your personal data, accounts, portfolio and projects. Welooked at the demo version of PRP. This is fully functional and onlyrestricts the number of entries. Installation is quick and creates aprogram group for the softwareThe graphic interface, though not as slick as Lotus Organiser, is niceand friendly. There is, however, a small mix-up in the Accounts module.The Accounts icon should be dimmed when within this module, butsurprisingly, if you click it here you go to PRP's Diary section.The Accounts option is more a mini-FA package, that lets you create andmaintain an accounts master. You can enter daily expenses in atransaction file, and periodically consolidate your accounts. Optionsfor printing vouchers, generating and printing ledgers, trial balanceand P/L statements complete the job.The Valuables section lets you track asset details such as purchasedate, amount, and mode of payment. You can also maintain records forseveral owners, and enter details under different categories andlocations. And assign passwords to each module.The program lets you store contact information (including name, address,and telephone number) in the CardFile database. The data file structureis customizable, and you can create multiple files. You begin byspecifying the database fields. Changing and deleting fields is easy.And you can sort and index files. Cards can be categorized as `private'and `public'. You can also export data into FoxPro 2.5 and dBASE IV andvice versa. However, PRP doesn't support files from other popular PIMs.Using the CardFile, you can also fix appointments (including multipleday events and recurring tasks). There's also an auto-dialer for phonecalls that maintains a log of calls made. Call logs, as well as otherhandy to-do lists and schedules can be printed. Tasks in to-do list canbe assigned different priorities. Text search options are included into-do lists, appointments, contacts and address books. The calendaroffers weekly, monthly and annual views. And the built-in notepadappears adequate enough.The Diary records important personal information such as the numbers foryour bank account, insurance policy, and vehicle license. It also hasseparate sub-menus for medical, travel, credit cards and otherexpenditure-related data.The Portfolio module is exhaustive, and allows creation and maintenanceof company masters (with their financial, bonus, dividend and closurehistory). The Report options includes valuation, dividend, andsale/purchase. The Utility menu has depreciation, rate of interest andvalue calculators. Unfortunately, the Help files were not included inthe demo reviewed.PRP also includes a full-featured Project Management module completewith calculation of cost per function point and per day output, andgeneration of activity and resource-wise reports. Plus, it also includedtrimmings such as conversion tables, international currency information,a world clock and startup reminders.In fact, except for e-mail support and group scheduling, PersonalResources Planner has all features essential in a PIM. And would be auseful application to manage your time.PRODUCT   : Personal Resources Planner (Demo version) for Windows.PRICE     : Rs 3,699 (Introductory offer valid till December 1996)SUMMARY   : A handy tool for managing resources and increasing            productivity. Has a calendar, to-do lists, appointments            and other time management tools. Also a CardFile for contact            management and a Diary for personal data. Modules for managing            portfolio, valuables, accounts and projects.DEVELOPER/VENDOR   : RDK Compu Data Techniks, 127/2/C, Swastik Society, PO            Box 4133, Navrangpura, Ahmedabad 380009. Tel:79-460117            Fax:79-6751133 E-mail: dkadikar@giasbm01.vsnl.net.in.            Also available on the PCQ Fall '96 CD-ROMA K at PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: HOW HELPFUL ARE HELP DESKS?from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996India has never been known for after sales support or service be it frompublic utilities or computer vendors. And e-mail, which falls somewherein between, is no exception. The story (and service) is more or lessidentical, whether its public sector VSNL which has been stronglycriticized or private service providers who are expected to be better,yet who too are the same.Usually, when you call the Help Desk in an emergency this in itself anindicator that something has gone wrong you are fully justified inexpecting an immediate solution to your problems. Instead, the assignedtelephone numbers are either busy or go unanswered. And when they areanswered, more often than not no technical staff is available toproperly respond to your queries. Or to fix the problem.In the course of this review, our experiences with the various serviceproviders did not impress us. (And remember as PCQ Labs reviewers, wewere in a sense handicapped, as we invariably had to disclose our e-mailaddresses and identities when calling the various help desks).Incidentally, almost all our calls were related to problems we actuallyfaced, including non-working software, nodes that refused to respond,junk being attached to messages, and so on.aXcess began the cycle by not giving their front-end software in Delhi.And what was finally delivered did not have a single installable module.Getting connected to their help desk was virtually impossible (in Delhi)during the day.Sprint RPG claims to operate a 24-hour help desk in Delhi. Yet when wecalled up at night, the telephone rang unanswered. However, duringworking hours things were better.Datapro had several problems while installing their software on our testmachine in Delhi. And could successfully complete it only after multipleattempts. And then they gave up trying to (fruitlessly) installvalue-added additions because of inherent bugs in the software.Global's help desk was initially very difficult to get through to. Theysubsequently set up a 24-hour help desk in Delhi, which despite its nameapparently does not function after office hours (presumably 9-to-5).Wipro BT help desk was a waste of time. They were unable to help setthings right most of the time because "no one was available."In comparison, and despite criticism, VSNL's help desk seems a much moreorganized operation. Particularly when you begin with low expectations,and are willing to wait while they connect you.Users Guide To Email Service ProvidersAxcess Online ServicesB3/86 Safdarjung EnclaveNew Delhi 110029Help Desk: 11-6183225, 6183223, 6183181Sprint RPG India LimitedGulmohar House,161/B-4, Gautam Nagar, Yusuf SaraiNew Delhi 110049 Help Desk: 11-6862562 (24-hours)Datapro Information Technology LimitedKeltron Chambers18-7/8, Arya Samaj RoadNew Delhi 110 005 Help Desk: 11-5753641, 5728051Global Telecom ServicesC-47, N.D.S.E. Part-IINew Delhi 110049 Help Desk: 11-6230221WiproBTE-13, Greenpark Main New Delhi 110016Help Desk: 11-509 2597VSNL GIASVidesh Sanchar Bhawan Bangla Sahib RoadNew Delhi 110 001 Help Desk: 11-3747310, 3361111Krishna Kumar and Anil Chopra (Delhi), Prasanth L Rao (Bangalore) andJamsheed Gandhi and Gopkiran Rao (Mumbai)Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: WIPRO BT EXM MAILfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Wipro BT EXM Mail to give it its full name is based on the EXM/UAinterface. And includes the primary interface to the local user, acommunication server, and a configuration utility. The communicationsserver is a program that handles all communications with the messagestore. The server/node that you log on to is the message store.Your mail will be transferred to your Inbox. The message store notifieswhere the message has come from, whether it's a message delivery report,or a message with an attachment. And all details are specified includingthe date, time of delivery, status, subject, and its origin.Mail sent can be assigned different priorities, importance, andsensitivity levels. They can be directly typed in or sent as anattachment. You can also create an address book where each entry has analias.Mails for despatch is stored in the outgoing mail folder, and wheneveryou connect to the message store, it will be transmitted. Automaticconnection to the message store occurs as soon as you log in. Oneproblem encountered with this pack age was that in most of the mail wesent, an extra part was created by the software. Sometimes this add-onwas sent as an attachment.At Delhi and Bangalore, we were able to connect to the node on the firsttry, or at worst, on the second. However, connects in Mumbai were badwith most requiring five or more tries.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: VSNL GIASfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996GIAS offers two types of accounts shell and TCP/IP. E-mail is availablein both through a shell account. As GIAS is essentially an Internetservice, in this review we have considered only the shell account. Andmore specifically only its e-mail section.GIAS uses a vanilla interface with no special software, and you can anystandard communications app to connect. The account is customisable inthe sense that you can use specialised third party app such as Eudora,or browsers like Microsoft's Internet Explorer if you choose the TCP/IPaccount, to simplify sending and receiving mail.On the whole we found the GIAS shell account a little tough to use. Forone thing, other packages had easy menu-driven options for uploading anddownloading files for attachments, and for creating messages offline.And VSNL has disabled the GIAS menu options for upload and download.Selecting upload gives a message asking you to go to the restricted UNIXprompt and use rz for uploads. However, if you do so and start theupload process using your comms app (we used Telix) it transmits for awhile before crashing. To upload files you need to use the additionalswitch -be (rz -be ).Similarly, the download option tells you to use sz, but to download yourmail in one go we had to use additional switches again (sz -e -l 1024 -L1024 ) to get mail and attachments together. And attachmentsare MIME encoded, so you need a program such as XFERPRO (PCQ Summer '96CD-ROM) to convert them into a readable format. Alternately you can saveattachments to your local directory on VSNL server, and then downloadthem separately.You can also read your mail online in PINE, the shell account's e-mailpackage with a built-in address book. However, PINE doesn't let youqueue messages to send them later. You must send, cancel or postpone.You can also upload ASCII text directly into PINE which works for shortmessages. However, when we tried uploading a UUENCODED attachment, thesystem went into an infinite loop and eventually disconnected after morethan five minutes of endless screen scrolling.Connecting is comparatively difficult with GIAS. At all stations, we hadto keep re-dialling to get connected. This happened on almost allattempts.On the other hand, VSNL GIAS doesn't charge you per message or on avolume basis a powerful attraction especially if you are sending andreceiving a lot of mail. And more importantly, you get Internetaccess something none of the other services reviewed can offer today.There's only a one-time (renewable) connect charge for every 500 hoursof use.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: SPRINT RPGfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The SprintMail software is by far the most option-filled e-mail app. Itseems to have a button for just about any task. And apart from thenormal send and receive mail options, there's also an interactive optionthat allows you to log on to the node and work online. You can also joinseveral entailment forums available on SprintMail. These range fromastrological predictions to technical discussions.All tasks from message composition through address book management tointeracting with the host are performed by clicking icons on thetoolbar. However as is usual with such an impressive number of buttons,initially it can be quite confusing to decide which one does what. Tooltips or an Icon explanation screen would definitely add to the ease ofuse.There's also an option to set up and perform scheduled operations. Thisallows you to send mail at a preset time, or check for mail.Managing address books too is simple. There is a range of templates thatconvert the address into Sprint's format. When SprintMail first startedin India, the Internet template would not work properly, as it had notbeen customized to Indian addressing. But this bug has since been fixed,and Internet addressing too is supported by the templates.Connecting to Sprint was also easy, with at worst, a second try required.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: GLOBAL MAILfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996This is an easy-to-use e-mail app. You read your mail and create newmail offline. Once everything is ready, you just connect to the node.Mail received is downloaded and whatever you have ready in your Outboxis uploaded for onward transmission. And once connected, the softwaregraphically displays messages being retrieved.All the retrieved mail is automatically stored in the local folder. Areally nice thing about this package is that unread mail has a sealedenvelope icon and mail read has an open letter icon. This helps youdistinguish between new messages and old ones. Activities such asconnecting to the node and sending and receiving mail have beensimplified. And can be done through one click of your mouse.However, creating Address Books is really painful as there are notemplates. If you want to enter an Internet e-mail address, instead ofusing the common @ symbol you have to enter `(a)'. The window to makethis entry is quite confusing and consists of several tabs that ask justabout everything but the way to grandma's house. The main tab lets youfill in details such as your given name, surname, common name, andprimary routing details. Then there's a network tab where you enter thedomain defined attributes and other network details needed for Internetaddresses. There's also a postal tab to enter details such as a person'spostal address and telephone numbers. There's the Others tab to enterthe alias name. And finally there's the X.500 tab with several of itsown queries. It would have been much simpler if templates had beenprovided, as in Sprint mail.A really helpful feature about this app is that if there's pending mailin the Sent Mail folder, the software prompts you on whether to send itor not whenever you exit. Sending or receiving attachments is easybetween two ISOPRO users. We sent a ZIPfile between two ISOPRO hosts,and between an ISOPRO and another e-mail package. Between the former,the attachment format was recognized, but in the latter the file changedto BIN format. This necessitated a call to the Help Desk for a solution.Just save the BIN attachment as a ZIP file and then access it.Connecting to Global was not a problem. We were able to get through onthe first try itself on most occasions. And the worst case was fivetries that happened twice at Bangalore in the afternoon.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: DATAPRO XEE-MAIL 96from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The Xee-MAIL 96 user agent is an easy-to-use app whose other optionsbesides e-mail include printing, managing address books, accesspermissions, administration, tools, and a neatly compiled help file.During installation, the software by default creates a SystemAdministrator (Sysadmin). This user has the rights to add five moreusers and define their access rights.Creating e-mail is the same as with other Windows-based e-mail apps. Youcreate new mail by typing in a message, or by using cut-orcopy-and-paste from other messages or text documents, and by usingattachments. One nice feature about the latter is that you don't have tospecifically invoke the address book. Just click the To: tab, and theaddress book displays automatically. Next double click on therecipient's alias and the address is entered in the To: field. However,Xee-MAIL does have a strange way of connecting to the node. Afterpreparing your messages, you have to restart in DOS to dial-in. For aWindows app, its really strange that you need DOS for such simple tasks.One area where we faced problems was while using mailing lists. Thepackage refused to queue a mailing list, and this remained consistent,regardless of whether the mailing list consisted of a single address orof 20 addresses. We even checked if the Sysadmin had imposed any suchrestrictions on the user, but found none. And even the Sysadmin wasunable to queue the mailing list for dispatch.Creating an address book is simple. There are several templates foradding a new e-mail address. There are also additional features such asauthorizing access to someone else to use your account while you areaway and encoding a message for privacy.Connecting to Datapro's nodes was fairly easy at all locations. We wereusually able to connect in three tries. And in the worst case, it tookeight attempts to get through at 11:00 AM in Delhi. But in Bangalore wefaced a problem. After a full day of testing, our mail box the next daywas full of 172 undelivered messages. Many of these were duplicates, andothers had been sent and received by recipient. However this problemoccurred only once.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: AXCESSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996aXcess Electronic Messaging is a DOS based e-mail service. And it'sinitial splash screen is the only graphical element. aXcess gives youthe option of using either their software, or any standardcommunications app (such as Telix) to upload and receive mail.With aXcess you can prepare messages both on and offline. However,features such as the Address book and Alias lists can only be createdand accessed while online. Therefore even though you create messagesoffline you still have to remember the e-mail address or at the veryleast the recipient's e-mail alias (nickname for the full address).Using this method, an address such as labsd.pcq@axcess.net.in becomes`labsdelhi' which is easier to remember. The problem with rememberingmultiple aliases or addresses is mitigated a bit by Alias lists thatallow to you club e-mail addresses under an easy to remember word suchas `Friends'.Once you dial in, aXcess allows you to organize your mail by moving andcopying messages between folders. You can view or create messages usingthe built-in editor which looks a lot like WordStar 4. And the pull-downmenus are quite straightforward. But using the e-mail software wouldhave much easier with dialog boxes instead of the nested sub-menusapproach used. You have to select `Move' to choose the message to move,then select the target folder to move to, and finally press  toback out.One problem we faced with aXcess was that you can't address a message tomore than seven people in the To list. And the same restriction alsoapplies to Alias lists. To make it harder, the system has few promptsand messages. There is no way of knowing when you are done with thecurrent chore. And you end up staring at the screen wondering what'sgoing on. A simple dialog box mentioning that the task is completedwould be nice.aXcess also gives you access to Business India's database of the StockMarket and Foreign Exchange rates. But when we tried to check this, wegot an error message that we weren't registered for this service.At all test locations, we had problems connecting to the aXcess nodes.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996E-MAIL SERVICES IN INDIA: PCQ LABS REVIEWS FIVE MAJOR E-MAIL PROVIDERSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996For this review, PCQ Labs setup test accounts at Bangalore, Delhi andMumbai. Vendors were also requested to activate a roaming account atPune. Vendors were allowed to install the necessary software on our testmachine, and configure it. The only difference was VSNL GIAS, where weused Telix a popular shareware app as no specialized software wasprovided. Once the software was properly set up, the tests began on an`as-is where-is' basis. We were unable to review VSNL's GEMS.400service, as test accounts were only available at two locations Delhi andMumbai.E-mail usage can broadly be classified into two levels corporate andperson to person of messaging. In the former, most of the data sent andreceived is information such as MIS, sales and purchase reports. And asour test of the market showed, most corporate messaging in India usesthe same service provider, with all branches and users connected to thesame system. Corporate messaging also uses value-added options such asmessage confirmation and faxing. On the other hand, person-to-personmessaging is not restricted to a single provider, and is usuallyacross systems.To send e-mail, a user has to first prepare the message, and then dialin to the provider's nearest node to send or receive mail. The softwareprovided helps the user manage messages. And the service provider needsto ensure that e-mail sent reaches its destination at soon as possible,without losing content or importance.In this review, we have checked each of these stages. Service andsupport was tested in some detail. It has not been included in therankings, as we were unable to duplicate test conditions with everyvendor. Security of the system and mail has not been tested.Test messages were exchanged from Delhi and Bangalore to the other testaccount at Delhi, Bangalore and Mumbai, at predetermined times. And alllocations were checked (in alphabetic order) at hourly intervals formail receipt.To connect to a node, we tried two alternate numbers, five times each.If a connection was not established, we proceeded to the next service,and only returned the busy ones at the end of the cycle.To test the supplied software's ability to handle attachments, astandard attachment consisting of a BMP file embedded in a Worddocument was used.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996PRAKASHAK: ADD INDIAN LANGUAGE CAPABILITIES TO WINDOWS APPSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Prakashak brings multilingual capabilities to your computer, and it runson DOS, Windows and Macs. It is available for Devanagari (Hindi),Kannada, Telegu, Tamil, Malayalam, Gujarati, Bengali, Oriya andGurumukhi (Punjabi). Prakashak for Windows comes with a bundled DOSeditor. But to install the app, you need to do separate installs for DOSand Windows, and both require the key disk. All copy protection schemesare irritating, and this one is no exception.Prakashak's DOS-based text editor lets you enter multilingual text. Ithas regular word processor features such as indents, tabs, fonts, andtype styles. And also supports multiple columns, mail-merge, and macros.However, the package lacks a spell-checker and transliterationfacilities. But it's fast and print quality is reasonable.The mail-merge option lets you merge text in both English and Hindi.However, you have to be careful to maintain the correct format whilemaking your data file entries. Just one wrong entry and the editorcrashes to the DOS prompt.To use the Windows version, run your favorite Windows word processor orDTP app, and then run Prakashak for Windows. Choose the Languages optionon the Prakashak main menu bar and select the language you've installed.Now select Phonetic or Graphical keyboard mapping. In our tests, wefound phonetic mapping a lot more intuitive. Choosing either optionbrings up a dialog box listing all running applications that work withPrakashak. Select the application you want to use and you can beginwork. You can also create custom keyboard layouts using the DOS-basedINSTALL.EXE utility.The Filter option lets you convert files created in the Prakashak DOSeditor to ASCII, RTF or Ventura format. Set Defaults lets you select oneapplication that will run every time you run Prakashak. You can alsodefine hot keys to invoke macros. You can have four such macros to letyou switch between languages and fonts using a hot key. These macrosworked fine with Write using the default hot key of Ctrl-F3 but theydidn't work properly with Word for Windows.Prakashak worked well with PageMaker 5, and files created using the DOSeditor and converted to RTF format imported well. Prakashak's manualsare comprehensive. The program comes with several true type fonts forWindows. It also works with ATM fonts. However, as an add-on, it's anexpensive solution, when cheaper alternatives are available, especiallyfor Indian languages.PRODUCT    : Prakashak for Windows (with Prakashak DOS Editor).FEATURES   : Available in Devanagari, Kannada, Telegu, Tamil, Malayalam,             Gujarati, Bengali, Oriya and Gurumukhi scripts with keyboard             mapping and fonts. Has Phonetic or Graphical keyboard mapping.             DOS-based editor.PRICE      : Rs 12,500 (one script). Rs 9,000 (each additional script).             Rs 9,000 (upgrade with DDE for FoxPro with one typeface).             Rs 21,000 (DDE and DTP per language with all typefaces)SUMMARY    : An Indian language solution that gives additional capabilities             to your Windows word processor and DTP software. Fonts are             available for True Type and ATM. Expensive as an add-on.MFR        : Sonata Software Limited, 1st floor, APS Trust Building,             Bull Temple Road, NR Colony, Bangalore 560019.             Tel: 5731417, 5718749 Fax: 80-5751298Prasanth L Rao at PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NEC VERSA 4080H: NEC'S LATEST VERSA IS AN ELEGANT MULTIMEDIA PENTIUMfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996This is NEC's upgraded Versa note-book, and unlike the Cyrix-basedVersa 550D we reviewed in August, this one runs on an IntelPentium/120. NEC's finally got rid of the trackball and put an elegantand functional touchpad. And the 100-240V mains adapter is so tiny, Iwish they'd fit it into the notebook itself.There's extensive power management, and the Phoenix Powerpanel, afloating button-bar that lets you, with one click, choose "high batterylife", or presentation quality, or a custom setting; or suspend thenotebook, or, best of all, save memory contents to a disk file and poweroff.On the display panel are the brightness control and two smallloudspeaker grills at the top corners. Great place for speakers, thoughthese are a bit tinny and weak (0.15 watt each). Some other neat touchesincluded a rear infrared port and when you use the optional dockingstation, this is disabled and a second infrared port on the front goesactive. You can select this through an on-screen button, too.We tested a very limited 8 MB model, a tight squeeze for most apps. Withmultimedia, 16 MB is a basic requirement.The Versa's TFT active matrix display is clear and sharp head-on, andreasonably clear as you change your viewing angle horizontally, butthings get a little fuzzy with a change of vertical angle especiallywhen looking at color photos. A possible reason could be that we hadtrouble setting the display to above 256 colors.The lithiumion battery packs enough power, and ran multimedia apps anda CD-ROM for about 90 minutes. The CD-ROM and floppy drive fit into thesame bay, so you have to choose between them.The unit we got was a straight US import, with a US mains plug, and thepromise of 24-hour hotline support (presumably in the US). The manual'scomprehensive (though older than the notebook), with even a bit on whatto do when you're travelling (documents for Customs checks, etc). Thebody stickers, however, say "Versa 4000", which is the older DSTN model.A well-featured elegant multimedia notebook that is adequately poweredfor most apps, as long as you take it with 16 MB.PRODUCT   : NEC Versa 4080HSPECS     : Multimedia notebook with Pentium/120 MHz, CD-ROM, floppy drive,            10.4" TFT color display. Dual infrared (S-IR) ports, PCMCIA            Type II/III.Lithium-Ion batterySUMMARY   : An elegant and well-integrated multimedia notebook with a            CD-ROM drive, but somewhat weak sound. Light, high-power battery,            active-matrix display.PRICE     : Rs 225,000 (8 MB) Rs 235,000 (16 MB).VENDOR    : Akash Electronics and Software, C-14 Chirag Enclave, New Delhi            110019. Tel: 11-6416003/04/05/07 Fax: 11-6467690            Email: mec@giasdl01.vsnl.netPKR at PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: EN ESPANOLfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Thanks to Bruno Unna of Internet de Alta Calidad in Mexico City, TBTFwill henceforward be available to Spanish-speaking readers. See(www.iac.com.mx/cgi-bin/uncgi/iackernel.pl?dest=/nw/hd/th/ultimo.html)for the latest issue. I don't read Spanish myself, but it's apparentthat Bruno translates the news and omits my wisecracks. His site isbetter designed than mine, too.Keith Dawson on the Internet. Archived at http://www.atria.com/dawson/tbtf/.To subscribe send the message "subscribe" to tbtf-request world.std.com.Commercial use prohibited.Reproduced by arrangement with Keith DawsonCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: ESSENTIAL TOOLS: PUBLICIZING YOUR WEBPAGEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996A new user queried the Apple Internet Authoring mailing list for adviceon getting the word out about his new Web page. The query drew thisdetailed and cogent response (www.counsel.net/info/marketing.html)from Bob Reap. It's a blueprint for doing the hard work of letting theworld know about your site, to the point of diminishing returns.Learning To Think Like An E-mail Direct MarketerWhether you call it "marketing via e-mail" or "spamming," you might beinterested in following a moderated conversation among itspractitioners. The Direct E-mail Marketing Association (DEMA) hosts amailing list and Web archive (kww.com/dema/). I've subscribed for awhile now and even posted once or twice. The moderator, Rob Zeemaintains an upbeat tone and seems sincerely to want to educate the listabout what is and is not acceptable behavior on the Web with the goal offinding ways to make unsolicited commercial e-mail palatable torecipients and ISPs. Zee is also collecting names/addresses of netizenswho wish not to receive commercial e-mail; he plans to make the listpublicly available, at which time reputable marketers should begin tofilter their mailing lists against it.I learned of the DEMA list from Phil Agre's Red Rock Eater news service.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: FOLLOW-UP: HOW'S JAVA DOING?from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996On Sun's first Java Day, I alluded to the new (to me) idea that the Javalanguage might be good for more than animating Web pages. LastNovember people weren't talking much about the intranet with a little"i". It has since become a commonplace that the money made from Nettechnologies over the next several years, at least, will mostly be madeby targeting the builders of corporate intranets. The MIS world is nowtaking seriously the notion of using intranets and Web browsers todevelop and deliver corporate applications. In a real sense Webtechnology has picked up the gauntlet from the declining client/servermodel.Here are some recent developments in the conquering march of Java.IBM has announced that the next version of its OS/2, code-named Merlin,will have Java technology built-in to the operating system l Remember Taligent?The late collaboration (by everyone except Microsoft) to invent next-generation frameworks for software development folded its tent some time ago.Now the Computer Industry Daily reports that Sun has licensed some ofTaligent's technology specifically its multilingual class libraries toimplement world-wide applications and applets in Java.Sun has delivered its Java Workshop development environment and isselling it for $99 for the rest of 1996 a price point far below thecompetition's.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: RELIGION ON THE NETfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996It's long been my belief that the content on the Net must mirror theinterests of humans in the aggregate. Business, science, politics,pornography, religion if people spend energy on it in "meatspace" theywill spend energy on it on the Net. Recently I've been accretingpointers to religious sites. Here are a few.A site that offers free home pages to churches and Christian-relatedgroups (www.churchsurf.com/).The Monetary of Christ in the Desert (www.christdesert.org/pax.html),where the brothers have brought the ancient art of the illuminatedmanuscript into the electronic age.The German Conference of Bishops recently renounced Confession byComputer, a PC application developed in Cologne that lets users confessto one or more of 200 sins. The program also offers advice on how toreach priests and ministers on the Net.The Virtual Diocese of Partenia (www. partenia. fr), presided over byBishop Jacques Gaillot. This outspoken French bishop was stripped of hisformer seat at Evreux by the Pope in 1995. But since bishops cannot bedefrocked unless excommunicated, Gaillot had to be given anotherdiocese. The Church's solution was to make Gaillot bishop of Partenia, asmall area in the Sahara Desert in which no people have lived for atleast 1,500 years. Since he had been made the Bishop of Nowhere, Gaillotdecided to become the Bishop of Everywhere that is, of cyberspace.Ultraseek (ultra.infoseek.com) provides a quick count of Web pageshaving the following words in their titles. The total of 63,785 comparesfavorably with the cyberporn count of 11,702. The words are: church,temple, mosque, archdiocese (21,740); Hindu, Catholic, Baptist,Lutheran, Muslim, orthodox, Protestant (19,560); Christian (12,569);bible, Koran, Torah (6,120); and Jesus, Buddha (3,796)Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: PIONEER ANONYMOUS REMAILER SHUTTERSTHE SHOPfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Johan (Julf) Helsingius of Finland, who has run the anonymous e-mailserver anon.penet.fi since 1993, shut it down last week. On 25 August1995 the British Observer newspaper had run a banner-headline front-pagearticle (scallywag.com/) titled "The Peddlers Of Child Abuse." Thearticle, which is both technically inaccurate and seemingly libelous (alawsuit has in fact been filed), accuses Helsingius and the owner ofEngland's largest ISP of willing complicity in child pornography.Helsingius attributed his decision not to the Observer article'sappearance, but rather to the lack of clearly defined laws relating tothe Internet. Helsingius is a scarred veteran of the anonymity wars,fighting the Church of Scientology to keep the identity of a userprivate.Other anonymous remailers remain in service; Community ConneXionsupports a free encrypting interface to ten of them(www.c2.net/remail/).Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: AOL ENJOINED FROM BLOCKING SPAMfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996America Online blocked all e-mail from five Net addresses belonging tocompanies AOL believes responsible for sending upwards of a million"spam" e-mail advertising messages to AOL subscribers. According to AOLthe volume of unwanted spam e-mail is the now number-one complaint ofits members. One of the alleged spammers, Cyber Promotions Inc, filedsuit, and the next day a Federal judge ordered AOL to stop blocking themailings pending a trial scheduled for November. AOL has appealed.NetDay provides details at netday.iworld.com /simba/9609/96090601.html).Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TASTY BITS FROM THE TECHNOLOGY FRONT: ARE NT WORKSTATION & NT SERVER THESAME?from PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996TBTF for August 8 (see PCQ September 1996) summarized a messy fightbetween Microsoft and Netscape, et al, over the licensing provisions ofWindows NT 4.0 Workstation. One of the combatants not mentioned in theearlier coverage is O'Reilly Associates, who like Netscape makes a Webserver that can run on the less expensive NTW platform. Two days agoO'Reilly senior editor, Andrew Schulman published an article(www.software.ora.com/news/ms_internet_andrews.html) claiming that NTWand NTS are in fact identical, except for the values of two registrysettings (www.pcweek.com/news/0902/06ent.html). Tests run by PC Week(www.pcweek.com /news /0826/26lic.html) are cited in the O'Reillyarticle, although the results seem to me to bolster Microsoft's claimthat NTS is optimized for a server role. (Either Microsoft's orNetscape's server, running on either NTW or NTS, could easily serveenough users to saturate a T1 connection, according to PC Week.)Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996TRAINING BLUES - THE IDEAL COMPUTER COURSEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The quality of computer education in most of the parts in India is stillpathetic. Much of the problem stems from the fact that the  educatorsare as ignorant as the students. I have come across many people who arecareer trainers, and have little to no understanding of the disciplinethey are teaching. In fact, our value systems make this paradoxicalsituation possible you could hardly expect a student to explain in notmore than five lines the difference between programming in FORTRAN andan RDBMS language.What follows is my own humble contribution to help lessen the problem ahypothetical course for students aspiring to be career developers. Thecourse structure assumes that candidates know how to use a PC and a wordprocessor.It starts with a course in Pascal programming not Basic, COBOL, or C.Pascal is the ideal language to make one start thinking in structuredterms that you would find useful throughout your career. Anotheradvantage is, one will find the books on data structures, algorithms andcompilers easy to understand as most of them use Pascal as the referencelanguage.The next course would be a trimester-long-unit devoted to solvingprogramming problems. Students would be expected to use their knowledgeof Pascal to solve a long series of programming problems, mostly of thetraditional variety. Learning to struggle with easy to state but toughto solve problems does much in developing clear thinking. Moreover,students get to understand their true aptitude for the subject matter.The student would take a course in Windows and PC software usage inparallel with the above. This course would focus on using software likedBASE, MS Word, Excel, Lotus 1-2-3 and the like for day-to-dayapplications. In addition the students would be exposed to advanced MSDOS concepts and Windows fundamentals.The next few courses would focus on commercial problem solving usingCOBOL, assembly language programming, and an insight into computerarchitecture. Students would be asked to write programs for a minipayroll or general ledger system. The computer architecture and assemblylanguage course would provide the student with an elementary idea of theinnards of the computer and the basic operations it is capable of. Thelab exercises of this course would focus on writing small programs in8086 assembler with exposure to BIOS and DOS services. The computerarchitecture course is central to the understanding of a whole range ofconcepts.The next trimester would focus on systems programming and C language.The former would cover elementary ideas about compilers, interpretersand operating systems. The students would be given a comprehensiveexposure to technical nitty-gritty such as concurrency, time sharing,and security. Parallely, they would learn to use C language to developsmall utilities, such as those for encrypting and compressing files.The penultimate semester would cover databases and networking. Truejustice should be done to these courses since students would have anadequate background to understand many of the central issues of thesetopics. Concurrent lab coverage would include developingnetwork-compatible programs and skills on popular RDBMS packages.The last semester would provide a set of optional courses such asWindows programming, advanced RDBMS, object oriented programming, andelements of accounting.The bottom line This might not be the optimal course structure, but farbetter than teaching C as the first programming language.Gautam Ahuja is a contributing editor of PC Quest. He also owns andmanages AHC Infotek, a Delhi-based turnkey software development company.You can reach him at sga%dartnet@uunet.uu.net or via the COL forum ofPCQ OnlineCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996REVIEW MODEMSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996BUYERS GUIDE TO MODEMSManufacture       Model          Speed (bps) Voice Support DisplayBoca Research Inc Boca Pro 16SA        28,800                9LEDsBoca Research Inc M144AI               14,400      -      Software IndicatorsBoca Research Inc M144EE               14,400      -         8LEDsBoca Research Inc M144PA               14,400      -      Software IndicatorBoca Research Inc ME14T2               14,400      -      Software IndicatorBoca Research Inc MV34AI               28,800      -      Software IndicatorBoca Research Inc MV34ED               28,800      -         8LEDsBoca Research Inc Pro 16 Rack          28,800      -        10LEDsBoca Research Inc SE1440 VSP           14,400      -      Software IndicatorBoca Research Inc SE34SRS              28,800      -      Software IndicatorBoca Research Inc SE34SUD              28,800      -      Software IndicatorGVC               VF-114HV             14,400   Optional         -GVC               VF-114V              14,400   Optional         -GVC               VF-1128HV            28,000   Optional         -GVC               VF-1128V             28,800   Optional         -GVC               VF-1128V+B2          28,800   Optional         -Hayes Micro       Accura 144/Fax       14,400     Yes       8 LEDsHayes Micro       Accura 288 Message   28,800     Yes       8 LEDsHayes Micro       Optima 144 Fax/Voice 14,400     Yes       8 LEDsHayes Micro       Optima 144 Fax       14,400     Yes            -Hayes Micro       Optima 288+Fax       28,800      -             -Hayes Micro       Optima 288 Fax+Voice 28,800     Yes       8 LEDsMaxtech/GVC       XM288E               28,800      -             -Maxtech/GVC       XM2881               28,800      -             -Maxtech/GVC       XVM144E              14,400      -             -Maxtech/GVC       XVM1441              14,400      -             -Megahertz         28800 Combo Card     28,800      -             -Megahertz         Megahertz XJ 3144    14,400      -             -Megahertz         Megahertz XJ 3288    28,800      -             -Megahertz         Megahertz XJ 3288    14,400      -             -Microsense        Microsense 14400     14,400      -             -Microsense        Microsense 28800     28,800      -             -Motorola          Fast Talk Plus       14,400      -         8 LEDsMotorola          Life Style 3400      28,800      -         8 LEDsMotorola          MONTANA              28,800      -         8 LEDsMotorola          Premier 3400         33,600      -         8 LEDsMRO-TEK           TEK-32 BJ            14,400      -         8 LEDsTaicom Data       MR34P                28,800      -         8 LEDsTaicom Data       MR34S                28,800      -         8 LEDsTaicom Data       MU32P                14,400      -         8 LEDsTaicom Data       MU32S                14,400      -         8 LEDsTeam Engineers    TeamLink 2144E       14,400      -         8 LEDsTeam Engineers    TeamLink 2288E       28,800      -         8 LEDsUS Robotics       Courier 28800        28,800      -              -US Robotics       Courier V.34 33600   33,600      -              -US Robotics       Sportster 28800      28,800      -              -US Robotics       Sportster SP 28800   28,800      -              -US Robotics       Sportster Vi 14400   14,400      -              -US Robotics       Sportster Vi 28800   28,800      -              -ZyXEL             Elite 2864           28,800     Yes        8 LEDsZyXEL             Elite 28641          12,800(B channel);                                       28,800(Data) Yes      8 LEDsZyXEL             U 1496 E             14,400     Yes        8 LEDsZyXEL             Omni 288S            28,800     Yes        8 LEDsZyXEL             U 1496 Plus Enhanced 19,200     Yes          LCDBUYERS GUIDE TO MODEMSManufacture          Bundled          TEC      Price(Rs) Warranty     Vendor                    Software         Approval             (Years)Boca Research Inc FaxWorks 3.0         -        45,000      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  FaxWorks 3.0,                  Net Cruiser,                  AOL/Compuserve               introductory offer      -        45,000      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  FaxWorks 3.0,                  Net Cruiser,                  AOL/Compuserve               introductory offer      -         7,500      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  FaxWorks 3.0,                  AOL/Compuserve               introductory offer      -         9,500      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  FaxWorks 3.0,                  AOL/Compuserve               introductory offer      -        15,500      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  FaxWorks 3.0,                  Net Cruiser,                  AOL/Compuserve               introductory offer      -        10,800      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc FaxWorks 3.0,                  Midisoft Media Works,                  Net Cruiser,                  Internet phone       -        13,500      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc    -                 -      3,56,000      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  Midisoft Media Works,                  Faxworks Datacom                  software,etc.        -         9,500      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  Midisoft Media Works,                  Boca Smart CD-ROM    -        20,800      5   Power Tel-BocaBoca Research Inc Drivers and utilities,                  Midisoft Media Works,                  Net Cruiser,                  Internet phone       -        24,150      5   Power Tel-BocaGVC SuperVoice       -                 -         2,286      -   CompuageGVC SuperVoice       -                 -         4,643      -   CompuageGVC               Optional Voice s/w   -         7,857      -   CompuageGVC               Optional voice s/w   -         9,429      -   CompuageGVC               Optional voice s/w   -         8,400      -   LanBit IndiaHayes             SmartCon For Windows LE and                  SmartCon Fax For Windows                                      Yes        7,450      -   DatamaticsHayes             Win 95 driver and SmartCon,                  Message Centre LE   Yes       15,750      -   DatamaticsHayes             Win 95 driver and SmartCon,                  Message Centre LE   Yes       19,000      -   DatamaticsHayes             SmartCon For Windows LE and                  Fax PCMCIA driver    -        10,000      -   DatamaticsHayes             SmartCon For Windows LE and                  Fax PCMCIA driver    -        35,700      -   DatamaticsHayes             Win 95 driver and SmartCon,                  Message Centre LE   Yes       32,000      -   DatamaticsMaxtech/GVC          -                 -        10,500      -   Graham InfoMaxtech/GVC          -                 -         8,950      -   Graham InfoMaxtech/GVC          -                 -          5000      -   Graham InfoMaxtech/GVC          -                 -         4,000      -   Graham InfoMegahertz            -                 -        28,000      1   MicrosenseMegahertz            -                 -         8,500      1   MicrosenseMegahertz            -                 -        22,500      1   MicrosenseMegahertz            -                 -         8,500      1   MicrosenseMicrosense           -                 -         6,500      1   MicrosenseMicrosense           -                 -        13,500      1   MicrosenseMotorola          DOS: DitFax/BitCom                  Win: Cheyenne BitWare VFD                                       -         7,500      1   Motorola/                                                         Fourth/Dimension TechMotorola          QuickLink-II(Data/Fax)                  for Windows          -        17,000      1   Motorola/                                                         Fourth/Dimension TechMotorola          QuickLink-II(Data/Fax)                  for Windows          -        21,000      1   MotorolaMotorola          QuickLink-II (Data/Fax)                  for Windows          -        31,000      1   MotorolaMRO-TEK           Delrina Winfax 4     -         7,000      1   MRO-TEKTaicom Data       BITFAX, Free Internet browser                  with every 10 modems -        10,587      1   System AidsTaicom Data       BITFAX, Free Internet browser                  with every 10 modems -        12,730      1   System AidsTaicom Data       BITFAX, Free Internet browser                  with every 10 modems -         3,640      1   System AidsTaicom Data       BITFAX, Free Internet browser                  with every 10 modems -         5,512      1   System AidsTeam Engineer     Optional             -         6,900      1   Team EngineerTeam Engineer     Optional             -        11,000      1   Team EngineerUS Robotics          -                 -        24,500      1   MicrosenseUS Robotics          -                 -        28,000      1   MicrosenseUS Robotics          -                 -        21,500      1   MicrosenseUS Robotics          -                 -        15,500      1   MicrosenseUS Robotics          -                 -         8,500      1   MicrosenseUS Robotics          -                 -        17,500      1   MicrosenseZyXEL             DOS: Zfax for Fax/Data/Voice                  Win: Trio for Fax/Data/Voice                                    Pending     25,500      2   Xon Comms.ZyXEL             DOS: Zfax for Fax/Data/Voice                  Win: Trio for Fax/Data/Voice                                    Pending     32,000      2   Xon Comms.ZyXEL             DOS: Zfax for Fax/Data/Voice                  Win: Trio for Fax/Data/Voice                                    Pending     16,500      2   Xon Comms.ZyXEL             DOS: Zfax for Fax/Data/Voice                  Win: Trio for Fax/Data/Voice                                     Yes        13,000      2   Xon Comms.ZyXEL             DOS: Zfax for Fax/Data/Voice                  Win: Trio for Fax/Data/Voice                                    Pending     23,500      2   Xon Comms.Prices supplied by:Boca: PowerTel-Boca Pvt Ltd, 11 Service Road, Domlur Layout, Bangalore560017. Tel: 80-5543104, 5543105 Fax: 80-565673GVC: Compuage Electronics Pvt Ltd, 3 Dhuru Building, 329 VithalbhaiPatel Road, Mumbai 400004. Tel: 22-3873436, 3851573 Fax: 22-3877836GVC: LanBit India Pvt Ltd, 205, Vireshwar Chambers, Near Shaan Theatre,Ville Parle (East), Mumbai 400057. Tel/Fax: 22-8354280Hayes: Datamatics Ltd, 106 Embassy Centre, Nariman Point, Mumbai 400021.Tel: 22-2831188, 2853107 Fax: 22-2853108Maxtech/GVC: Graham Information Systems Pvt Ltd, 416 Shanti Sadan,Bhaudaji Road, Matunga, Mumbai 400019. Tel: 22-4013335, 4021024 Fax:22-4025230Motorola: Motorola India Ltd, 108 Gavipuram Gottali, Off Bull TempleRoad, Bangalore 560019. Tel: 80-6612973 (4 lines) Fax: 80-6612977Motorola: Fourth Dimension Technologies, 5 Srirangam Avenue, 53 PantheonRoad, Egmore, Madras 600 008. Tel: 44-8553156, 8553000 Fax: 44-8553221MRO-TEK: Artek Enterprises Pvt Ltd, 202, Yogeshwar, Mac-2 ConnaughtPlace, New Delhi 110001. Tel: 11-3322716, 3325037 Fax: 11-3310492,3713209Taicom Data Systems: Systems Aids, 9th Main Road, I Stage, HennurBanaswadi Layout, Bangalore 560043. Fax: 80-5280359 Team Engineers: TeamEngineers, 2-2-647/227/C CE Colony, New Nallakunta, Hyderabad 500013.Tel: 40-7614412, 7640079 Fax: 40-7614412, 7640079US Robotics, Megahertz & Microsense: Microsense Computers Pvt Ltd, 1Community Centre, East of Kailash, New Delhi 110065. Tel: 11-6410134,6461285 Fax: 11-6470620, 6470619ZyXEL: Xon Communications Systems India Pvt Ltd, 19 Casa Major Road,Madras 600008. Tel: 44-8260124, 8258336 Fax: 44-8554930, 6263184Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996WATCH YOUR PC ON TVfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996We are often asked why we prefer external modems to internal ones. Andsince most internal modems have a built-in 16550 UART and a lower pricetag.Well, there are several reasons for this. Let's start with one of themore disastrous ones. Have you ever switched on your PC while watchingTV in the next room. More often than not, the screen starts shaking andall kinds of strange lines appear on-screen. This is caused byinadequate shielding of the PC's power supply. Without a body toapprove electrical emissions, such as the FCC, vendors don't pay muchattention to the quality of the power supply's filter circuits. Theresult lots of electrical emissions than can and do cause interferencewith just about any electronic device.Now imagine your poor little internal modem card sitting right next tothis power supply. If the TV next door can be effected, think of what'shappening to a something right next to the source of all thisinterference. You get miserable performance as lots of noise is added toalready dismal telephone line conditions. Given that our telephonesystem is not the best money can buy we land up with problems rangingfrom bad or almost no connects, to low transfer rates when trying totransfer files.There are several other reasons against using internal modems, but ouridea here is just to warn you about what you could be getting into.Another hair-raising example is the possibility of being struck bylightening while online during a storm. This can happen to bothexternal and internal modems. With an external modem all that goesnormally is just the modem. But for an internal modem you couldburnout the whole PC. Not to mention any other peripherals such as themonitor, keyboard and printer. Think about it.PCQ LabsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996AND HOW THEY FARED: WITH EVERYBODY PERFORMING QUITE WELL, PRICE & FEATURESDETERMINE EDITOR'S CHOICEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The results of our tests were initially quite surprising. Unlike theV.32bis modems that were quite common in 1994-95, the V.34 modems testedthis year produced near identical performance results. At first wethough our tests had some flaws, but after running through the testsuites several times, we realized what was really making the differencewas the V.34 specification itself.In the Sibling Test, there was a mere 2.66 percent difference in speedbetween the highest and the lowest connect times. And all speeds wereconsistent with what we expected at 28,800 bps (in theory, a 28,800 bpsmodem in V.42 mode will transfer at a maximum speed of 3,600 charactersper second; actual speeds were better than 90 percent of this in allcases).In the ISP Access Tests, differences in speed amounted to no more than3.8 percent. All the modems remained rock-steady while connected. Andall of them survived the three minute beep without major incidents.In fact, the total variance in scores for performance is as low as 11(out of 100). And in such a scenario, buying decisions will beinfluenced very much by features, bundled goodies and most importantly,the price tag.For this years shootout, we have modems offering more or less similarperformance, with price tags varying between Rs 10,000 to Rs 40,000. Andsome modems also have features that could justify, at least partially,the higher prices. However, others, and in particular, the MotorolaPremier and the US Robotics Courier V.Everything, simply cannot justifytheir prices, given their feature sets.Some vendors may argue that their modems are faster (having a top speedof 33,600 bps), but the implementation of this speed is simply asuperset of the V.34 standard used by all modems. And othermanufacturers can argue that they won't implement a speed standard thathad not been ratified by the ITU. (Remember the V.FC episode from early1995, where many manufacturers jumped the gun and implemented V.FC todeliver 28,800 bps, only to find their modems incapable of adjustingwhen the official V.34 standard appeared, causing serious damage tomany modem manufacturers' reputations when they had to either recallmodems for factory refitting, or simply orphan them.)Most of the modems operating at 28,800 bps will be able to upgrade to33,600 bps once V.34bis is ratified and in all cases this will mean onlya change of Firmware (the control software within the modem) easilydone today with most using Flash ROM upgrades, or simply a Firmware ROMreplacement.Interestingly, the lowest priced modem in this review, the GVC 28800,supported the V.34+33,600 bps speed. Forty percent of the modems wereunable to connect at full speed when subjected to the Unknown ModemTest. This should be a pointer for users working with bad lines orquestionable modems at the other end.The final decision boiled down to the two most important factorsinsofar as the Indian market is concerned price and the Out-Of-BoxExperience.When we applied the Brown-Gibson model to our results, the Boca wasunquestionably on top. It had a 12 point lead over the ZyXEL Omni and a19 point lead over the Hayes that came in third. The GVC came in fourth,loosing mainly on features. Motorola, who changed their modem pricingfrom Rs 21,000 to Rs 31,000 during the review, dropped to ninth place,despite very good performance and features. The US Robotics Courierdropped from last year's top-three to the eighth place, despite topmarks for performance, because of its price.Happy high speed connects.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996REVIEW - MODEMSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Grand Total     Weightage 300      RankBoca MV.34EE              242       1Gvc 28800                 224       4Hayes Accura 288 Message  226       3Motorola Premier 33.6     197       9Multitech MT 2834BL       207       7Multitech MT2834ZDx       215       5USR Courier V.Everything  203       8USR Sportster 28800       195       10Zyxel Elite 2864          210       6Zyxel Omni 288            230       2Features                                 Weightage    Documentation 31 Serial Cable 31 Win 95 19 Voice 13 Others 6 Total 100Boca MV.34EE        20            31        19       0         1        71GVC 28800           5             0         19       0         1        25Hayes Accura 288 Message                    12            31        19       13        0        75Motorola Premier    33.6                    17            31        19        0        1        68Multitech MT2834BL  31            31        19        0        6        87Multitech MT2834ZDX 17            31        19        0        2        69USR Courier V.Everything                    17            0         19        0        4        40USR Sportster 28800 13            0         19        0        1        33Zyxel Elite 2864    28            31        0         13       4        76Zyxel Omni 288      28            31        0         13       4        76Performance And Price                                  Weightage     File Transfer  50 Connect Unknown 33 Handshake Time 17 Total 100 Price 100Boca MV.34EE        50                 33                13       96        74GVC 28800           50                 33                16       99        100Hayes Accura 288 Message                    50                 25                13       88        63Motorola Premier 33.6                    50                 33                13       96        32Multitech MT2834BL  49                 33                12       94        25Multitech MT2834ZDX 48                 33                12       93        53USR Courier V,Everything                    50                 33                16       99        65USR Sportster 28800 50                 30                17       97        65Zyxel Elite 2864    50                 30                13       93        40Zyxel Omni 288      48                 30                13       92        63Features And Test Results                            Modem Model             Boca      GVC 28800     Hayes Accura 288         Motorola Premier             MV.34EE                      Message                     33.6Local Vendor   Powertel   Boca         Graham Comm Datamatic    MotorolaPrice          Rs 13,500  Rs 10,000    Rs 15,750                Rs 31,000Warranty(Years) 5         3            2                        1Average US$ Price               212        150          170                      320Converted to NR               11,448     8,100        9,180                    17,280Premium Price Factor               18%        23%          72%                      79%Accessories                               Modem Model           Boca      GVC 28800     Hayes Accura 288     Motorola Premier           MV.34EE                      Message         33.6Serial Cable  Yes       No             Yes                   Yes16550A Card   No        No             No                    NoSoftware                               Modem Model           Boca      GVC 28800     Hayes Accura 288          Motorola Premier           MV.34EE                      Message                     33.6Datacom   Faxworks 3.0g QuickLink II fax SmartCom           QuickLink II faxFax       Faxworks 3.0g QuickLink II fax SmartCom           QuickLink II faxVoice          n/a          n/a          SmartCom                    n/aWindows 95 INF file       Incl. with Win/95 Yes               Yes                       YesParallel       No           No             No                        NoDialup         Yes          Yes            Yes                       YesHandest        Yes          Yes            Yes                       Yes4-Wire Leased  No           No             No                        NoDisplay                           Modem Model           Boca      GVC 28800     Hayes Accura 288      Motorola Premier           MV.34EE                      Message          33.6Type(No)    LED(8)       LED(8)           LED(8)         LED(8)Speed indication            No           No               No             NoRetrain indication            Yes          No               No             NoEC indication            No           Yes              No             NoFax indication            No           No               Yes            NoControls                           Modem Model           Boca      GVC 28800          Hayes Accura 288   Motorola Premier           MV.34EE                        Message              33.6Voice/Data switch           No              No              No                   NoPower      Yes             Yes             Yes                  YesVolume     Software only   Software only   Software only        Software onlyConfiguration           Software only   Software only   Software only        Software onlyPower Supply                           Modem Model        Boca          GVC 28800      Hayes Accura 288   Motorola Premier        MV.34EE                      Message              33.6Type    Socket Mount  Socket Mount   Socket Mount        Socket MountRating  230VAC/9VAC   230VAC/9VAC    230VAC/9VAC         120VAC/9VACEarth Pin   No           No            No                  NoTest result                            Modem Model               Boca       GVC 28800      Hayes Accura 288   Motorola Premier               MV.34EE                   Message              33.6Handshake(sec)  12.80       10.64           12.90               12.98File Xfer(CPS) EPBAX                3,270       3,274           3,350               3,319File Xfer (CPS) VSNL                3,263       3,264           3,265               3,261Features And Test ResultsMulti-tech Multi-Tech   US Robotics        US Robotics        ZyXEL    ZyXELMT2834BL   MT2834ZDX Courier V.Everything Sportster 28800   Elite 2864 Omni 288Multi-tech Multi-tech   Microsense          Microsense         Xon      Xon                                                           & Wanland  & WanlandRs 39,950   Rs 18,950   Rs 28,000           Rs 15,500      Rs 25,500 Rs 16,000   2 2         1 1         2 2                  2 2            1 1       2 2   450         180         350                  170            427       315   24,300      9,720       18,900               9,180         23,058    17,010   64%         95%         48%                  69%             8%       -6%AccoriesMulti-tech Multi-Tech   US Robotics        US Robotics        ZyXEL    ZyXELMT2834BL   MT2834ZDX Courier V.Everything Sportster 28800   Elite 2864 Omni 288  Yes         Yes           No                 No             Yes       Yes  No          No            No                 No             No        NoDisplayMulti-tech Multi-Tech   US Robotics        US Robotics        ZyXEL    ZyXELMT2834BL   MT2834ZDX Courier V.Everything Sportster 28800   Elite 2864 Omni 288LED(14)    LED(10)      LED(12)             LED(7)          LED(21)    LED(13)Yes        Yes          No                  No              Yes        YesYes        Yes          Yes                 No              Yes        YesYes        Yes          Yes                 Yes             Yes        YesYes        Yes          Yes                 Yes             Yes        NoControlsMulti-tech Multi-Tech   US Robotics        US Robotics        ZyXEL    ZyXELMT2834BL   MT2834ZDX Courier V.Everything Sportster 28800  Elite 2864  Omni 288Yes         No             Yes               No             Yes       YesYes         Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes       YesYes        Software        Yes               Yes            Software  Software            only                                             only       onlySoftware   Software     S/W,DIP switch     S/W,DIP switch  Software    Software only        only                                             only       onlyPower SupplyMulti-tech Multi-Tech   US Robotics        US Robotics       ZyXEL    ZyXELMT2834BL   MT2834ZDX Courier V.Everything Sportster 28800  Elite 2864  Omni 288Inline      Socket      Inline Block      Socket Mount     Socket       Socket  Block       Mount                                          Mount        Mount 230VAC     220VAC      230VAC/20VAC     120VAC/20VACDual  VAC          230VAC /13.8VAC     /9VDC                                         /5-12VAC    /16VAC No          Yes         Yes               No               Yes          NoTest resultMulti-tech Multi-Tech   US Robotics        US Robotics       ZyXEL    ZyXELMT2834BL   MT2834ZDX Courier V.Everything Sportster 28800  Elite 2864  Omni 28814.09        13.65        10.49              10.11           13.00      13.003,274        3,261        3,337              3,274           3,314      3,3463,220        3,143        3,267              3,260           3,266      3,145Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996ZYXEL OMNI 288S: GOOD BALANCE OF PRICING & FEATURES, COMPLEMENTED BYPERFORMANCEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The Omni 288S is not exciting to look at, but provides good value formoney. This is a basic dial-up model, with just enough LEDs. However,their location on top of the case is not very ergonomic. And to seewhat's happening you need to look down at the modem a not so comfortableposition.It uses the same manual and software as the Elite 2864, which makes itextremely easy to use. However, it also shares the same shortcomings noWin 95 INF files, and more or less the same performance online.Like the Elite, the Omni too can be upgraded via Flash ROM. And we hopeits quality will `ripen with age' like any good wine. ZyXEL is wellknown for issuing frequent firmware upgrades (even in the 1496 series),so one can expect that online performance will improve over time.At Rs 16,000, the Omni is priced about the same as the US RoboticsSportster 28800, and its PPF is the lowest in the entire review sixpercent below the estimated fair landed price!The modem's price-to-features balance made it a serious contender forthe top slot, but the Boca wins on better pricing and a slightly betterperformance.RATING:PRODUCT   : ZyXEL Omni 288SPRICE     : Rs 16,000SUMMARY   : The Omni gives above average performance and a very good            price-to-features balance. A no frills dial-up model, the Omni            gets the second rank, and is highly recommended.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996ZYXEL ELITE 2864: GOOD FEATURES & MATCHING PRICING, BUT AVERAGEPERFORMANCEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Although ZyXEL terms the Elite 2864 a `Do Everything' modem, we wouldprefer calling it a multimedia modem because of its obvious stress onfeatures such as voice traffic.It sports a sweeping design, with the largest number of LEDs on itsstatus panel and supports both serial as well as parallel connections tothe PC. It also has an optional RAM upgrade that can receive faxeswithout being connected to a PC. It can also be upgraded to ISDNcapabilities (albeit at a stiff price tag)It came without any Win95 INF files, and we had to download these fromthe Internet before we could install this modem. This is a bit of aCatch 22 situation to install the modem, you need to use it first, whichyou can't. The bundled software, Triofax, is a full voice mail systemthat is very easy to use. However, it does not support Win95's TAPIfunctions.The manual is really elaborate, with lots of diagrams and configurationoptions something new users will definitely appreciate.The many LEDs let you see the status from across the room. And thepowerful speaker can really rock the room when it handshakes. Online, itwas unable to reproduce the magic of its predecessor, the 1496 series.It retrained more than usual, and in the unknown modem test,consistently failed to connect at 28,800 bps.ZyXEL uses Flash ROM to update its firmware. Several such upgrades haveaddressed many problems in earlier models. One hopes that the Elite 2864too will also eventually become as stable as the 1496 series at whichpoint it will become a serious contender. upgrade ability to ISDN may notseem much now, but when ISDN becomes a reality, this will ensure thatthe modem does not become obsolete.Earlier priced at Rs 35,000, the Elite has been more comfortablyrepriced to Rs 25,000, and sports a really low PPF of eight percentRATING:PRODUCT   : ZyXEL Elite 2864PRICE     : Rs 25,000SUMMARY   : The Elite has an elaborate LED display, and sports a sweeping            design. Offers ISDN upgradeability and a RAM upgrade can enable            it to receive faxes without attaching to a PC.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996US ROBOTICS SPORTSTER 28800: A NO-FRILLS MODEL WITH BELOW AVERAGEPERFORMANCEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The Sportster 28800 is the natural successor to the Sportster 14400. Itlooks near identical to the older models a not highly ergonomic shapeand insufficient LEDs. And there is no voice/data toggle switch either.The modem too comes with little documentation when the first Sportsterwas first introduced in India, we were impressed with the quality ofdocumentation, but things seem to have changed. The manuals are usefulif you know about modems, but a novice would be lost in the jargonjungle.Like its sibling, the V.Everything, this one too comes without a serialcable, which leaves you wondering how to connect the modem to your PC.That is until your told that you have to buy this necessary componentseparately the equivalent of saying `batteries not included'.Online, this modem was not very stable, and had problems dealing withthe modem in our ISP Access and in the unknown modem test. In the formerit managed to connect, but retrained often. As for the latter, it couldnot connect at 28800 bps.At Rs 15,500, it carries a PPF of almost 70 percent.RATING:PRODUCT   : US Robotics Sportster 28800PRICE     : Rs 15,500SUMMARY   : Indifferent performance, lack of features and over pricing            caused this to fall in the ratingsCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996US ROBOTICS COURIER V. EVERYTHING: EXCELLENT PERFORMANCE & FEATURES WITH ASTIFF PRICE TAGfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Black, sleek, excellent performance, and very expensive. Add to all thisa pretty fabulous software bundle, which just about sums up the USRobotics Courier V. Everything.Unlike the low-end Sportster, this one is a real work horse, and hasbeen a long favorite with service providers world wide, and with goodreason too. It supports virtually every modem protocol ever invented(including V.FC, V.32terbo and V.34), as well as the yet to beestablished V.34+ running at 33,600 bps). When you use the V.Everything,you'll never need to worry about compatibility issues.The modem too is an ergonomic delight sized and shaped to fit under astandard phone, or as part of a pile of modems stacked one over theother. It also has a programmable switch that is user customizable(though the default is a voice/data toggle switch). A slider volumecontrol makes it easy to "listen in" on a link for audio debugging, andthe bank of DIP switches at the bottom are great for configuring it fornon-PC applications, such as mainframes. And for those in the habit ofmisplacing their manuals the Courier has the most important commandsprinted on its bottom. The supplied documentation was a bit obtuse, butusable nevertheless.The V.Everything has a pretty overpowering software bundle in the formof two CD-ROMs packed with lots of useful applications, including anaccounting system, communication and Internet software, as well as otherutilities. And all these with a multimedia front end that is a pleasureto use.Win95 had built-in drivers for this modem, so there were no problems.Surprisingly, there was no serial cable supplied - a serious drawback.Online, it worked steadily and reliably. File transfer speeds were onpar with the other modems. What really let it down was the pricing at Rs28,000, it is priced out of reach for most users, which is a pity. Amore realistic price would have made this the unbeatable choice for themasses. As it stands, the high price tag represents a PPF of about 50percentRATING:PRODUCT    : US Robotics Courier V.EverythingPRICE      : Rs 28.000SUMMARY    : An excellent but expensive workhorse with lots of software.             The unrealistic pricing and average features really lost it             points.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996MULTITECH 2834 BL: LEASED-LINE MODEM THAT'S EXPENSIVE FOR DIAL-UP USEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Similar to its predecessor the 1432 BL, the 2834 BL too is encasedin ametal box. It looks sturdy and is projected as high-end modem.Unfortunately, it also comes with a high price tag; the highest in thisshootout.The 2834 BL's front panel is quite impressive. It has all the relevantLEDs including speed indicators and a voice/data toggle switch. Thepower supply is an inline block type with a strange connector thatactually locks in place, but sometimes falls off every now and then. Themodem also has a small volume control knob at the back. Apart from theregular serial and phone connectors, it also had a 4-wire leased lineconnector the only modem to have that.The 2834 BL has excellent documentation with the manual adequatelyexplaining all the features and settings. The bundled software isMultiExpress which has its own separate manual. Also supplied is aserial cable. There are no extra drivers required as the modem is listedin Win95 and worked without any problems. In terms of performance, the2834 BL was a little on the lower side. It had the highest handshaketime and the transfer rates were average both on the EPABX as well as onthe transfers with VSNL. The modem does support the V.34+ protocol andin our cross tests, it did connect at V.34+ 33,600 bps.Overall the modem passes muster, but its not for the average buyer. Thesteep price of Rs 39,500 places it out of most users budgets. But itdoes have the advantage of being leased line compatible, and would be agood for corporate buyers. The 2834 BL is an expensive even abroad, butin India its PPF works out to 64 percent.RATING:PRODUCT     : Multitech MT 2834 BLPRICE       : Rs 39,950SUMMARY     : The 2834 BL gave average performance and features. Very              impressive front panel, plus leased-line support.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996MOTOROLA PREMIER 33.6: A HEFTY PRICE TAG LETS THE PREMIER DOWNfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996At first glance, the Motorola Premier invoked a sense of dejavu itlooks identical to the Motorola Lifestyle 28.8 reviewed last year. Theonly visible difference we could find was the higher operating speed(33,600 bps using the as-yet unratified V.34+ specification) and itsprice of Rs 31,000.A quick check at Motorola's Web site showed that this was indeed the nowdiscontinued Lifestyle, with a few additional features, none of whichaffect everyday use. The modem now has a Flash ROM feature that allowsMotorola to update the modem's controlling firmware through a softwareupgrade. And it also has additional features such as synchronousoperation and V.25bis dialing (used only when connecting to certainmainframes). It's DTE (Terminal interface) rate can go twice as high asthe Lifestyle's (230.4 Kbps instead of 115.2 Kbps), but this featurethat will mean little to the average user, whose PC can only `talk' atspeeds up to 115.2 Kbps. The modem also incorporates some securityfeatures such as 20 user security profiles and remote configuration,which would be useful when the Premier is used in a host environment.The modem itself is encased in a sleek `slab of cheese' plasticbody first seen in the Lifestyle with an insufficient number of LEDs tolet the user know what's going on. There is no voice/data toggle switch.And the documentation is somewhat on the skimpy side definitely not forfirst time users though reasonably comprehensive for experienced ones.In actual use, the Premier performed as expected from a true Motorolamodem (unlike the Fastalk models which are rebranded, the Lifestylemodems are actually manufactured by Motorola). Online performance wasstable, though some quirks did show up. In the default setup, the modemwould connect at 2400 bps unless forced to 28,800 bps this was probablya flaw in the firmware that should be rectified by now.Motorola worldwide has begun a global product repositioning exercise,where certain models are priced as premium models as in their cellularphone range and the Premier too seems a victim of this.None of the available features can justify the Rs 31,000 price tag, andwe wonders just who exactly is Motorola targeting. It does not have4-wire leased line or voice facilities that would have helped justifythe price. And since Motorola worldwide has discontinued the Lifestyle(as announced on their own web site), it doesn't have a modem thatcaters to the lower end of the market. The Premier could easily havebeen priced at around Rs 18,000, which would have been fair. As itstands, the Rs 31,000 price tag represents a PPF of almost 80 percent.While the Motorola scored an impressive 96 out of 100 on Performance,and a not too bad on Features, but out priced itself from thecompetition!RATING:PRODUCT       : Motorola Premier 33.6PRICE         : Rs 31,000SUMMARY       : WWW. The Premier gave good performance and is reasonable in                features. But its pricing robbed it of a possible top three                position, if not the Editor's Choice itselfCopyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996HAYES ACCURA 288 MESSAGE: GOOD PERFORMANCE & COULD DO BETTER ON FEATURESfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The Accura 288 is a sleek little modem, like most of the other modelsreviewed. The manufacturer have decided to pay attention to themodem's appearance too. Its packaged in a simple plastic casing,making the Accura one of the lightest. The power supply is of thesmall socket-mounted type.The box contains a serial cable, a small booklet masquerading as themanual and which is by no means complete, and SmartCom software. Thiscomes with its own, larger manual and the first time when we looked atthe documentation, we assumed (wrongly) that the SmartCom manual wouldalso have details for the modem.On the front panel, the modem sports the regular number of LEDs. Theback panel has the connector for the serial port, the phone and linejacks and the power switch. There is no volume control or voice/dataswitch. With SmartCom, the modem can act as a complete messagingstation with answering machine. Since our tests did not involve theseabilities, this feature was not tested.As of performance, the Accura fared quite well. Its handshake time wasaverage and the file transfer rates on both the internal EPABX tests aswell as the VSNL tests were very good. In fact, the Accura 288 had thehighest file transfer speed in the ISP test. But it did have a problemconnecting to our unknown modem. For some reason, it would constantlystep down to V.34 21,600 bps. We tried several times but always gotconnected at this rate. And this cost the Accura valuable performancepoints. Similarly, it scored a total blank in "Others", making it tothird place overall.Overall, the modem performed well, but is overpriced at Rs 15,750, whichrepresents a PPF of more than 70 percent. Nevertheless, this is not sucha bad modem.RATING:PRODUCT     : Hayes Accura 288 MessagePRICE       : Rs 15,750SUMMARY     : Good performance but for connect speeds to the unknown modem.Using the bundled software, the modem can act as a complete messagingstation.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996GVC 28800: AN ATTRACTIVE LOW COST OPTION WITHOUT SACRIFICING ONPERFORMANCEfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The GVC 28800 modem looks quite similar to the older Hayes V Seriesmodems. A silver metallic case with a bit of black, quite compact andneat. Despite the fact that its made of metal, its extremely light. Thepower supply for the GVC too is the small socket mounted variety.The front panel had just a row of LEDs, nothing else. There was novoice/data toggle or speaker adjust knobs; just the power switch at theback, with phone line in and out jacks connectors and the serialconnector. There even was no indicator for speed. There was an HSindicator for any speed exceeding 2,400 bps, and a TST LED for retrains.Speaker volume is controlled using software. But the speaker is a bittinny, and the V.34 handshake can really make it shriek, so you shouldadjust the volume to as low as possible.Appearances aside, the modem behaves quite well. We managed to get somepretty good results calling over the EPABX, and on our direct line testsas well. Rock steady file transfers and a reasonably low handshake timegave the GVC a slight, early lead in performance. We did not encounterany problems connecting to our unknown modem. Every connect was at V.3428,800 bps. The GVC also supports the V.34+ protocol, so in some testswe even managed to get a 33,600 bps connect.A feature that we really missed, was online statistics or last callanalysis. At high-speed, it really nice to know where the problems lie.Many modems these days have a register which can be checked for thedetails of the last call.The modems factory defaults are properly configured for hardware(CTS/RTS) flow control, and we did not have to make any changes at allto get it to work, other than the X register for detection of dialingtones.A skimpy little 22 page manual comprises the modem's documentation. AndQuickLink II the bundled software. No serial cable was provided, butWin95 drivers were supplied.Overall a good modem, it performed well in all tests, with best partbeing the price. At Rs 10,000 it is definitely the cheapest 28.8 kbpsmodem available today. And it comes with a three year warranty. The PPFis 23 percent, which means you can expect the price to come down a bit.However, the absence of adequate documentation, a serial cable,voice/data switch and other features cost the GVC dearly, that it couldnot recover despite its low price. The GVC ended up in fourth place.RATING:PRODUCT   : GVC 28800PRICE     : Rs 10,000SUMMARY   : Good performance and attractive pricing. Lost out on features.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996BOCA MV.34EE: GOOD PERFORMANCE & ATTRACTIVE PRICING SETS THE BOCA APARTfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Packaged in an all black plastic case, the Boca MV.34 EE looks nice andsleek. The modem is small, light, and very portable. And the powersupply is the standard, two-pin socket mounted type.The front panel has several LEDs, but none indicate the connect speed.It appears to be trend not to provide a speed indicator on the frontpanel, but to use software instead. The Boca however does have anindicator for retrain a thoughtful touch. In most of the testsconducted, the modem hardly ever retrained, so at first we actuallythought there was no retrain indicator.The Boca comes with adequate documentation. There's a nice 94 pagebooklet that gives you all the information you need. As for drivers,none are shipped, but it is recognized and listed in Win95 so it workedwithout any problems. Also bundled is Faxworks 3.0, a fax software. Interms of completeness, this was one of the few modems shipped with aserial cable.Performance-wise the Boca was really good. It did not have the fastesthandshake times or even the highest transfer rates, yet was extremelysteady. It did very well on all the tests, over the EPABX, as well asduring direct calls to VSNL. Even the test with our unknown modem werevery good. As the Boca does not support the V.34+ protocol, all connectswere at V.34 28,800 bps.The price tag of Rs.13,500 is attractive, and includes a five yearwarranty. Overall a good modem, with excellent performance. The modemscored a low 18 percent Premium Profit Factor, which is commendable.Steady performance, good features and a decent price makes the BocaMV.34EE the Editor's Choice.RATING:PRODUCT      : Bocamodem MV .34 EEPRICE        : Rs 13, 500SUMMARY      : Good features and pricing combine with performance to make               the Boca modem the winner in this shootout.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996THE PC QUEST 1996 MODEM SHOOTOUT: THE TESTSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996The sibling testEach modem was tested back to back (not over a phone line) against amodem of the same make and model. This determined how the modem wouldbehave in what could be called `unchallengeable ideal conditions'. Itshould be noted that though some modems were capable of speeds up to33,600 bps using the as-yet-undefined V.34+ standard (expected to becomeV.34bis sometime in late October), we forced the modems to connect at28,800 bps to keep results consistent. And a standard ZIP file wastransferred to test transmit speeds.The Inter-operability TestEach modem was tested back to back (not over a phone line) against allthe other models in the review. This brought out any problems that amodem could face when connecting to another modem from a differentvendor, as is likely to happen when you connect to any BBS or Internetservice.The ISP Access And Data Transfer TestEach modem was tested repeatedly against a specific modem at VSNL (thesole public Internet Service Provider, as yet) over a standard phoneline. The ZIP file was used to test transfer speeds. This representedthe most common usage of such modems. As in the Sibling tests, we forcedthe modems to work at 28,800 bps, though this was actually unnecessary,as VSNL's modems do not go beyond 28,800 bps.The Unknown Modem TestEach modem was tested over telephone lines against the same modem (froma vendor not included in this review).PricingWe also calculated the `Premium Profit Factor' (PPF) a comparison of theUS street prices with the prices at which the modem is sold inIndia though we did not include this factor for the actual ranking. ThePPF was calculated by estimating the landed cost in India, based on theUS street price, using $1=Rs 36, and adding 50 percent to this valuetowards import and marketing expenses. This value, deemed as a fairprice, is then compared to the actual Indian price, and expressed as apercentage above the estimated fair price. The higher the percentage,the bigger the PPF. Use this value to estimate the chances of the pricedropping in the near future the higher the differential, the higher thechances for a price drop.How We Ranked ThemIn order to determine the rankings, we used the standard PCQ LabsPerformance-Features-Price model and the Brown-Gibson model to arrive atthe weightages of individual parameters. Given below are the parameters,and their associated weightagesPerformanceFile transfer rate (cps)               50Connect speed to unknown modem         33Time taken to handshake with sibling   17Total                                  100Price                                  100FeaturesDocumentation                          31Serial Cable provided                  31Win 95 INF file provided               19Voice                                  13Others                                 6Total                                  100NB: For `Others' we looked at the following six factors V.34 +, LeaseLine Option, Connect Speed Indication, Retrain Indication, andVoice/Data switch. The presence of each meant one point.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List CopyrightPC QUEST via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996PC QUEST 1996 MODEM SHOOTOUT: PCQ LABS TORTURE-TEST 10 V.34 MODEMSfrom PC QUEST (India), OCTOBER, 1996Every year around this time, here at PCQ Labs we spend a considerableamount of time testing modems. And this year too, this activity has beenmore frenetic than ever before, mainly because of the incredible demandfor modems that has resulted from VSNL's introduction of publiclyaccessible Internet services.While laying down the test parameters for this year's review, PCQ Labswas faced with the decision about what modems to review. We have foundthat users tend to refer to our reviews throughout the year, and itstherefore very important to ensure a line up of modems that can cater tothe demands for the next year (or until our next shoot-out).So we decided to exclude any modem that does not offer speeds of 28,800bps or more. The reasoning is actually quite simple VSNL now offersV.34, 28,800 bps access in all cities and demand for modems operating atthese speeds has risen sharply. The biggest factor in this increase hasbeen a rapid rise of World Wide Web content and Web pages are nowincredibly rich both in graphical and multimedia content. This is good,but at the same time, pages such as these require high access speedsbefore you can see what you're supposed to.Our minimum specification was that reviewed modems should be external,V.34 models, at the very least. The inherent instability of the previousstandard (V.32bis), plus the low speeds achieved by such modems madethem less desirable. And finally, the low prices of modems today (thelowest we tested cost just Rs 10,000, with average street prices forhigh quality, V.34 modems being around Rs 16,000) effectively ruled outV.32bis 14,400 bps modems priced just 20 percent less.In this shoot-out, we have managed a fair sampling of the market. Somemodels are however missing: World Wide Technologies withdrew aftersubmitting a model for the shootout. And the US Robotics Voice modem wasnot tested because they could provide only one modem as against the tworequired by our tests.How We TestedFor testing the modems, we kept in mind the fact that almost allpotential purchasers would be using them to connect to VSNLs Internetservices. We therefore tested these modems against a typical modemrunning at VSNL (we had access to a specific telephone number and not ahunt group, ensuring that we had the same line and equipment conditionsfor every test).We stressed on the "out of box experience" (OOBE) for modems tested.Usability scored over other factors a modem that was up-and-runningstraight out of the box was rated higher than one that took a lot oftinkering and support. This OOBE was also affected by little thingslike if the vendor bothered to supply a serial cable (it was surprisingthat some of them didn't), if they offered a 16550A-based serial cardeither as a standard or as an option (almost none of them even chose tomake the buyer aware that without this, these modems are effectivelyuseless), what was the quality and usefulness of documentationavailable (modem documentation that is, not software documentation. Forexample, GVC shipped a generic 22 page manual devoid of any usefuldetails), and how the modems performed using their basic factory(default) settings.We did not test PCMCIA (PC Card) modems, or internal modems in thisshootout.The Test BedThe test bed consisted of two Pentium/100 PCs with 16 MB RAM, runningWindows 95, with the MS Plus! pack installed. And both machines had16550 UART ports installed. The communication software used wasHyperTerminal 2.0.Copyright 1996 Pc Quest (India)Back to Headline List WT03-B33-16IA059-000323-B027-94http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec108.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224108 text/html 22828HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:39:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:32 GMTContent-length: 22641Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec108.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER PC NEWS via NewsNet January 20, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES POWERPC OS/2 LIMPS HOME. NO SUPPORT, SALES, THIRD PARTIES, - OR FUTURE? (427 words) APPLE DENIES IT'S QUIT THE LOW-END, BUT LEAVES QUESTIONS UNANSWERED (475 words) RADIUS CALLS IT A DAY - HANDS POWER MACINTOSH WORK OVER TO UMAX (290 words) IBM STOPS SHIPPING POWER SERIES MACHINES WHILE OS STRATEGY IS SORTED (131 words) POWER COMPUTING LAUNCHES "MID-RANGE" 601-BASED MAC OS BOXES (192 words) MOTOROLA & BULL LOOK TO 4-WAY 200MHZ POWERPC 620 SERVER RUNNING AIX. (152 words) CANADA'S STD TAKES MOTOROLA MOTHERBOARDS TO BUILD PREP BOXES (108 words) APPLE CUTS PRICES ON TOOLS AS IT SEEKS TO WOO DEVELOPERS (228 words) JAVA TOOLS BURGEON ON POWER MAC - DESPITE LACK OF BROWSER (343 words) COMMERCIAL ANNOUNCEMENT: NEW WAVE OF EMBEDDED AND REAL TIME SOLUTIONS (593 words) CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996             POWERPC OS/2 LIMPS HOME. NO SUPPORT,               SALES, THIRD PARTIES, - OR FUTURE?IBM promised that they would have OS/2 for PowerPC finished offby the end of 1995 and the company appears to have done it - inboth senses of the phrase. OS/2 Warp PowerPC Edition is indeedavailable, but only as a PRPQ: a  Program Request For PriceQuotation item. This limbo-state is reserved for the mostnichiest of IBM's niche products; not on general sale, butavailable through "the customers usual IBM representative" as aspecial order. And the magic product reference that you will needto quote is '5799.QTZ'.The product doesn't include any of the Warp Connect parts, and itonly runs on the 604-based PowerSeries 830 and 850 models -anyone misguided enough to buy a PowerPC-based laptop from IBMcan forget it. Neither does it appear that the company intends todo much to enhance the product "We are shifting out focus back toIntel for '96" an Austin-based spokesperson acknowledged lastweek. IBM is committed to getting the next Intel-based release(codenamed Merlin) out this summer, together with serverextensions which go to make up its Eagle offering.Why PRPQ? "we know that we can reach the people who want it withthis system" said the IBM spokesperson, referring to the 150customers world- wide who were on the beta programme last year.The approach has the disadvantage that anyone with a non-IBMPowerPC machine will not be able to order OS/2 using this method,but since the operating system will only run on IBM's own 830sand 850s that is not problematic. No PowerPC manufacturers havelicensed OS/2; and none that we have spoken to have evinced anyenthusiasm for the product.While we are somewhat loath to pronounce OS/2 for PowerPC   dead,there is precious little evidence that the product has a future.The Power Personal Systems division - charged with taking PowerPConto the desktop has been disbanded and it was only this divisionthat had much to gain from OS/2 for PowerPC. The PowerSeriesmachines new home - the AIX division - is having a hard enoughtime adjusting to having to sell Windows NT, let alone OS/2. Atthe same time, the originally much- vaunted plans for a commoncode-base for Intel and PowerPC versions have also disappearedover the horizon. None of IBM's current work  on  the Intelversion includes producing a  micro kernel-based version.In summary, the future of PowerPC now depends on Windows NT, AIX,Mac OS and Solaris. OS/2 can safely be ignored for the timebeing.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996              APPLE DENIES IT'S QUIT THE LOW-END,                 BUT LEAVES QUESTIONS UNANSWEREDFaced with first quarter losses of $69 million Apple Computer Inchas announced it will restructure its business and make around1,300 people -  8% of its workforce redundant. However thecompany has denied reports that it is withdrawing from the low-end home and education market. A spokesman acknowledged, howeverthat the low-end muddle of Performa and LC machines would berationalised, with fewer models on offer.  Meanwhile Apple willattempt to move away from its technology focus, with newdivisions charged with targetted particular business sectors -education, consumer, multimedia, publishing and the Internet.How much this comes to pass remains to be seen, since the WallStreet Journal believes that a deal that will see Apple bought bySun Microsystems is "imminent", with Sun CEO Scott McNeallyputting the finishing touches to the bid. There have beenrepeated reports that the two companies have been in negotiationssince September, but this time The Journal seems convinced.This quarter's figures show Apple's gross margins down as netrevenues dropped to 15.1% of net  sales, down from 28.7% for thesame period a year ago.  Price cutting and increased competition,particular in Japan were to blame. The job cuts, will eat intoprofits in the second quarter - Apple expects to take a pretaxcharge then of $125m.While initial job losses are to come from sales, marketing andadministration,  there is speculation that research anddevelopment staff will not be immune from  future cuts. There'salso a general feeling that one particular job - that belongingto Michael Spindler, Apple's president and CEO - may be for thechop.Though the business changes would appear to be quite radical, thetruth is that a lot more is likely to  come. The board is due tomeet again to flesh out subsequent stages of restructuring andjob cuts will not be the least of it.The most important thingmissing from Apple's  plan is how it will run its business in thepost PPCP (nee CHRP) world.In a month, maybe two the first PPCP machines notionally able torun Mac OS  will appear. By the end of 1997 we can expect to seequite a few in production. Yet Apple's restructuring makes nomention of this fact - of the fact that it is about to loseeffective control of its compatible hardware base. What does itintend to do? how does it intend to license Mac OS software -freely? to selected PPCP manufacturers? to end users?The details are still missing and until Apple comes up with aclear public policy users, investors and developers will not beable to make sensible decisions about the efficacy of its plans.Companies signing a Mac OS licensing deal are explicitly excludedfrom revealing the terms to third parties.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996              RADIUS CALLS IT A DAY - HANDS POWER                   MACINTOSH WORK OVER TO UMAXTroubled Radius Inc has decided to quit the Mac-clone market andis selling out to Umax Data Systems. Radius will retain 19.9% ofthe new company, Umax Computer Corp which will get  all ofRadius' Mac-making R&D staff, systems designs and key contacts.Umax intends to ship two  PCI-based Mac compatibles in the secondquarter; one, a 150MHz 604-based box codenamed StormSurge isaimed at the high-end market, with the 603-based RipTide machinegoing for the consumer/education market.Previously, Umax, best known for its scanners, had announced thatit would have a PPCP (CHRP) machine ready during the second halfof the year, however the upheaval involved in transferring theR&D team means that this won't now appear until the fourthquarter, according to Umax Computer's VP and general managerPeter Mehring.Unlike Radius' existing machines, the forthcoming boxes  differconsiderably from Apple's own motherboard designs and are basedon work already underway at Radius. The 603-based machine alsobreaks with Radius' habit of concentrating on high-end, high-margin machines for graphics designers. Financial terms of thedeal were not disclosed.Don Chang, vice chairman and co-founder of Umax Technologies Inc,a wholly-owned Umax Data unit has been named president and CEO ofUMAX Computer, the company said. Incidentally, Umax founder Huangis also chairman of Taiwan-based Elitegroup Computer Systems Ltd,one of four companies from which Apple Computer Inc is reportedto be taking bids for contract manufacturing of 300,000motherboards per month, which the company wants to sell on toclone makers. Elite group, First International Computer Co, AcerInc and GVC Corp all confirmed to Electrical Engineering Timesthat they were in touch with Apple on taking at least part of thedeal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996           IBM STOPS SHIPPING POWER SERIES MACHINES                   WHILE OS STRATEGY IS SORTEDIBM's AIX division is still taking orders for, but has stoppedshipping PowerSeries machines with Windows NT installed.Since Power Personal Systems Division was rolled into the AIXorganisation the latter has been mulling to decide how to copewith the alien OS in its midst. An official announcement isexpected next month that the PowerSeries machines have been re-dubbed RS/6000s and that these low-end RS/6000s support WindowsNT.Actual shipments of the machines will not restart until March,according to sources. And in case you are wondering, no the AIXdivision has not been given any remit to sell or support OS/2Warp PowerPC Edition - you will be able to buy the boxes withWindows NT, or AIX preinstalled or with no operating system atall.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996             POWER COMPUTING LAUNCHES "MID-RANGE"                     601-BASED MAC OS BOXESPower Computing Corp has come out with a new line of mid-rangeMac OS RISC machines at budget prices, under the PowerCurve name.The Austin, Texas-based Macintosh cloner says the new machinesare CPU upgradable, use the 120MHz POWERPC 601 and the PCI bus.The PowerCurve 601/120 is available in desktop and low-profileconfigurations and has three PCI slots, on-board 10Base-TEthernet, optional Level 2 cache, built-in high-performancevideo, and a big software bundle including Microsoft Corp'sOffice for the first time.Maximum memory expansion is 256Mb. The on-board VRAM videoenables users to have 2Mb or 4Mb of video RAM with support for upto 24-bit colour in 1,280 by 1024 pixel resolution. It willsupport VGA-style monitors and the VGA connector is auto-sensing.The base configuration for the low-profile PowerCurve 601/120 is8Mb memory, 840Mb disk, 2Mb Video RAM on-board, Mac 15-pin andSuper VGA graphics connector, extended keyboard, mouse andbundled software at $1,850. The desktop version is $1,900; bothmodels are expected  later this month. The software bundleincludes ClarisWorks, Quicken, SoftWindows 2.0 on 60-day trial,America Online access software, Grollier's MultimediaEncyclopaedia CD-ROM.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996             MOTOROLA & BULL LOOK TO 4-WAY 200MHZ                 POWERPC 620 SERVER RUNNING AIX.Sister publication Unigram.X reports that Motorola Inc andCompagnie des Machines Bull SA have a four-way POWERPC 620 RISC-based server with Level 2 cache up and running in Grenoble using200MHz parts that are said to outperform 200MHz 604s. The machineis running AIX, and the partners are working on 64-bit channelsand an eight-way implementation is being developed.Nevertheless, IBM Corp thinks that its Apache chip will be thefirst 64- bit symmetric multiprocessing offering to come tomarket. Apache, the enhanced AS/400 PowerPC AS part that willfigure in commercial RS/6000s, has been dubbed the POWERPC 625.RS/6000 assistant general manager Jeff Mason is apparentlycirculating a positioning document internally on 620 versus 625versus 630. The 620 is apparently nine months off its schedule.The PowerPC 620e that came to light late last year, turns out tobe just a compact implementation of the 620.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996           CANADA'S STD TAKES MOTOROLA MOTHERBOARDS                       TO BUILD PREP BOXESAnother regional PowerPC manufacturer has turned up, this timeits STD Systems Inc, which was uncovered by the reporters on theNewsbytes Network. STD's range of  CompuPartner Power2(pronounced Power squared) servers are based on Motorolamotherboard designs, run Windows NT and are mainly going intoCanadian academic and research institutions, with a pension forfloating-point work according to a company spokesman.The London Ontario-based manufacturer claims to be the fourthbiggest PC company in Canada in terms of sales and have around19% of Canada's education market. Base systems, built around the603 start from C$4,000 upward, with the high-end machinesweighing in at  C$8,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996                 APPLE CUTS PRICES ON TOOLS AS                   IT SEEKS TO WOO DEVELOPERSApple used the MacWorld Expo to show off new versions of its MPWPro  products and ETO "Essentials Tools Objects" developmentsoftware. At the same time the company slashed prices:  MPW Pronow costs $195 as opposed to $295. The ETO bundle, which includesMPW Pro, Symantec C++ for Power Macintosh,  Inside Macintoshetc. is down to $595 from $795.For PowerPC-based developers, the most interesting parts of thenew releases would appear to be MrC/MrCpp 1.0 - new optimised Cand C++ compilers for Power Macs. Apple is claiming "considerablyfaster runtime performance compared with other popular compilers"and in the labs, with a following wind the company claims "up  to25% improvement", though without knowing what they are comparingit with, that's pretty meaningless.The company has also included an early development release of"MrPlus:, described as  a new performance tuning environment tohelp accelerate native Power Macintosh applications. The utilitymonitors runtime execution of an application and then rearrangescode to make best use of the processor instruction cache andreduce the number of page faults in a system with virtual memoryenabled. It can also be used as a profiling and code coveragetool.MacApp has also been tweaked up to version 3.3, and includes, forthe first time  integrated support for Open ScriptingArchitecture, Drag- and-Drop, and PowerTalk  mailers.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996                JAVA TOOLS BURGEON ON POWER MAC                    - DESPITE LACK OF BROWSERThe Power Macintosh finds itself in the odd position of beingwell supplied with tools for writing Java applets, while end-users still have no way of running them. Metrowerks, having justlaunched version 8 of its Codewarrier development tool says itwill add a suite of Java development tools code-named Wired inthe May 1996 release.Meanwhile  Arch-rival Symantec is promising a free Java upgradethis quarter, for existing users of its C++ compiler. SymantecCafe, formerly codenamed 'Expresso' includes an integrated ClassBrowser that allows developers to browse and edit Java methods,data, and classes; Source- code level debugging for Java code; aprogrammer's editor and full support for AppleScript. There's noword of any runtime module that will let Macintosh-baseddevelopers actually test the results, however. Symantec is usingSun's own Java compiler at the heart of Cafe.But the first company off the blocks with a real product isCambridge Massachusetts-based Natural Intelligence Inc which hasbegun shipping Roaster (is there no end to the coffee-relatedpuns?) - a $390  Java development environment. NI has its ownJava compiler, but also enables the use of Sun's own code forpeople worried about complete compliance.The company is claiming the package as the most complete Javadevelopment environment available. In addition to the compiler,there is a Java class disassembler a code editor and a projectwindow for easy manipulation of class files. Notably, Roasteralso includes an applet runner for testing and debugging thefinished Java applets.What's still missing is a general Mac-based Web browser capableof executing the finished Java applets. Netscape CommunicationCorp is still struggling to get the Java interpreter working inthe Macintosh implementation of its Navigator, the latest betarelease, version 2.06ba still lacks Java support.  A Netscapespokesperson said that the company was on schedule to have afinished Java-enable browser within the next 6 weeks, howeverthere is unlikely to be any extended public beta programme as hasbeen seen with the Windows version, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER PC NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 20, 1996                   COMMERCIAL ANNOUNCEMENT:          NEW WAVE OF EMBEDDED AND REAL TIME SOLUTIONSWith this new report, High-End (32-bits and higher) RTOS MarketSizing and Market Analysis Industry Report, International DataCorporation (IDC) and First Technology Inc. (FTI) havecollaborated to provide a deeper understanding of embedded andreal time software.  This report enlarges upon embedded softwareto create the enhanced framework for real time operating systems(RTOSs) of:*    Self-hosted, comprised of Unix and non-Unix*    Host/Target*    Roll-your-own/In-house developed*    General purpose OSs, comprised of DOS/Windows/NT and UnixThe software industry for embedded and real time solutions hasbeen small in comparison to the larger semiconductor, boards andsystems suppliers.  But embedded software continues as alinchpin.  Now as there are more public companies, lead byIntegrated Systems and Wind River, consolidations that havebrought larger companies into the market with Mentor acquiringMicrotec Research, and defense companies implementing technologytransfer, the software market is building the necessary businessand technology infrastructure for a robust industry.                          Market SizingThis report forecasts significant growth within the RTOS market.On a unit basis the report presents embedded and real time unitshipment estimates for RTOSs that increase from 23 million unitsin 1994 to 140 million units in 1998, at a 57% compound annualgrowth rate (CAGR).  The bar chart on thehttp://apt.usa.globalnews.com/powerpc/ web site presents the RTOSunit growth.As a result of downward pressures on average selling prices(ASPs), the RTOS revenue growth as discussed and forecast in thereport is not at the same level as the unit shipments.  On adollar basis the RTOS market is forecast to increase from $383million in 1994 to $970 million in 1998, at a 27% CAGR growth.The bar chart on the http://apt.usa.globalnews.com/powerpc/ website presents this revenue dollar RTOS growth.The report analysis presents forecasts in the categories:*    finer detail of RTOS discrimination*    geographic distribution by North America, Western Europe,     Japan, and rest of world*    industry vertical market segmentation*    competitive vendors sharesThis is a continuing report in the embedded and real time series.The next analysis reports, soon to be released, focus on toolsfor the development of embedded and real time software and themerchant boards market.                      Sponsoring CompaniesIDC has a record of thirty years of top-quality research that isunmatched in the industry.  IDC is the premier planning, marketresearch and consulting firm covering the world of informationtechnology in all dimensions for both vendors and users.  The IDCwork is regarded as the objective, definitive source of marketdata and critical insights.  Data is collected and assessedworldwide by analysts in diverse countries of origin.FTI is a leading market and technology analysis company that hasa major focus area on embedded and real time solutions.  It hasworked on numerous embedded and real time projects with worldwideclients that include:*    semiconductor manufacturers*    public agencies and financial organizations*    independent software vendors of RTOSs and tools*    computer systems vendorsWith IDC, FTI initiated the first work efforts for marketforecasting for critical submarkets of the embedded and real timemarket.  This analysis has a software emphasis, but also extendsinto the broad requirements for embedded and real time OEMs.                             PricingThe price of the report is $2,900.00.  There is a special bonusof 1 hour of consulting discussion with the principal authorincluded free with each report purchase.  For further informationcall 508.935.4070 or e-mail to the principal authoridc@power.apt.eunet.co.uk. Or visit our web site athttp://www.idcresearch.com/Back to Headline List WT03-B33-17IA059-000323-B027-129http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec80.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224201 text/html 22740HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:39:49 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:07 GMTContent-length: 22553Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec80.html Sample Issue Copyright PRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CHIRON AWARDS HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE CONTRACT TO SEPRAGEN FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMS (366 words) TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCES SOFTWARE FOR DIGITAL UNIX (453 words) INTERNET ACCESS SOFTWARE BUNDLED WITH PLUG & PLAY MULTIMEDIA MODEM (585 words) DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES MDA SOFTWARE RUNNING ON ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONS (533 words) DIGITAL AND MACROMRDIA PROVIDE DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM FOR CROSS-PLATFORM AUTHORING ENVIRONMENT (957 words) CopyrightPRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNetJanuary 1996CHIRON AWARDS HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE CONTRACTTO SEPRAGEN FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMSSepragen Corporation (NASDAQ: SPGNU, SPGNZ, SPGNA, SPGNW), ofSan Leandro, CA, has signed a contract to build multipleQuantaSep LS (large-scale) systems for Chiron Corporation. Thecontract, valued at approximately $400,000, includes hardware,software, documentation and validation. The systems have beendesigned to meet the specific needs of Chiron's drugmanufacturing efforts.  Delivery is scheduled for January1996."The interactive team efforts between Sepragen and Chironengineers resulted in the custom design of the processpurification systems. These will enable the rapid purificationof large quantities of two new potential Chiron drugs fortheir clinical trial needs," said Vinit Saxena, president andchairman."This is part of our overall strategic plan to providestate-of-the-art, large-scale purification systems tobiopharmaceutical companies to enhance and optimize theirmanufacturing processes."We selected Sepragen for this purchase based on theexceptional service that they have provided to us in thepast," said Mark Pemberton, director of Bulk PharmaceuticalManufacturing at Chiron Corporation.The QuantaSep LS is a large-scale, computer-controlledchromatography workstation consisting of hardware,electronics, software, sensors and detectors."Sepragen's advanced technologies have added significanteconomic value to the manufacturing processes of many FDAapproved pharmaceutical drugs worldwide," Saxena said.Sepragen Corporation is a pioneer in the field of large-scalechromatography - the next generation technology in theseparations field. The company markets a patented radial flowchromatography (RFC) technology that utilizes a novelhydrodynamic column design in which the flow is directedradially from the outside to the center of the column. Thesurface areas are larger and the radial flow path (bed depth)is shorter. The combination of these features results inhigher flow rates, lower back pressures, and increasedvolumetric productivity over traditional axial columns. Thisis further magnified in large-volume chromatographyapplications.Sepragen also markets computer-controlled processchromatography workstations and process technology to thebiotechnology, food and environmental industries. Thecompany's products are being used by leading biotechcompanies to reduce manufacturing costs and commercialproduction time to market, as well as by food andenvironmental companies to produce new value-added productsand processes. Based in San Leandro, California, the companymarkets its proprietary RFC technology and services worldwide.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNetJanuary 1996TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCES SOFTWARE FOR DIGITAL UNIXTexas Instruments (TI) Software will begin shipments ofComposer for Digital Equipment Corporation's Digital UNIX.Texas Instruments Software's Composer is a market-leadingcomponent-based development tool for client/server applicationdevelopment.  Standards-compliant, high-performance DigitalUNIX is the industry's leading 64-bit UNIX operating system.The combination of Composer and Digital UNIX provides themaximum performance, modularity and scalability available inthe client/server application development market today. WithComposer, users can design, develop and deploy flexibleclient/server applications that allow maximum use of computingresources regardless of the client/server architecture. Incombination with Digital UNIX, Composer gives users the highperformance needed to run client/server applications in a UNIXenvironment. Applications developed with Composer can bedeployed on the Digital's Alpha* workstation running DigitalUNIX or OpenVMS*."Digital UNIX offers Composer customers an industry standardhigh-performance UNIX operating system that lets them movetoday to the next generation of open computing," said SusanMorgan, alliance manager for Texas Instruments Software. "ThisTI and Digital solution enables customers to develop anddeploy client/server applications in a reliable, distributedenvironment where top transaction processing performance is amust and customers can be assured of scalability that meetsbusiness growth needs," Morgan added."We're pleased that TI has decided to port its market-leadingapplication development tool to Digital UNIX," said MarkSilverberg, UNIX product marketing manager at DigitalEquipment Corporation."The combination of Composer, Digital UNIX and 64-bit Alphaplatforms provides users with the ideal combination offlexible tools and robust power to develop mission-criticalclient/server applications."The Implementation Toolset module of Composer will beavailable for Digital UNIX. This module, which ensures theautomation of the compilation, linking and installation ofComposer-developed applications, allows migration of thedeveloped code to the target deployment system.As part of its strategy to provide customers with manydevelopment and implementation options for softwareapplications, Texas Instruments Software provides Composer fora broad range of operating systems. In addition to DigitalUNIX, these operating systems include Digital OpenVMS, IBMMVS, Tandem NonStop Kernel, Tandem NonStop-UX, Hewlett-PackardHP-UX, IBM AIX, Sun Solaris, Sequent Dynix/ptx, PyramidDC/OSx, Siemens/Nixdorf SINIX, AT&T GIS SVR4, MicrosoftWindows 3.1 and NT, and OS/2.For information on U.S. pricing and availability call (800)838-1843.About Texas Instruments SoftwareTexas Instruments Software is the market leader in softwareapplication development and assembly tools and services fordepartment and organization-wide implementation ofclient/server technology. Texas Instruments Software is adivision of Texas Instruments Incorporated (NYSE:TXN), ahigh-technology company headquartered in Dallas, Texas, withsales or manufacturing operations in more than 30 countries.For more information on Texas Instruments Software and itsproducts, please visit the division's World Wide Web site athttp://www.ti.com/software/software.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNetJanuary 1996INTERNET ACCESS SOFTWARE BUNDLEDWITH PLUG & PLAY MULTIMEDIA MODEMHayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. has announced Q1 1996availability of the Hayes ACCURA 288B V.34 Message Modem. Thisnew internal plug & play modem features full voicefunctionality, including full duplex speaker phone, RadishVoiceView, digital voice messaging, and automatic paging,bringing professional office messaging capability to SOHOusers."Hayes ACCURA 288B Message Modem offers a low cost alternativeto traditional high cost answering services, with the addedbenefit of message management features such as automaticpaging and message retrieval," said Dennis Hayes, Chairman andCEO, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. "The marriage ofcomputer and telephone communications in this product bridgesthe gap between SOHO users and their office, making them moreresponsive to their customers needs."ACCURA 288B Message Modem features:Features BenefitsFull Duplex Speaker Phone Superior, low cost, hands-freespeakerphone operation.Digital Voice Messaging High quality voice mail system for aprofessional business image.Automatic paging To get that urgent call or fax while you areon the road.Remote Message Retrieval With 24 hour remote access tomessages, you can provide instant response to callers.Plug & Play Simplifies installation and configuration ofWindows 95 operating system. (In internal modems only.)VoiceView Allows easy switching between data, fax, and voicemodes during the same call.Caller I.D. Provides in-bound caller identification without acostly display phone.Distinctive Ring Directs calls to voice, fax, or data modem.Fax-on-demand Enables callers to select from a menu and havetheir selection faxed back to them.Data/Fax/Voice Modem automatically and transparentlyDiscrimination recognizes and handles data, fax, and voice onone phone line.The full duplex speaker phone capability in this productallows for simultaneous hands free communication and togetherwith its VoiceView capability can even exchange data\fax fileswith remote sites during the same call. Hayes ACCURA 288BMessage Modem will answer incoming calls, play recordedgreetings to the calling party, and store voice messages asdigital files to a PC's hard drive. The product also has ahigh quality, built in microphone which easily integrates intoa desktop PC's existing speakers."With the enhanced security features of the ACCURA 288BMessage Modem, users can establish password protection,manage or forward messages to others, and secure privatemessages," said Bob Meara, Senior Product Manager, ConsumerProducts, Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. "Along with themodem's ability to do fax scheduling and receivefax-on-demand, users now have a powerful and secure messagingsystem that is flexible and easy to use."Hayes ACCURA 288B Message Modem supports 28,800 bits/s datatransmission and up to 115,200 bit/s throughput with ITU-TV.42bis compression. The modem also supports 14,400 bits/s faxtransmission and Class 1 and 2 fax capabilities. SRP for theACCURA 288B Message Modem is $259.The product comes bundled with Hayes Smartcom Message Center,a full-featured voice, fax and data product, as well asInternet access software packages, and complimentary AmericaOnLine and CompuServe software that come with 1-month free on-line memberships.Best known as the leader in microcomputer modems, Hayesdevelops, supplies and supports computer communicationsequipment and software for personal computers and computercommunications networks. The company distributes its productsthrough a global network of authorized distributors, dealers,mass merchants, VARs, system integrators and originalequipment manufacturers.For further information please contact:Andrew W. Dod Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. Phone:770/840-9200 ext. 6365 Facsimile: 770/441-1238 InternetAddress: adod@hayes.com Hayes World Wide Web Site:http://www.hayes.comBack to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIGITAL DEMONSTRATES MDA SOFTWARE RUNNINGON ALPHA- AND INTEL-BASED WORKSTATIONSDigital Equipment Corporation has demonstrated its completefamily of Alpha-and Intel-based systems, all deliveringexceptional performance, running the industry's leadingMechanical Design Automation (MDA) software applications atAutofact '95."AlphaStation workstations are the world's best in performanceand offer customers a choice of leading 2D and 3D graphicsoptions and three operating systems -- Digital UNIX, WindowsNT, and OpenVMS. The workstations allow for real productivitybreakthroughs in MDA. Digital's new line of personalworkstations, from Intel- based models through to Alpha-basedmodels, are economically priced NT-based solutions and offereasy CISC-to-RISC migration," said Herb Shumway, vicepresident of Digital's Software Partner Group. "Digital'scomplete range of workstations and servers deliver customersthe best performance at every key price point, providingdesign engineers with the power they need for complex models."Running Circles Around the CompetitionCompetitive MDA application benchmark demos in Digital's boothwill show the outstanding performance of AlphaStationworkstations. EDS Unigraphics and Pro/ENGINEER applicationsdemonstrated in the booth will run almost three times fasteron an AlphaStation 600 5/300 workstation than on SGI Indigo 2R4400/200 and Sun SPARC station 20/71 workstations, and almosttwice as fast as an HP 9000 J210 workstation.In addition, the Bentley MicroStation CADbench benchmarkrunning on the AlphaStation 600 5/266 workstation, and on theAlpha XL 266, Celebris XL 5133, and Celebris XL 6150 PersonalWorkstations, will demonstrate the range of systems availablefrom Digital -- both Intel-based and Alpha-based -- that runpopular Windows NT applications.Leading MDA Applications Perform Best on Alpha-based SystemsLeading MDA software vendors are demonstrating their productsrunning on Alpha systems in their own booths, including,Autodesk, Bentley, Matra Datavision, and SolidWorks, amongothers. The following Digital Business Partners will bedemonstrating their application software in Digital's booth:o ANSYS, Inc. -- ANSYS 5.2 is a multi-purpose design analysissoftware for engineers who want multi-purpose finite elementanalysis with versatile design analysis and optimizationcapabilities.o Bentley Systems, Inc. -- MicroStation with ModelerMicroStation Masterpiece is a feature-based parametric solidsmodeler and high-end engineering visualization software thatincludes ray tracing and animation.o CIMLOGIC, Inc. -- Toolbox is a set of application tools thatenhances AutoCAD and Designer and performs a number offunctions including 2D and 3D design, detailing, anddimensioning. The company develops and markets designautomation and drafting annotation applications for AutoCAD.o Computervision -- Optegra, TDM-Lite for Microsoft Windows NTis a cost-effective way to bring the benefits of datamanagement to PC users. It is a member of Computervision'sOptegra enterprise data management family.o EDS Unigraphics -- Unigraphics is complete CAD/CAM/CAEsoftware solutions and services that enable optimal individualproductivity, comprehensive design through manufacturing, truecollaborative engineering, and advanced process automation.o MacNeal-Schwendler Corporation -- MAC/PATRAN and MSC/NASTRANis leading analysis software.o Parametric Technology -- Pro/ENGINEER is a parametric,feature-based solid modeling system for the design-through-documentation of mechanical parts and assemblies.Pro/MECHANICA is design optimization software for easyevaluation of design form, fit, and function.o SolidWorks Corporation -- SolidWorks 95 is the firstproduction-level solid modeling system to be builtspecifically for Windows NT.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCTIVITY SOFTWARE via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIGITAL AND MACROMRDIA PROVIDE DEVELOPMENT SYSTEMFOR CROSS-PLATFORM AUTHORING ENVIRONMENTDigital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (SanFrancisco) have forged an agreement to create a developmentsolution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will bebundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, andMacromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimediaapplications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximumrevenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part oftheir agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in jointtechnical development and marketing, and provide technicalsupport to developers."We've already achieved critical mass with the number oftelecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in theirtrials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director ofworldwide marketing, Digital's Video and InteractiveInformation Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoringtechnology with Digital's Mediaplex Application DevelopmentSystem, we can offer both the platform and middleware strengthof Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoringcapabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkeycontent creation solution.""Because we already have the Director Player running on avariety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position tobring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the devicethey have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With theircost-effective architecture and strong understanding of whatbroadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is anideal partner."Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, SashaMagee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already usingDirector, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with asmooth and continuous path to move our business to thebroadband marketplace, particularly because both companies arecommitted to delivery on multiple computing and set-top boxplatforms."Complete Authoring ResourcesThe Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporateseveral Macromedia authoring solutions, including: MacromediaDirector 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creatingmultimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution imageediting and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering andanimation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge bySonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content forthe World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an applicationfor compressing and playing Director files on the World WideWeb -- is included.These products will enable developers to create clientapplications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fullyintegrated with the streaming capabilities of the mediaserver. For custom client/server applications such asinteractive home shopping, distance learning, and homebanking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes ofapplication services on the server.Robust Content Design and Testing PlatformThe Mediaplex Application Development System also includescomplete hardware resources for creating applications,including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and aPentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using thisconfiguration, developers can design content on the PC andtest their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia networkextensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, theWorld Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments fromApple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equippedwith a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of harddisk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. Adual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIXfor testing interactive broadband applications, or MicrosoftWindows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating pointprocessor capabilities for graphics rendering and videoediting. The Mediaplex Application Development System comeswith Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentiumprocessor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB ofhard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, andEthernet connectivity.Pricing and AvailabilityThe Mediaplex Application Development System, with this fullcomplement of hardware and software resources, is pricedstarting at $33,900, with significant discounts available forqualified developers, and will be available from Digital inthe first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one yearmembership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access tosupport forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital'sSDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced asseparate options.About MacromediaMacromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts softwaretools, offers a full range of products for the Windows andMacintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include:Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design andillustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standardanimation and authoring tool for multimedia production;Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoringenvironment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the mostpowerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design andediting; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentationapplication.About DigitalDigital is currently the market leader in interactiveinformation technology, supplying media server solutions formore trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cabletelevision companies using Digital's Mediaplex serverarchitecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, andWestminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunicationscompanies using Digital technology include US West's trial inNebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in theNortheast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's serversare also being used in production environments to insertadvertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TVheadends served by Adlink in California, and to deliverpay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks inCanada.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-18IA059-000323-B027-162http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec45.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224255 text/html 32500HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:41:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:55 GMTContent-length: 32313Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec45.html Sample Issue Copyright THE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *LATEST NEWS* TRENDS IN BRIEF... (126 words) NOTES 4 THE NEW YEAR (1082 words) IBM PC COMPANY -- PAST AND PRESENT (754 words) IBM'S INET TO SPARK INTERNET APPLICATIONS (717 words) IBM TO EXPAND RMON SUPPORT (375 words) IDC FORECASTS A GLOOMY 1996 FOR THE INDUSTRY (995 words) CAMBEX UNVEILS MAINFRAME DISK ARRAY (317 words) SUN SCORES WELL IN PRICE/PERFORMANCE RUNNING DB2 VERSION 2 (225 words) IBM TO OFFER ON-SITE SERVICE FOR APC PRODUCTS (129 words) CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996TRENDS IN BRIEF...THE TREND TOWARD OUTSOURCING MAY TURN INTO A NETWORKmanagement headache.  When large customers pass the widearea networking buck to carriers, they lose the abilityto monitor and test the complete net, pointed out ScottMagee, a SystemView for AIX consultant.  IBM and othercompanies need to work closely with the carriers toensure that their management systems stay useful...IBM's many write-offs for restructuring and other costsmay be bad for investors, Wood Struthers Vice ChairmanStanley Nabi told The Wall Street Journal.  Nabi saidIBM's book value is lower than it was 12 years ago...Viking Components yesterday released memory upgrades forIBM ThinkPads.  The modules come in 4M, 8M, and 16M andare priced from $60 to $75 per megabyte.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996NOTES 4 THE NEW YEARLotus Development Corp. (Cambridge, Mass.) is poised tohail in Notes Release 4 along with the new year.  Manyindustry observers said Lotus' timing is well-aimed tobeat out its primary competition: Microsoft Exchange,scheduled for general availability in February.  Otheranalysts pointed out that Lotus' more more matureproduct, Notes Release 4, already has a running startagainst Microsoft Exchange Version 1 Release 1.Notes 4 promises greater functionality and ease of useover Notes 3.  Calling it the convergence of messagingand groupware, Lotus outlined the benefits of its fourth-generation product:* Object store: Documents and objects can be stored,managed, and retrieved through links or direct usermanipulation.  The object store does not distinguishbetween messages and other objects.* Security: Additional security beyond password securityand digital signatures is rolled into Notes 4.  Furthersecurity is required to manage access to the objectstore, as well as to the individual objects and fieldswithin that database.* Mobile support: Notes 4 users will have access tomessages, as well as to objects that have been linked tothose messages.  Notes 4 supports database replicationdirectly to individual client laptops and remotedesktops.* Manageability: Manageability requirements are expandedto include replication.  The client/server architectureof the integrated messaging and groupware requires thatfourth generation systems provide robust tools for thecentralized management of servers, messages, and objectstores, as well as routers and server tasks.* Directories: Notes 4 extends the directory to encompassconfiguration, authentication/security, and customizedsite-specific information.* Transport and routing: These services are expanded totransport and route loosely structured documents thattypify fourth generation objects.  Also, Notes 4 hasnative support for X.400 and SMTP-MIME transports toensure interoperability with international inter-enterprise communication standards.  Message and documentrouting are dynamic, with routing paths that arealterable on the basis of message urgency to linkavailability.* Migration facilities: Notes 4 migration facilitiesallow system administrators and users to migrate at theirown pace and support coexistence among multiplegenerations of messaging systems.ABOUT FACE FOR INTERFACEAcross the board, analysts were most impressed with Notes4's new and improved interface.  Lotus completelyredesigned its interface, explained Mark Levitt, senioranalyst for electronic messaging for International DataCorp. (Framingham, Mass.).  "It connects cc:Mail to Notesthrough a shared interface," he said.  "As a mail-basedinterface, it makes it much easier for cc:Mail users touse Notes."The interface is the most important aspect of Notes 4,Levitt said.  "Notes has always had a great deal offunctionality that has gone unrecognized or unused bymost users," he said.  "Not all users need that amountof functionality, but the interface makes it simpler andeasier for cc:Mail users to move to Notes."Notes 4 goes several steps beyond what cc:Mail istoday," Levitt continued.  "That is not to say that Lotusis planning to get rid of cc:Mail, but they're making themigration path to Notes easier."Vince Carahaly, president of NetExperts Inc. (Exton,Penn.) and beta customer of Notes 4 on Windows NT for amonth and a half, agreed that the interface was a keyimprovement in Notes 4."The biggest complaint about Notes 3 was that the e-mailinterface wasn't very good -- even though this was thecompany with the award-winning cc:Mail product," Carahalysaid.  "With Notes 4, Lotus gave the e-mail interface thelook and feel of cc:Mail."Apart from the new interface, Notes 4 improved itsdatabase replication.  Notes 4 supports field-levelreplication, while Notes 3 only supported document-levelor record-level replication, Carahaly explained.For example, a Notes user can have a personnel file withall the information on an employee and perhaps a bitmapwith a photo ID of the person.  With record-levelreplication, if one part of that file changes -- forinstance, the employee's phone number -- the Notes usermust replicate the whole thing.  At field level, the usercan get in and change the phone number.  "It's much moregranular," he said.  "It's more efficient, faster, andthere's less data to ship over."RELEASE 4 VERSUS RELEASE 1Even without the one month head start over Microsoft,Lotus is still in a better position with Notes 4 thanMicrosoft is with Microsoft Exchange, Carahaly said."Notes is an established product.  It's a maturegeneration of product -- that's their head start rightoff the bat," he said.In addition, Notes 4 is a more robust environment thanMicrosoft Exchange, Carahaly said.  "Microsoft Exchangeis not workflow -- it's just client/server mail," hesaid.  "Notes is a workflow product with client/servermail.""Shops that have Notes probably won't switch to MicrosoftExchange," Carahaly said.  "Many companies are waitingto see how good Notes 4 actually is.  Once it gets intothe market and people find that it has no problems, doeswhat it says it does, the improvements are there andfunctioning -- it will be a hit."Another analyst agreed that Notes 4 is a largeimprovement over Notes 3.  "Notes 4 is a great leapforward," said Tom Austin, research director with theGartner Group (Stamford, Conn.).  "Notes 4 put in placea real integrated development environment."Austin also praised the new mail interface.  "Notes 4 hasbrought management of communications to the point wheremere mortals can do it," he said.  In addition, Notes 4has improvements in scalability.  "With Notes 4, a servercan support five to ten times more people versus Notes3," he said.  "This greatly reduces the cost ofmanagement."JAVA JOCKEYINGNotes 4 contains the programming language Lotus Script."Lotus Script obsoletes Notes macros," Austin said.Despite the recent announcements that both IBM andMicrosoft will support Java and Java Script, Austin saidneither company will abandon their own script languages."Java Script won't rule the world," he said.  "But bothIBM and Lotus will support Java."Although Austin said he was very impressed with Notes 4,he said the release should have been on the market oneand a half years ago.  "Lotus does not have a trackrecord for accelerated development," he said.  "Notes 4came three years after Notes 3.  If it takes Lotus threemore years to come out with Notes 5, it will be lookingat the pack from the back."(RACHEL BROWN)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996IBM PC COMPANY -- PAST AND PRESENTIBM's PC Company underwent its share of restructuring andchanges in 1995, and most industry observers said its newdirection is a positive step forward.  They also offeredsome ideas about what improvements the Big Blue unit canmake in 1996.KILL OS/2Analysts shook their heads and wrung their hands overIBM's continued devotion to its maligned operatingsystem, OS/2."I'm surprised that [IBM Chairman Louis] Gerstner hasallowed OS/2 to continue this long," said FrancieMendelsohn, president of Summit Research Associates(Rockville, Md.).  "IBM has thrown millions of dollarsinto this and not seen a return."Although Mendelsohn said OS/2 is an excellent product,she said the market share is so small that it will notbenefit IBM in any way.  "Maybe 1996 will be the yearthat IBM totally gives up the ghost of OS/2," she said.Another analyst agreed that OS/2 is technologicallybrilliant but not worthwhile.  "IBM has to disentangleitself from ventures like OS/2 because that continues todrag them into the ground," said Steve Kleynhans, programdirector of workgroup computing strategies for the METAGroup (Stamford, Conn.).IBM needs to position itself a leader, Kleynhans said."But it's a fine line between surrounding themselves withnew and glorious technology and wandering into theweeds," he said.  "Lately IBM has been wanderingaway -- with things like its Micro Channel and OS/2.These are things the industry didn't really want -- IBMneeds to do innovative things without alienatingthemselves from the industry."SWIMMING IN THE CHANNELAnalysts praised the PC Company's move away from directselling of its PCs to bringing resellers into thepicture.  "IBM must pursue an indirect channel strategyto effectively compete in the commoditized PC industry,"said Joseph Ferlazzo, an analyst with WorkGroupTechnologies (Hampton, N.H.).Ferlazzo credited Robert Stephenson, the new head of thePC Company, with the indirect channel strategy."Stephenson was probably one of the people who pushedthat through," he said.  "There have been a lot of goodmoves since Stephenson's been on board."  As a formersalesman, Stephenson recognizes that IBM can no longerplay in the direct channel and that the company needs togive its channels enough margin to make it profitable forthem to sell IBM products, he said."The big question is: Can IBM provide the necessarymargin to their resellers without losing more money inthe PC Company?" Ferlazzo said.  "It's too early to tellwhether it will work."Although Ferlazzo said IBM has lived up to its end of thebargain with its resellers by creating a high presencefor the IBM name in advertising and public relationsactivities.  "IBM is doing its job of creating brandrecognition.  Look at all the Aptiva commercials," hesaid.But Kleynhans said the IBM name has lost much of itsluster.  "The IBM name still carries a certain cachet,but not like it did before," he said.  "IBM's biggestchallenge is to differentiate [itself] in a market where[it's] no longer the overriding leader."CLONE THINKPAD SUCCESS"IBM still makes the best notebook out there with theirThinkPads," said Mendelsohn."IBM needs to find a way to clone its ThinkPad successfor its desktop and server lines," agreed Kleynhans.  IBMstill lacks exciting products in its desktop or serverlines, but this winter the company is poised to introducesome interesting products, he said.Mendelsohn praised IBM's move to beef up its Aptiva line."Originally it was only a 60 MHz machine -- that'sunderpowered even for the home market," she said, addingthat IBM needs to focus more on the home market.  "Thehome market will probably account for half of the PCssold.  That market is booming."INVENTORY UNDER CONTROLAt least the PC Company has made strides with itsinventory issues, Ferlazzo said.  "Its build-to-orderstrategy is clear and underway," he said.  "Itsmanufacturing strategy is strong."Stephenson's predecessor, Richard Thoman, put in placea process for daily updates on the amount of ordersreceived and the number of PCs made, which mademanagement and inventory issues much easier, Ferlazzoexplained.  "IBM is not having these critical issues ofinventory," he said.  "Manufacturing is no longer ahindrance.""The problem is the business model.  The PC Company isjust breaking even, if that," Ferlazzo said.  "Thebiggest challenge for Stephenson is making the PC Companya profitable entity."(RACHEL BROWN)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996IBM'S INET TO SPARK INTERNET APPLICATIONSApplication developers can now "test drive" theirInternet applications in a driving course sponsored byIBM.  IBM announced an iNet porting extension to itsSolution Partnership Center (SPC) in San Mateo, Calif.The SPC uses the IBM RS/6000 platform, running IBM'sversion of Unix, AIX.  The iNet porting facility providesdevelopers with access to systems, support, andtools -- either over the Internet or in person at theSPC."We intend to make the RS/6000 the Internet server ofchoice," said Tom Fornoff, director of workstationmarketing for IBM's RS/6000 Division.  "We're confidentthat developers using this facility will realize theadvantages in performance and flexibility that theRS/6000 offers."INET OFFERINGSThe iNet porting facility's complete list of resources,free to developers (as available), include:* An iNet porting World Wide Web (WWW) home page athttp://www.spc.ibm.com that provides information on thecenter and how to use its resources* Internet access to a number of RS/6000 systems runningAIX, allowing developers to test drive the platform andexperience its Internet server capabilities* Scheduled, secure Internet access to a range of RS/6000servers, software development tools, and technicalsupport that let developers port or create Internetapplications for the RS/6000 platformIn addition, developers can use the latest RS/6000uniprocessor, symmetric multiprocessor, and scalablePOWERparallel systems (RS/6000 SP).  IBM developmenttools will also be available.  These include productsfrom IBM and third parties like BlueStone, IllustraInformation Technologies, Lotus, Netscape, Prodigy,Progressive Networks, RAD Technologies, Spyglass, VDOnet,Verity, Worlds, Xing Technology, and others.  Thesevendors will also provide technical support and training.Marketing support is also available for Internetapplications created for or ported to the RS/6000platform.  Marketing support includes a listing on a "HotInternet Applications" Web page directory on the SPC'shome page; marketing links with IBM channels, productdivisions, and the Industry Solution Units.BOON TO BIG BLUE, DEVELOPERSIndustry observers were excited about IBM's announcementand said the iNet porting facility is a boon to both IBMand developers.  "This allows IBM to immediately allowdevelopers to begin testing code, testing new marketideas -- without building an infrastructure of cornerstores," said Rich Doherty, a director of TheEnvisioneering Group (Seaford, N.Y.).Doherty described IBM's iNet porting facility as a"virtual service bureau," but said developers who stillwant the security and sanctity of testing theirapplications in person can take their applications to thefacility in San Mateo.The Envisioneering Group has accessed the site and builtports on IBM's supercomputers.  "There's nothing elselike it," Doherty said.  "You can call into the heart ofthe technology, try out ideas in private, and have accessto thousands of dollars of development time."TRY BEFORE THEY BUYNot only can developers test out their applications,developers can bring their clients in and walk throughthe applications with them to work through any problems,Doherty explained.  "This is a `try before they buy' setup," he said.  "You couldn't ask for a better match ofcustomer and vendor."Other companies may try to copy elements of IBM's iNetporting facility, but Doherty said IBM gives developerslots of access to its system.  "These things are usuallyportioned out in terms of minutes, not in terms of tensof hours," he said.  "IBM has dozens of ports to ensurethat each developer has 22 continuous hours."That's unique -- that's not just driving the car aroundthe block, that's like borrowing it from the dealer fora weekend," Doherty said.DATA RULESAnother analyst agreed that IBM's interest in Internetapplications is good for the company.  "IBM has a pointof leverage in this new environment -- it's called data,"said John Robb, an analyst with Forrester Research Inc.(Cambridge, Mass.).IBM has huge amounts of data, mostly on its back-endsystems, Robb explained.  "IBM wants to help companiesdistribute or publish or integrate that data with theirWeb offerings," he said.  "So anything that IBM can offerin the way of tool sets is positive."Everyone wants to Web-enable their legacy systems," Robbsaid.  "IBM should be in the business of helpingcompanies do that."(RACHEL BROWN)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996IBM TO EXPAND RMON SUPPORTAlthough IBM has supported RMON for some time, thecompany is introducing extensions to the networkmonitoring standard across its hub products starting inthe next few months.The extensions include two probe modules, one designedto resemble the RMON 2 standard once it is finalized andanother to generate test traffic on a local area network.Right now, IBM has only one probe capable of performingthese functions: an Ethernet probe for its 8250 Nwaysintelligent hub which can monitor three Ethernet segmentssimultaneously.In the coming months, IBM will announce thesecapabilities for the 8260, at the top of IBM's line, saidSallie Matlack, an IBM-certified IT specialist.  LesserIBM hubs will receive these extensions sometime in thefuture.RMON (remote network monitoring) is an industry-standardmethod of collecting statistical data at the physical anddata layers of network segments and sending the data backto a central site for analysis.  RMON-compliant probescan also detect problems and send warnings to themanagement station.RMON 2 will expand the range of data that can begathered, looking at higher functions such as networkprotocols and applications, and will provide an end-to-end view.IBM's Enterprise Communications Analysis Module (ECAM)is a block of software that looks at the same things RMON2 will when the standard is complete.  IBM has createda mechanism where ECAM can be automatically downloadedfrom a management station into a probe that has beenengineered to accept modules like ECAM.IBM's other RMON extension, called Traffic TransmissionManagement Module (TTMM), can take network trafficcollected through other monitoring tools and spit it outonto a local segment.  This lets network managers monitorthe impact on that segment via performance monitoringtools.PUTTING IT TOGETHERTo handle the information gathered through RMON probes,IBM last October introduced a version of its softwareproduct Nways Campus Manager - ReMon, a version thatincludes ECAM and TTMM.  In November, IBM brought thesoftware from NetView for AIX to HP OpenView.ReMon lets managers tell the distributed agents whichpackets to capture and send back to the managementplatform.  It also displays the information gathered fromthe probes graphically.(JEFF CARUSO)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996IDC FORECASTS A GLOOMY 1996 FOR THE INDUSTRYIn spite of a bullish 10-year outlook for on-linecommerce, researcher International Data Corp. (IDC)yesterday predicted 1996 to be a year of disappointmentas investors and corporations suffer through thediscouragingly slow development of a significant consumerbase.By this time next year, IDC predicted 20 percent of theFortune 500 companies that have commercial Web sites willclose or stop maintaining them, resulting in "ghost"sites.On-line information service providers (such asCompuServe, America Online, Microsoft Network, andProdigy) will derive more than half of their revenue fromproviding access to the Web by mid-1997.  IDC predictsthat two of the four will struggle to survive."In 1996 we predict that the Internet/World Wide Webphenomenon will shift from today's `intoxication' stageto a `hangover' stage," said Frank Gens, senior vicepresident of research at IDC, the world's leadingprovider of information technology (IT) data, analysis,and counseling.  "The high-flying Internet suppliers willhave disappointing financial results, while technicalcapabilities of the Internet are stretched to thebreaking point."Gens also said IT industry revenues will jump from $500billion to more than $2.5 trillion by 2010, and corporatespending on IT will rise from 2 percent of revenues tomore than 5 percent. In addition, IDC said it believeson-line commerce volume will hit $150 billion or more bythe year 2000 and more than $1 trillion by 2010."Some financial service companies, retailers, andpublishers will bail out in the initial hangover period,"Gens said.  "In the process, they will cripple theirbusinesses' ability to compete in the growing `virtualeconomy.' In contrast, leaders in the emerging electronicmarketplace will significantly increase theirinvestments. In the process, the seeds will be sown forthe creation of new leadership and the downfall of somecurrent giants in many industries."INTERNET APPLIANCESBy this time next year, IDC predicts that manufacturersof "Internet appliances" -- low-cost devices that allowthe user to access on-line information -- will ultimatelyslash prices in half by year's end.Internet Appliances will arrive in 1996, but thesuccessful ones won't be priced at $500, Gens said.  Theywill come out of the gates at $100 to $300.  The gameconsole crowd is already slicing away at the pricing forsimple Web surfing devices.  Within two years, InternetAppliances will emerge as giveaways (less than $100 tofree) by businesses that want customers to access theiron-line services, according to Gens."Price competition in data to the home will becomebrutal," Gens said.  IDC predicted that high-performanceInternet access will be delivered to the home for aslittle as $15 to $20 per month in 1996, down from $25 to$70.  Pricing will drop to $10 to $15 per month withinthe next two years, partially because cable companies(with the help of affordable cable modems) will play theInternet card as their first foray in thetelecommunications business.  Telephone companies willrespond with more aggressive pricing.According to IDC, in 1996 and 1997, suppliers willaggressively explore new home PC designs to drive downprices of multimedia devices to $800 to $1,000 (and less)in an effort to penetrate broader segments of theincreasingly important consumer market.  It will beparamount for PC vendors to become better acquainted withthe mainstream consumer electronics market and mentality,and learn a whole new meaning of "price-competitive."Without doubt, the winners in the PC business in thecoming decade will be those that crack the mass-marketbarrier, IDC said.MICROSOFTIDC predicted Microsoft will have a great year in 1996,but its hold will be challenged by the Internet-based"Revenge of the (Unix) Nerds."  One effect of theInternet phenomenon of 1995 has been that many on WallStreet and within the IT industry now are forecasting theundoing of Microsoft's hold on the industry, and hailingthe rise of Netscape and Sun Microsystems as the newindustry leaders."While IDC recognizes the potential of the Internet worldto weaken several of Microsoft's key levers on theindustry, such as OLE and Visual Basic, there will berelatively little revenue effect from this in 1996," Genssaid.  "We also believe in spite of the recurring rumorsof Department of Justice investigations, Microsoft willescape any major antitrust activity in 1996, an electionyear.  Additionally, Microsoft will conclude that itsventures into new businesses will have a greater chanceof success without the Microsoft brand."OTHER PREDICTIONS FOR THE NEW YEAR* There will be an Internet-driven shakeout in theapplication software and application development toolsbusinesses in 1996 and 1997.  The emergence of the Web,and the growing importance of entertaining,multimedia-rich interfaces, will challenge the currentcrop of client/server tool suppliers like Microsoft,Powersoft, Dynasty, Forte, and Seer, as well asapplication package companies like SAP and Peoplesoft.* Software licensing will support network access andshort-term "rental."  Behind the scenes, suppliers arecurrently exploring how to "crack the code"  on thischarging model; the leaders will begin experimenting inthe marketplace in 1996 and 1997.* Large systems will become "politically correct."High-end servers will increasingly be required to scaleto support direct access by thousands to potentiallymillions of users, as opposed to today's hundreds tothousands of corporate users.  This accelerated scalingrequirement will put pressure on Microsoft's enterprisestrategy due to NT's relatively low-end design point,and boost the Unix camp's high-end business.Beneficiaries will be IBM, Hewlett-Packard, SunMicrosystems, and -- perhaps -- a rejuvenated Digital.* The increased scope of the Net will favor suppliersthat excel in creating "virtual organizations."Successful suppliers will be able to play well in a"virtual organization"  structure -- able to act ascreator, investor, producer, and/or partner.A full copy of IDC's 1996 predictions can be found onIDC's home page.  The address ishttp://www.idcresearch.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996CAMBEX UNVEILS MAINFRAME DISK ARRAYCambex Corp. last month announced a high-performance diskarray subsystem that supports both IBM System/390mainframe and client/server data storage requirements.The Cascade XE (cross-enterprise) system provides highavailability and up to 272 gigabytes of storage in asingle DASD product.  The Cascade XE can besimultaneously attached to an IBM mainframe 3990 diskcontroller and to open systems platforms, including IBMRS/6000 and SP2, SUN SPARC, Hewlett-Packard 9000 andMicrosoft's Windows NT.Cambex also announced an XE Backup/Restore option whichsupports the use of existing mainframe tape subsystems,management tools, and procedures.  The software optionprovides backup for both legacy and open systems storage.The amount of storage in the Cascade XE available foreach platform is scalable, enabling the user toreconfigure capacity levels to accommodate a gradualtransition from one operating environment to anotherwithin the same disk array unit."FIREWALL" PROTECTION INCLUDEDMainframe and open systems environments operateindependently and are isolated through an electronic"firewall" that ensures data security and integrity.Unlike other solutions, data paths and cache memories arenot shared between the different host environments,thereby ensuring that data cannot be corrupted bycomponent failure or operator error.A Cascade XE configured with 68G of RAID-1 mainframe DASDand 68G of RAID-5 open systems storage is priced at$265,000, or less than $1.95 per megabyte.  In a largerconfiguration of 136G of mainframe and 136G of opensystems storage, the Cascade XE system is priced at$475,000, or $1.75 per megabyte.Since storage assigned to open systems platforms can beconnected to the IBM 3990 controller, the Cascade XE alsoprovides users with a cross-enterprise backup capabilityunder System/390 storage management facilities.  The XEBackup/Restore option increases the use of existingmainframe tape facilities by extending support to thebackup and restoration of open systems storage within theCascade XE subsystem.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996SUN SCORES WELL IN PRICE/PERFORMANCE RUNNINGDB2 VERSION 2Sun Microsystems Computer Co. announced the industry'sbest-ever price/performance results for the TransactionProcessing Performance Council Benchmark C (TPC-C)benchmark.Sun's SPARCserver 1000E with eight 85 MHz SuperSPARCprocessors, running IBM's DB2/a Version 2 database serversoftware on the Solaris 2.4 symmetric multiprocessing(SMP) operating system, delivered results of 3255.88transactions per minute (tpmC) at a price/performance of$182 per tpmC.The new performance results are the best-ever publishedDB2 Version 2 performance figures and the first on anon-IBM platform, demonstrating the commitment of IBM andSun to open industry standards.According to Janet Perna, director of database technologyin IBM Software Solutions Division, "We are excited atthis opportunity to demonstrate IBM DB2 Version 2'ssuperior performance and reliability features on the SunSolaris system as part of this TPC-C benchmark.  Thisdemonstrates IBM's continuing commitment to making itsleadership database products available on allhigh-performance platforms -- something our customersrequire in order to maintain their competitive edge inthe marketplace."The TPC-C benchmark simulates an order entry environmentfor a warehouse operation.  The benchmark has gainedindustry acceptance because it is considered to besimilar to "real world" processing. By simulating theactivities found in complex Online Transaction Processing(OLTP) application environments, the TPC-C benchmarkexercises a system's breadth of components associatedwith such environments.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON IBM via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996IBM TO OFFER ON-SITE SERVICE FOR APC PRODUCTSAmerican Power Conversion Corp. announced that IBM isoffering on-site service for all APC UPS products andaccessories.  Effective last month, customers have theability to include APC products on IBM MaintenanceAgreements for on-site service via 800-IBM-SERV.  APC isthe only UPS vendor to presently have this agreement withIBM."This agreement provides APC and IBM customers with highlevel service through IBM and benefits our customers byproviding a one-stop- shop for all of their serviceneeds," commented John F. Schultz, General Manager ofIBM's Availability Services.APC products are currently sold through IBM AvailabilityServices, ISSC, and IBM PC Company.  In addition, APC isan AS/400 Partner in Development, NetFinity Partner inManagement, Member of the SystemView/NetView Association,and an RS/6000 Partner in Development.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-19IA059-000323-B027-201http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec100.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224327 text/html 32711HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:41:31 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:28 GMTContent-length: 32524Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec100.html Sample Issue Copyright THE REPORT ON MICROSOFT via NewsNet January 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *LATEST NEWS* SLOWDOWN TEMPORARY FOR WINDOWS 95; MEETS EXPECTATIONS (904 words) FOR MICROSOFT IN 1996, UBIQUITY IS KEY (823 words) MSNBC BRINGS MICROSOFT ONE STEP CLOSER TO TECHNOLOGY DOMINATION (814 words) NOTES 4 BEATS MICROSOFT EXCHANGE TO MARKET (1079 words) MICROSOFT BACKS IEEE MULTIMEDIA CONNECTION/CONTROL STANDARD (514 words) IDC: MICROSOFT WILL DO WELL IN '96 -- BUT DARK CLOUDS HOVER OVER THE HORIZON (857 words) CopyrightTHE REPORT ON MICROSOFT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996SLOWDOWN TEMPORARY FOR WINDOWS 95; MEETS EXPECTATIONSAlthough most analysts have downgraded their estimatesabout the number of copies of Windows 95 that would sellduring 1996, the numbers are expected to pick up a bitduring the coming year.Dataquest (San Jose, Calif.), for example, reduced itsWindows 95 forecast by 3.6 million, from 30 million to26.4 million.  Dataquest now estimates that 16.4 millioncopies of Windows 95 will be in consumers' hands by theend of 1995 (the rest staying in the distributionchannel).The lower forecast "is an artifact of forecasting aproduct at a time when it was not yet in the market andwhen the final shipment date had not been set," saidDataquest principal analyst Paul Cubbage.Estimates were downgraded for a variety of reasons.  Oneis that many corporations have been particularly cautiousabout upgrading from Windows 3.1 to Windows 95.Companies are taking their time to make the decisionbecause moving to Windows 95 is expensive, both in termsof money and the time it takes to learn the new operatingsystem, said Chris Le Tocq, president of SoftracksSoftware Research (Los Altos, Calif.)."There have been two years of people trying to getWindows 3.1 to work, and it works pretty well.  A lot oforganizations are now smart enough not to upgrade justfor upgrade's sake," he said.  Although companies viewWindows 95 as more reliable than Windows 3.1, they haveto evaluate whether it is worth the pain they anticipateinstallation will cost them, he said.When corporations buy a PC today, they have the optionof ordering it with Windows 95, Windows 3.1, or both, LeTocq explained.  Many are opting for both, and to date,they are turning to Windows 3.1 because it is a knownquantity, he said.Consumers also are not buying Windows 95 in thequantities originally forecasted.  Cubbage attributedthis to the fact that consumers don't have as much tospend and are not as optimistic about the economy asanticipated.The slowdown in sales of Windows 95 is temporary, Cubbagesaid, because eventually, users will have no choice butto use the operating system.  Cubbage predicted thatsales will pick up by the second or third quarter of1996.It is irrelevant whether Windows 95 penetration is up toits aggressive predictions, because virtually every newversion of key application software products is beingwritten for Windows 95, and users aren't going to stopadvancing their software.  Eventually these applicationsalone are going to move users to Windows 95, said TomNolle, president of CIMI Corp. (Voorhees, N.J.).MEETING EXPECTATIONSAll in all, Windows 95 has met expectations."I think it is pretty much on target," Cubbage said.  "Itis an improvement and doesn't break nearly as much asWindows 3.1.  At least for me, it runs at about the samespeed as Windows 3.1."Windows 95's ability to work with different types ofhardware and to control the hardware is better thanWindows 3.1's, but not nearly as foolproof as Microsofthas claimed, Le Tocq said.  Despite the fact that it doesan outstanding job of detecting hardware and working withit, there are key hardware platforms that it doesn'tdetect, he said.There is always a laundry list of things to fix when anew piece of software enters the marketplace, and Windows95 is no exception.  "When you have something new, youdiscover maybe there are things you didn't spend as muchtime on as you would have wished," explained Le Tocq."Maybe you provided for 300 network cards, and it turnsout the remaining 50 are really important to people.That's pretty common."There is widespread belief that Microsoft is preparinga fix of Windows 95, which probably will hit themarketplace in the second quarter of 1996.But it wouldn't be prudent for Microsoft to spill thebeans about a fix during the lucrative holiday buyingseason, Nolle said, because the effect would be to cutMicrosoft's current sales of Windows 95.Le Tocq agreed.  "[The fix] probably will arrive withvery little fanfare so it won't disturb current sales.When you have such high public exposure, you don't wantto announce a fix.  I wouldn't be surprised to see themslip the fix into the boxes and keep shipping it, andthen tell people once there is enough of it in thechannel."STATISTICS ABOUT WINDOWS 9593% of those who have already purchased Windows 95 aresatisfied with it.91% agree that Windows 95 was worth the expense.90% said it was worth the time and effort it took toinstall it.88% said they would buy Windows 95 again.86% said they would recommend Windows 95 to a friend orcolleague.47% indicated they bought Windows 95 exclusively for homeuse.16% indicated they bought Windows 95 exclusively for workuse.37% indicated they bought Windows 95 for both home andwork use.26% said their main reason for buying it was to improveprevious platform/performance.25% said it was to keep up with technology.23% cited wanting the applications supported by Windows95 as the reason for buying it.13% said they bought Windows 95 because it was bundledwith the hardware.Source: Ziff-Davis Publishing Co.(KAREN D. SCHWARTZ)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON MICROSOFT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FOR MICROSOFT IN 1996, UBIQUITY IS KEYIf Microsoft is to continue its domination of most majorcomputer technology sectors in 1996 and beyond, it mustshore up areas in which it has been traditionally weakand continue along its path in areas in which itdominates.In 1996, Microsoft must enter any pockets of thetechnology market that it hasn't already conquered, saidTom Nolle, president of CIMI Corp. (Voorhees, N.J.)."Any place the market might go that Microsoft isn'talready in is a potential risk for them.  To some degree,Microsoft has to be everywhere," he said.  "A little leakis all it takes.  Its position in the marketplace willbe easier to defend if there is no area of major weaknessbecause if there is, that may be enough for any companyto break Microsoft's hold on the market."Microsoft should stick to what it knows best: commoditydesktop software, said Brian Jeffery, an analyst withInternational Technology Group (Mountain View, Calif.)."Microsoft seems to be doing fairly well on the desktop,but anything above the desktop isn't flying very well.For a few years, Microsoft suffered from the illusionthat it was something else, but it should stick with whatit knows best," he said.For example, Microsoft's foray into the world of theInternet may be misguided, Jeffery said.  Microsoft canbe divided into two businesses: the very stable andprofitable desktop software business, and a collectionof niche businesses, which, for Microsoft, is "sciencefiction," he said."There is a lot of talk about Microsoft dominating theInternet, but that is absolute rubbish," Jeffery said."It will never be a large percentage of their revenue.They should stick to their core successes."Although Internet-related business presents a lot ofpossibilities for Microsoft in 1996, "there is just asmuch of a possibility that it will cost a lot of moneyas there is that Microsoft will make a lot of money,"said William Zachmann, president of Canopus Research(Duxbury, Mass.).But Microsoft has the financial resources to trydifferent things in an effort to come up with the nextbig thing, Zachmann said.  "But they are fishing.  Ifyou look at Microsoft Network, it was supposed to be abig deal, and it is off to a limping start."To maintain its edge in 1996, Microsoft must focus onexpanding its positions of traditional strengths into thenetwork and collaborative applications arena, which havebeen areas of relative weakness for Microsoft, Nollesaid. "There are many things operating systems services canlogically be expected to do, and one is to provide thebasic tools for multisystem collaboration and to set adevelopmental standard that would be used to buildapplications like ATM to the desktop or videoconferencingapplications," he said.  In this area, Nolle explained,Microsoft hasn't established a lock on the developercommunity like it has in other areas.ABOVE THE LAW?Analysts generally agree that Microsoft's legal troublesare pretty much behind them, at least in 1996.  Microsoftis "walking a pretty well-defined path through theminefield, and unless they do something cocky and stupid,I think they are fairly safe," Nolle said.The Justice Department has not been unduly harsh withMicrosoft, but there may still be some rumblings in thehalls of Justice.  "I would tend to view any substantialintervention by the Justice Department as a wild cardrather than something I would confidently anticipate,"Zachmann said.But despite the fact that Microsoft's path to successlegally is fairly well-defined, it isn't impossible thatcompany officials may get myopic, so immersed in itsculture that they lose sight of how the company isperceived.  That could spell trouble for Microsoft by1997, Nolle predicted."Microsoft needs to think about the things that IBM andAT&T have faced: the question of a preemptive strike toreduce the legal pressure," Nolle said.  "AT&T and IBMboth came to the conclusion that they were better offaccepting a self-imposed change that diffused the legalactivity."1997 AND BEYONDBy the end of 1996, Microsoft will be more firmlyestablished in the applications area than ever becauseof IBM's acquisition of Lotus and Novell's divestitureof WordPerfect.  Those actions have basically demolishedcompetition for Microsoft in those key application areas,Nolle said.  "Microsoft is going to run rampant inapplications in 1996," he predicted.But Microsoft could experience a setback in marketleadership, industry dominance and market command eitherthis year or next, Zachmann warned.  "I've beenanticipating a setback for Microsoft for some time now,but it hasn't happened yet.  One of these quarters,Microsoft's earnings are going to fall, and that couldprecipitate the setback.  To continue on its growthtrack, Microsoft has to keep coming up with lots ofearnings gains, and that gets tougher and tougher to do."(KAREN D. SCHWARTZ)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON MICROSOFT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996MSNBC BRINGS MICROSOFT ONE STEP CLOSERTO TECHNOLOGY DOMINATIONLast month, Microsoft and NBC struck a deal to create anews service that will inform viewers across broadcast,cable and the Internet.  The revolutionary news service,dubbed MSNBC, is designed to take advantage of NBC'snewsgathering expertise and Microsoft's strength incomputer technology, both through its software and itsfledgling on-line service, Microsoft Network.As Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates said when the deal wasannounced, people want to be able to call up news ondemand at their convenience.  While watching breakingnews on television, consumers want to be able to getaccess to more in-depth information on items of interest.The deal with NBC will help create innovative interactivenews content and an integrated media experience, heexplained.The deal calls for Microsoft to invest $220 million overfive years for a 50 percent stake in the all-news cablestation.  Both Microsoft and NBC will invest $200 millionover five years to fund the cable channel and asupporting on-line service.Areas of special interest for Microsoft includeinteractive television and on-line computer services,both of which will be incorporated into the MSNBCventure.Gates apparently wanted to enter the news business verybadly: when a deal to acquire a large stake in TurnerBroadcasting Service went awry last August, Microsoft gotback in the saddle and spent the next several monthscontemplating and executing a plan to get what it wanted.With the MSNBC deal, it may have done just that.A BETTER PLANThe MSNBC venture is a much better way to go thanMicrosoft's previous idea, which was to form its own newsorganization, said Peter Krasilovsky, an analyst withArlen Communications Inc. (Bethesda, Md.).  Microsoft hadhired more than 20 reporters, who would form the genesisof what might have been Microsoft's unique newsorganization.But the current plan allows Microsoft to have a buffer."Not only does Microsoft get to provide state-of-the-artnews, but it also doesn't get taken to task as a newsagency, which might have been very difficult from acorporate point of view," Krasilovsky said.The MSNBC venture will have to prove that there is amarket for people who want to customize this type ofinformation, said Peter Bernstein, president ofInfoNautics Consulting Inc. (Ramsey, N.J.).  "I thinkthere is a small segment of the population that would beinterested in doing that, but the question is whetherthey will be willing to pay a stiff price for it," hesaid.  "Will the perceived value be there for the serviceto get the kind of penetration it will need to besuccessful?"At this point, it is difficult to envision that peoplewho are accustomed to getting information one way willchange their behavior so radically as to heavily use theservice MSNBC plans to provide, Bernstein said.  "ButMicrosoft and NBC have plenty of money, and if they wantto back it to the extent that it will probably need tobe backed to change people's behavior, they can do it.It's a question of marketing, and Microsoft has provenitself very good at marketing."By entering into this deal, Microsoft is covering allbases, trying to position itself as a premier contentprovider.  This agreement, along with Microsoft Networkand Microsoft's strong interest in interactivetelevision, is Microsoft's move into the real-timecontent business.  "They honestly believe that contentis going to be king in the future," and Microsoft wantsto own a large part of that empire, Bernstein said.Content is key, agreed Jim Penhune, an analyst with BISStrategic Decisions (Norwell, Mass.).  Microsoft has mademany alliances for content, including the defunct dealwith Turner Broadcasting and its relationship with SKGDreamworks.A STEPPING STONE TO INTERACTIVE TV?Some say that providing on-demand news is an interim steptoward gaining a foothold in the interactive televisionmarket.  Microsoft is hoping that MSNBC will be theinteractive TV vehicle for news information, somebelieve."You can't go wrong with content because all of it isfairly leveragable," Penhune explained.  "A year ago, oreven now, there is a lot of talk about [deals like this]giving Microsoft content for interactive TV.  But evenif it doesn't, it gives them content for all these othermedia as well, so it isn't like they are going to bestuck with something they can't use."Although projects like the MSNBC venture take plenty ofMicrosoft's energy and money, they will not distractMicrosoft from its core projects, Penhune said.  Thosecore projects are all targeted at the consumer market,"and if you accept the premise that they are consumer-and not business-oriented, then doing something like thisis not a distraction.  It is another way of addressingthe consumer market," he said.(KAREN D. SCHWARTZ)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON MICROSOFT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996NOTES 4 BEATS MICROSOFT EXCHANGE TO MARKETLotus Development Corp. (Cambridge, Mass.) hailed inNotes Release 4 along with the new year.  Many industryobservers said Lotus' timing is well-aimed to beat outits primary competition: Microsoft Exchange, scheduledfor general availability in February.  Other analystspointed out that Lotus' more more mature product, NotesRelease 4, already has a running start against MicrosoftExchange Version 1 Release 1.Notes 4 promises greater functionality and ease of useover Notes 3.  Calling it the convergence of messagingand groupware, Lotus outlined the benefits of its fourth-generation product:* Object store: Documents and objects can be stored,managed, and retrieved through links or direct usermanipulation.  The object store does not distinguishbetween messages and other objects.* Security: Additional security beyond password securityand digital signatures is rolled into Notes 4.  Furthersecurity is required to manage access to the objectstore, as well as to the individual objects and fieldswithin that database.* Mobile support: Notes 4 users will have access tomessages, as well as to objects that have been linked tothose messages.  Notes 4 supports database replicationdirectly to individual client laptops and remotedesktops.* Manageability: Manageability requirements are expandedto include replication.  The client/server architectureof the integrated messaging and groupware requires thatfourth generation systems provide robust tools for thecentralized management of servers, messages, and objectstores, as well as routers and server tasks.* Directories: Notes 4 extends the directory to encompassconfiguration, authentication/security, and customizedsite-specific information.* Transport and routing: These services are expanded totransport and route loosely structured documents thattypify fourth generation objects.  Also, Notes 4 hasnative support for X.400 and SMTP-MIME transports toensure interoperability with international inter-enterprise communication standards.  Message and documentrouting are dynamic, with routing paths that arealterable on the basis of message urgency to linkavailability.* Migration facilities: Notes 4 migration facilitiesallow system administrators and users to migrate at theirown pace and support coexistence among multiplegenerations of messaging systems.ABOUT FACE FOR INTERFACEAcross the board, analysts were most impressed with Notes4's new and improved interface.  Lotus completelyredesigned its interface, explained Mark Levitt, senioranalyst for electronic messaging for International DataCorp. (Framingham, Mass.).  "It connects cc:Mail to Notesthrough a shared interface," he said.  "As a mail-basedinterface, it makes it much easier for cc:Mail users touse Notes."The interface is the most important aspect of Notes 4,Levitt said.  "Notes has always had a great deal offunctionality that has gone unrecognized or unused bymost users," he said.  "Not all users need that amountof functionality, but the interface makes it simpler andeasier for cc:Mail users to move to Notes."Notes 4 goes several steps beyond what cc:Mail istoday," Levitt continued.  "That is not to say that Lotusis planning to get rid of cc:Mail, but they're making themigration path to Notes easier."Vince Carahaly, president of NetExperts Inc. (Exton,Penn.) and beta customer of Notes 4 on Windows NT for amonth and a half, agreed that the interface was a keyimprovement in Notes 4."The biggest complaint about Notes 3 was that the e-mailinterface wasn't very good -- even though this was thecompany with the award-winning cc:Mail product," Carahalysaid.  "With Notes 4, Lotus gave the e-mail interface thelook and feel of cc:Mail."Apart from the new interface, Notes 4 improved itsdatabase replication.  Notes 4 supports field-levelreplication, while Notes 3 only supported document-levelor record-level replication, Carahaly explained.For example, a Notes user can have a personnel file withall the information on an employee and perhaps a bitmapwith a photo ID of the person.  With record-levelreplication, if one part of that file changes -- forinstance, the employee's phone number -- the Notes usermust replicate the whole thing.  At field level, the usercan get in and change the phone number.  "It's much moregranular," he said.  "It's more efficient, faster, andthere's less data to ship over."RELEASE 4 VERSUS RELEASE 1Even without the one month head start over Microsoft,Lotus is still in a better position with Notes 4 thanMicrosoft is with Microsoft Exchange, Carahaly said."Notes is an established product.  It's a maturegeneration of product -- that's their head start rightoff the bat," he said.In addition, Notes 4 is a more robust environment thanMicrosoft Exchange, Carahaly said.  "Microsoft Exchangeis not workflow -- it's just client/server mail," hesaid.  "Notes is a workflow product with client/servermail.""Shops that have Notes probably won't switch to MicrosoftExchange," Carahaly said.  "Many companies are waitingto see how good Notes 4 actually is.  Once it gets intothe market and people find that it has no problems, doeswhat it says it does, the improvements are there andfunctioning -- it will be a hit."Another analyst agreed that Notes 4 is a largeimprovement over Notes 3.  "Notes 4 is a great leapforward," said Tom Austin, research director with theGartner Group (Stamford, Conn.).  "Notes 4 put in placea real integrated development environment."Austin also praised the new mail interface.  "Notes 4 hasbrought management of communications to the point wheremere mortals can do it," he said.  In addition, Notes 4has improvements in scalability.  "With Notes 4, a servercan support five to ten times more people versus Notes3," he said.  "This greatly reduces the cost ofmanagement."JAVA JOCKEYINGNotes 4 contains the programming language Lotus Script."Lotus Script obsoletes Notes macros," Austin said.Despite the recent announcements that both IBM andMicrosoft will support Java and Java Script, Austin saidneither company will abandon their own script languages."Java Script won't rule the world," he said.  "But bothIBM and Lotus will support Java."Although Austin said he was very impressed with Notes 4,he said the release should have been on the market oneand a half years ago.  "Lotus does not have a trackrecord for accelerated development," he said.  "Notes 4came three years after Notes 3.  If it takes Lotus threemore years to come out with Notes 5, it will be lookingat the pack from the back."(RACHEL BROWN)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON MICROSOFT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996MICROSOFT BACKS IEEE MULTIMEDIA CONNECTION/CONTROLSTANDARDMicrosoft last week threw its support behind the IEEE1394 serial bus interface standard, indicating that itwould be adhered to in future releases of the company'svarious Windows operating systems.The standard enables high-performance multimediaconnections and control of business and consumerelectronic devices.  It offers high-speed communicationsand fully supports isochronous real-time data services.It also supports Plug and Play, allowing "hot plugging"of up to 63 external peripherals for convenient systemreconfiguration by the user.  It allows peer-to-peerdevice communication, such as communication between ascanner and a printer, to take place without consumingsystem memory and CPU resources.For multimedia applications, the IEEE interface enablesreal-time digital data transfer for audio and videocapture, editing and playback, as well as for distributedmultimedia applications such as desktop conferencing.For example, users can easily transfer images from acamcorder to a PC.  These images can be edited andreplayed on the PC or TV screen while userssimultaneously print color pictures.  For traditionaldata storage, IEEE 1394 is faster and less expensive thancomparable SCSI interfaces, supporting data transferrates of 400 megabits per second and increasing in speedin the future.Microsoft also revealed that it has signed a letter ofintent with Sony Electronics Inc. to develop open devicedriver interfaces (DDIs), APIs and an open hostcontroller interface for IEEE 1394.Another letter of intent with Compaq Computer Corp. istargeted at accelerating adoption of the IEEE 1394high-speed serial interface as a standard in the PCindustry.  This includes defining an open host controllerinterface specification.  Both efforts will be undertakenin cooperation with the 1394 Trade Association."The IEEE 1394 interface is an enabling technology forexpanding PC connectivity to a greater range of devicesand to new classes of peripherals, such as consumerentertainment appliances," said Brad Silverberg, seniorvice president of the personal systems division atMicrosoft, in a prepared statement.  "IEEE 1394 enablesPCs to play a central role in consumer entertainmentsystems.  We are pleased to be working with the leadingcompanies in the consumer electronics industry to developthe IEEE 1394 serial bus interface standard."Microsoft, a member of the 1394 Trade Association, isplaying a leading role in developing and promoting anopen IEEE 1394 serial bus interface specification.Microsoft hosted the IEEE 1394 meeting in July and willbe hosting a 1394 driver architecture design preview inMarch 1996.SUPPORT FOR IEEE 1394Various hardware manufacturers have pledged support forthe 1394 specification, including Cirrus Logic, ConnerPeripherals, Digital Equipment Corp., Western Digital,Texas Instruments and Adaptec.Adaptec Inc., a provider of input/output solutions, plansto supply high-speed 1394 solutions that will allow PCapplications to "speak" to home electronics devices suchas camcorders and set-top boxes and make applicationssuch as desktop video editing a reality.  Among themarkets and applications for 1394, according to Adaptec,are digital video, home electronics, near-term computerapplications such as desktop video editing, andconvergence of PCs and home electronics.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE REPORT ON MICROSOFT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996IDC: MICROSOFT WILL DO WELL IN '96 --BUT DARK CLOUDS HOVER OVER THE HORIZONDISAPPOINTMENT, RETRENCHMENT FORECAST FOR '96 ELECTRONICMarketplace: Microsoft will have a great year in 1996,but its hold will be challenged by the Internet-based"Revenge of the (Unix) Nerds," according to marketresearcher IDC.In the overall electronic marketplace, 1996 will be ayear of disappointment as investors and corporationssuffer through the discouragingly slow development of asignificant consumer base, IDC predicts.MICROSOFT'S LOOSENED GRIPOne effect of the Internet phenomenon of 1995, IDC said,has been that many on Wall Street and within the ITindustry now are forecasting the undoing of Microsoft'shold on the industry, and hailing the rise of Netscapeand Sun Microsystems as the new industry leaders."While IDC recognizes the potential of the Internet worldto weaken several of Microsoft's key levers on theindustry, such as OLE and Visual Basic, there will berelatively little revenue effect from this in 1996," IDCresearcher Frank Gens said.  "We also believe in spiteof the recurring rumors of Department of Justiceinvestigations, Microsoft will escape any major antitrustactivity in 1996, an election year.  Additionally,Microsoft will conclude that its ventures into newbusinesses will have a greater chance of success withoutthe Microsoft brand."GLOOM AND DOOMBy this time next year, IDC predicts 20 percent of theFortune 500 companies that have commercial Web sites willclose or stop maintaining them, resulting in ghost sites.The leading online information service providers (e.g.,Compuserve, America Online, Microsoft Network, Prodigy)will derive more than one-half of their revenue fromproviding access to the Web by mid-1997.  IDC predictsthat two of the four will struggle to survive."In 1996 we predict that the Internet/World Wide Webphenomenon will shift from today's `intoxication' stageto a `hangover' stage," said Frank Gens, senior vicepresident of research at IDC, the world's leadingprovider of information technology (IT) data, analysisand counseling.  "The high-flying Internet suppliers willhave disappointing financial results, while technicalcapabilities of the Internet are stretched to thebreaking point."Though we predict the overall growth in onlinesubscribers will continue to be very strong, we expect1996 will show a high turnover rate as users underwhelmedby the content on the Web cancel their onlinesubscription services and turn on their TVs," Gens said."Still, 1996 will be a strategic investment year forbusinesses that expect to compete in the growingelectronic marketplace, because during the next fiveyears, the number of `wired' (i.e., online) users willrise to more than 200 million, and by 2010, it willexceed 1 billion."Gens also predicts IT industry revenues will jump from$500 billion to more than $2.5 trillion by 2010, andcorporate spending on IT will rise from 2 - 2.5 percentof revenues to more than 5 percent. In addition, IDCbelieves online commerce volume will hit $150 billion ormore by the year 2000 and more than $1 trillion by 2010."Some financial service companies, retailers andpublishers will bail out in the initial hangover period,"Gens said.  "In the process, they will cripple theirbusinesses' ability to compete in the growing `virtualeconomy.' In contrast, leaders in the emerging electronicmarketplace will significantly increase theirinvestments. In the process, the seeds will be sown forthe creation of new leadership and the downfall of somecurrent giants in many industries."  Internet AppliancesBy this time next year, IDC predicts that manufacturersof Internet Appliances -- low-cost devices that allow theuser to access online information -- will ultimatelyslash prices in half by year's end."Internet Appliances will arrive in 1996, but thesuccessful ones won't be priced at $500," Gens said.They will come out of the gates at $100 to $300.  Thegame console crowd is already slicing away at the pricingfor simple Web surfing devices.  Within two years,Internet Appliances will emerge as giveaways (less than$100 to free) by businesses that want customers to accesstheir online services."Price competition in data to the home will becomebrutal," Gens said.  IDC predicts that high-performanceInternet access will be delivered to the home for aslittle as $15 to 20 per month in 1996, down from $25 to$70.  Pricing will drop to $10 to 15 per month within thenext two years, partially because cable companies (withthe help of affordable cable modems) will play theInternet card as their first foray in thetelecommunications business.  Telephone companies willrespond with more aggressive pricing.HOME PC MARKETAccording to IDC, in 1996 and 1997, suppliers willaggressively explore new home PC designs to drive downprices of multimedia devices to $800 to $1,000 (and less)in an effort to penetrate broader segments of theincreasingly important consumer market.  It will beparamount for PC vendors to become better acquainted withthe mainstream consumer electronics market and mentality,and learn a whole new meaning of "price-competitive."Without doubt, the winners in the PC business in thecoming decade will be those that crack the mass-marketbarrier.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-20IA059-000323-B027-227http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec90.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224345 text/html 24779HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:42:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:12 GMTContent-length: 24592Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec90.html Sample Issue Copyright SECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet May 18, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FRONT PAGE NEWS INTRODUCTION (91 words) DISASTER RECOVERY FOR INFORMATION: IS YOUR BUSINESS PREPARED? (621 words) STUDY - NO DETECTION TECHNOLOGY EXISTS FOR EXPLOSIVES (846 words) SPECIAL REPORT U.S. RANKS LOW IN TERRORIST INCIDENTS (797 words) BRIEFS VIKONICS (75 words) CHECKPOINT SYSTEMS (109 words) CALENDAR OF EVENTS (376 words) BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES VIDEOS OFFER TIPS ON INFORMATION SECURITY & DISASTER RECOVERY (292 words) CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993INTRODUCTION      Welcome to the second issue of SECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS--thenewest member of the Phillips Business Information family ofnewsletters. Every other week, STN will bring you news and in-depth analysis on new technologies, applications, regulations andnew players competing to sell access and information securitysolutions to corporate America and the defense industry.      SECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS will be your most timely source ofactionable information on the dynamic security technologymarketplace. We welcome your comments, so please feel free tocall Candace Sams at 301/340-1520, ext. 285.Back to Headline List CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993DISASTER RECOVERY FOR INFORMATION: IS YOUR BUSINESS PREPARED?      Recent bombings at New York's World Trade Center and inLondon's financial district indicated the vulnerability of anybusiness' information technology. SECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS haslearned an evaluation of security operations at the World TradeCenter--including the security of technology applications--hasbeen underway for the past six weeks.  Results of the evaluationcould be available by July 1, John Horn of Kroll Associates ofNew York told us.  Kroll is conducting the security analysis byrequest of the building owners, the Port Authority of New Jerseyand New York.      Disaster contingency planning and recovery of informationtechnology is one area a number of businesses have littleexpertise, security experts say, and some businesses need tosmarten up.      "Businesses need to recognize how quickly the informationtechnology environment is changing and the implications this hasfor security and recovery," Keith Hearnden, said, who spearheadeda recent study on the business perils of computer failure.Hearnden, a lecturer on security management at the LoughboroughUniversity in London, collaborated on the study with IBM and theComputing Services Association to survey more than 3,000businesses on disaster recovery plans for computer failure.      The study, which was recently published by IBM's BusinessRecovery Services, showed 13 percent of businesses waited 13-24months before testing their contingency plans; 24 percent waited7-12 months; and 30 percent waited four to six months beforetesting plans.  The study also showed 31 percent had tested theirplans within three months.      "It is imperative to ensure that the whole business can berecovered rather than use central computing facilities.  Ifcustomers and reputation are irreparably damaged, what is the useof a fully operational information technology system," he said.      "This means radically rethinking the approach to disasterrecovery.  It means identifying and accepting the level ofdependency of a business on information technology.  It meanstackling the issue head on and being prepared to use practiceswhich are capable of incorporating and responding to the verylatest developments in business developments.      "Lest there remain any doubt about the importance ofprotecting a business' information technology, consider the factthat information technology's share of the overall capital stockof U.S. corporations has jumped to 25 percent in key areas suchas communications, finance, business services, healthcare andeducation,"  Hearnden said.      "Contingency plans are usually prepared by IT [informationtechnology] staff and IT staffs are traditionally oriented towardmainframes, Carole Allen of IBM's Business Recovery Servicessaid.  IBM and others recommend that firms carry out businessimpact analyses as part of contingency planning so that theyunderstand thoroughly the impact and cost of the loss ofapplications and then set recovery priorities. "A recovery planis only effective if it provides for all risk areas, is regularlytested and takes account of the forces of change and adaptsaccordingly," Allen said.      Nearly 36 percent of employees were uprooted and many had towork from home after the blast; 16 percent worked in offices ontemporary leases and 7 percent of the work was moved abroad,according to a report by Contingency Planning Research inJericho, N.Y.      Chi/Cor Information Management, a Chicago-based companycontacted by STN, provides software for companies to buy to setup emergency response plans.  The software provides guidelines ofa comprehensive disaster recovery plan to include: projectorganization; business impact analysis, security review, strategydevelopment, vital records backup and recovery, disaster recoveryplan development, and testing and maintenance. All of theseitems have to be updated as the business grows and technologychanges.  "You have to protect equipment and people as well asprotect the longevity of your business by creating a recoveryplan," Heidi Ewell, marketing manager for Chi/Cor said.Back to Headline List CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993STUDY - NO DETECTION TECHNOLOGY EXISTS FOR EXPLOSIVES      An advisory board for the National Research Council recentlyconcluded that there is no single detection technology "that can,by itself, provide a high probability of detection coupled with alow false alarm rate that will reduce the threat of terrorism atan acceptable cost to airport operations."      The board recommended further examination of technologiesfunded by the FAA for research and development and expects theprivate industry will commercialize the results.      The 85-page study, called, "Detection of Explosives forCommercial Aviation Security," was submitted by the NationalMaterials Advisory Board to the Commission on Engineering andTechnical Systems with the National Research Council.  The boardconducted the study under contract with the Federal AviationAdministration and asked the FAA to define the regulatorystrategy to be used for explosive detection devices andencouraged the agency to encourage industry participation in therulemaking process.Technology Developments      The technologies under development have a high, medium orlow priority tagged onto them.  The high priority technologiescould be deployed within the next several years and they include:      Thermal Neutron Activation (TNA)--low energy neutronscaptured by nitrogen atoms; provides detection capability againstlarger quantities of highly energetic explosives with a highnitrogen content.      Dual Energy X-ray--alternating X-ray beams of high and lowenergy levels producing two different images due to differencesbetween the photoelectric and Compton attenuation coefficients ofthe different elements.  Looks for average atomic number, but nota specific number.      Extremely Low Dose X-ray--Produces images at a lower x-raylevel.      Coherent X-ray Scattering--an X-ray diffraction that dependson the crystal structure of the explosive.      Dual Energy X-ray Computed Tomography--A computed tomographyimage used as a map of the X-ray attenuation.      Vapor/Particle Detection Devices--uses low vapor pressure ofplastic explosives. Technologies on a medium or low priorityinclude:  elastic neutron scattering; pulsed fast neutronactivation; photon activation; nuclear resonant absorption; fastneutron associated particle and backscatter analysis X-ray.The Future of Aviation Security Technology      The future of aviation security technology was revealed in arecent speech given by a scientific advisor of Civil AviationSecurity for the Federal Aviation Administration.  Dr. Lyle O.Malotky told the aviation audience "changes in securitytechnology are both evolutionary--that it is an improvement tosomething we are already doing, and revolutionary--a dramaticdeparture from existing procedures and thinking."      Malotky gave short-term and long-term solutions to improvethe quality of the aviation security system worldwide.      Today, he said, a way to improve aviation security is tomeet the challenge of searching common consumer electronics forhidden explosives. Commercially available explosive vapordetection systems provide an increased level of protection whenscreening electronics, he said. The complexity of assembly andthe vents accessing the interior of the electronics make themattractive for this technology.      Also, implement enhanced X-ray systems capable ofidentifying the presence of organic materials mixed withinorganic camouflage work well for the examination ofelectronics. Unlike a traveler's suitcase, electronics containvery little organic material, so the explosive stands out in thebackground.A Look to the Future of Aviation Security      The future of aviation security is "transparent screening."Without the knowledge or cooperation of passengers, their baggagewill automatically be searched for the tools of terrorism--weapons and explosives.  Malotky said the magnitude of theaviation industry--the 500 million people and one billion piecesof luggage that fly every year in the United States--requireairlines to conduct these security functions automatically.      Changes will be made in the aircraft cargo container design,Malotky predicted.  Part of the challenge of explosive detectionis the small size of the explosive charge that may bring down acommercial airliner.      By changing the design of baggage containers and using highstrength composite materials, it will increase the blastresistance of the aircraft while reducing the repair andreplacement cost of the baggage containers.      Also, probing radiation will be routinely used to detectexplosives concealed in baggage in the next five to 10 years.  Avariety of approaches have been used and progress made in thisarea. Typical of the anomaly detection approaches are variousdual energy X-ray, X-ray backscatter, X-ray tomography, magneticresonance, dielectric measurements, and thermal neutron systems.More specific signatures detected by technologies like nuclearquadruple resonance, X-ray diffraction, or fast neutron scattercan improve false alarm rates. Malotky expects a final rule onthe type, quantity and reliability of an automated explosivedetection system will be published in the summer and systems willundergo testing against the standards in late 1993.      There must be cooperation between the air carrier, airportsand the FAA to implement future security aviation technology.The air carriers and airports will implement these changes whilethe FAA funds the aviation security research and requires thetechnological innovations.      "Something needs to be done today to implement thetechnologies we have now even though they are not the ultimatesolution," he said. "Failure to put in place the best securitytechnology we have leaves the entire system vulnerable toattack."  (National Academy Press, 800/624-6242.)Back to Headline List CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993U.S. RANKS LOW IN TERRORIST INCIDENTS      The State Department sent a clear message to members ofCongress in a recent report that while the United States held thelowest number of reported international terrorist incidents,state-sponsored terrorism should still be a concern for allgovernments.      "Despite progress and successes, the threat of terrorism,particularly state-sponsored terrorism, is still serious,"Laurence E. Pope, acting coordinator for counterterrorism, saidin the introduction of the annual report. In the coming decade,"we will certainly face serious challenges from terrorism growingout of ethnic, religious tensions around the world.  Our responsemust be to maintain our vigilance, increase our capabilities andfurther develop cooperation."      The report, "Patterns of Global Terrorism: 1992" praised theUnited States, its allies and the U.N. Security Council for itsdiligence in increased awareness, vigorous counterterrorismtraining and tougher attitudes toward terrorism.  The reporthighlighted the Security Council's example of its toughstance against terrorism in Libya's  bombing of two civilianaircraft.Security Council Toughens on Terrorism      The report highlighted the example of the United Nations'condemnation of Libyan terrorism and the imposition of sanctionsagainst that country to indicate the most significant change inattitude. The U.N. Security Council voted for mandatorysanctions against Libya for refusing to comply with terms.  Thesanctions included an arms and air embargo, a demand that LibyanArab Airlines offices be closed and a requirement that all statesreduce Libya's diplomatic presence abroad.  The U.N. SecurityCouncil reviews the Libyan case every 120 days.      "The United States, its allies and the U.N. Security Councilrecognized the need to make governments pay who support, tolerateand engage in international terrorism," Pope said.  The UnitedStates currently lists Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea andSyria as state sponsors of terrorism.  This list is maintained inaccordance with an export administration act that imposes tradeand other restrictions on countries determined by the Secretaryof State that supports acts of international terrorism.  The listis sent to Congress and countries can be added or deleted ascircumstances demand.Three Aspects to the Decline in Terrorism      In a list of reasons for the decline in terrorism, the StateDepartment cited these three aspects: end state-sponsoredterrorism; strengthen the rule of law; and refuse to rewardterrorists by making concessions.      End state-sponsored terrorism.  State sponsorship refers togovernments that support, tolerate and engage in internationalterrorism.  The United States, its allies and the United NationsSecurity Council have recognized the need to make thosegovernments pay a significant price for sponsoring terrorism.      Strengthen the rule of law.  The State Department said itimproved the judicial and law enforcement capabilities of othernations that could be victims of terrorist acts. The StateDepartment has conducted training through its antiterrorismtraining assistance program, and said it has improved the abilityof governments to pre-empt, to investigate and to prosecuteterrorists. In 1992, more than 1,125 senior officials from 25countries received the training which totaled the number ofpeople trained to 14,000 from 75 countries. Refuse to rewardterrorists through concessions.  Third, by not makingconcessions, the State Department obtained the release of thelast American hostages in Lebanon in late 1991, and Germany sawtwo German relief workers freed in June 1992.  The abductors haddemanded the release of convicted Hizballah terrorists, but theGerman government refused to meet this demand.Report Distributed as Reference Guide      The report, has been distributed to the Senate foreignrelations committee, House foreign affairs committee, the SenateJudiciary Committee, and various other congressional committeesas a reference document, Mike Kraft, spokesman from the StateDepartment's office of counterterrorism, said.      Last year, 361 international terrorist attacks were reportedagainst the United States; much lower than the 1991 figure of567.  The State Department attributed the inflated 1991 figure toa number of incidents during the Gulf War. The report alsoindicated that in 1992, 40 percent of the incidents were directedat U.S. citizens and property. Assessments of foreign countrieswhere significant terrorist acts occurred were included as wellas the previous year's activities of individuals, terroristgroups or umbrella groups known to be responsible for thekidnapping or death of any American citizen during the past fiveyears.      An overview is given of other international terroristincidents in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the MiddleEast.  The report also talked about specific incidents in Angola,Sudan, Afghanistan, India, Japan, Pakistan, Philippines, SriLanka, Thailand, Germany, Greece, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom,the former Yugoslavia, the former Soviet Union, Argentina,Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Panama, Peru, Algeria, Egypt, Israel,Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, and Yemen.  Thehighest number of incidents were in Latin America, Western Europeand the Middle East. (State Department, 202/647-6575.)Back to Headline List CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993VIKONICS      Vikonics Inc., a manufacturer of computer-based securitysystems recently introduced TAC -200, an integrated accesscontrol and intrusion detection security system.  TAC-200incorporates software technology at less than $5,000.  Vikonicsalso announced the expansion of its Vikonics Integrated SecurityIntrusion Detection System (VISIDS) line for larger commercialand government customers. The VISIDS 3500 integrates CCTV controland floor plans into the VISIDS UNIX-based integrated securitysystem. (Vikonics, John Strong, 201/641-8077.)Back to Headline List CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993CHECKPOINT SYSTEMS      Checkpoint Systems, Inc., a Thorofare, N.J.-basedmanufacturer of microprocessor and radio frequency-based securitysystems purchased the entire share of capital and subordinateddebt of ID Systems International B.V. and ID Systems Europe B.V.The two Dutch companies manufacture, distribute and sell securityproducts and services, in return for interim financing for thecompanies.  "Checkpoint felt it was important to havedistribution in Europe," Steve Selfridge, chief financialofficer, told SECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS.  Completion of the dealwill be in one to two months.  The ID Systems group'sconsolidated sales totaled $20 million in FY 1992.  (CheckpointSystems, Kevin Dowd, 800/257-5540, ext. 2407.)Back to Headline List CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993CALENDAR OF EVENTS      As a value-added feature for readers of SECURITY TECHNOLOGYNEWS, the following calendar of events provides a sampling oftraining available on information security.JUNE Physical Security Technology & Applications Conference, June 7-9and Facility Security Design Workshop, June 9-11.  Both in St.Louis, Mo.  Call American Society for Industrial Security,703/522-5800. Computer Security Awareness Training, June 11 (#510-07),Atlanta, Ga.  For federal, state, local government employees andgovernment contractors who manage, use or operate all mainframecomputer systems.  Improve computer security practices, withdiscussion on how to prevent, detect and report computer fraud,waste and abuse.  Call General Services Administration (GSA)Interagency Training Center, 703/557-0986.  Computer Security, June 14-18 (#500-06), Atlanta, Ga.  Forfederal, state, local government employees and governmentcontractors who manage, use or operate all mainframe computersystems. Identify threats, vulnerabilities, assets, andcountermeasures for information systems; conduct physicalsecurity surveys troubleshoot computer security problems, etc.Call GSA, 703/557-0986.  LAN Disaster Recovery, June 28-29, Chicago, Ill.  Call MISTraining Institute, 508/879-7999.JULY  Risk Assessment/Contingency Planning, July 12-16, Chicago, Ill.Develop effective emergency plans, programs, policies andprocedures; identify key security priorities, ways to conductrisk assessment and threat ID surveys. Scenario-based exercisesand knowledge of own agency's security requirements guidestudents in hands-on planning seminar.  Call GSA, 703/557-0986.  Security Systems Technology, July 13-15 (#570-3), New York,N.Y.  Current aspects of security technology and types ofelectronic and mechanical security devices, including devices foraccess control, space protection, sensors, security televisionand lighting.  Available intrusion detection security systems areexplained.  Call GSA, 703/557-0986.AUGUST Information Security Managers Symposium, Aug. 9-11, Hilton Head,S.C.  Call MIS Training Institute, 508/879-7999. Physical Security*, Aug. 9-13 (#530-10), Atlanta, Ga.Comprehensive systems approach to crime prevention and physicalsecurity.  Call GSA, 703/557-0986.  Voice and Data Security, Aug. 21-Sept. 3, Atlanta, Ga.  Historyof secret communication and public key cryptosystems to theapplication cryptology in voice and network security.  CallGeorgia Institute of Technology, 404/894-2547.  Documentation showing completion of course may be submitted tothe American Society for Industrial Security (ASIS) towardmeeting Certified Protection Professional (CPP) requirements.Back to Headline List CopyrightSECURITY TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetMay 18, 1993VIDEOS OFFER TIPS ON INFORMATION SECURITY & DISASTER RECOVERY      Boston-based Commonwealth Films offers videos to teachcorporations about information security and disaster recovery."As society continues to access people using high technology, thedatabase of a company will be its most valuable asset, ChristineSullivan, president of Hawthorne Associates, told SECURITYTECHNOLOGY NEWS.  Hawthorn Associates represents CommonwealthFilms.  Commonwealth's videos teach corporations how to safeguardcompany information.  "If safeguards are not taken, a company isvulnerable to disaster," Sullivan said, "and [a person's] jobcould be on the line if nothing is done about respecting acompany's security."      The videos teach every level of employee to respect acompany's computer and the company's proprietary information.The videos, which cost $525 each, include:     Back in Business: Disaster Recovery     Mum's the Word: PC/LAN Security     Under Wraps: Information Security     Locking the Door: Computer Security     Access Denied: Computer Crime (available at end of June)Disasters Can Ruin a Business      "The horrible statistic is that 72 percent of all businesseshit by disaster, however defined, either fail outright or withinthree years.      "There's a need for videos that teach company planning forhow you're going to handle a disaster, not as a bureaucratichurdle but as the survival of your business,"  Sullivan toldKathleen Silvassy, Editor of VIDEO MARKETING NEWS, our sisternewsletter.      "A growing concern among companies is that we're in theinformation technology age as manufacturing declines, and yourvalue is the information you hold.      "If your computers can be wrecked, you become veryprotective of your property.  It doesn't just have to be acomputer virus.  It can be a hurricane or someone coming in andblowing up your machines.  Look at the World Trade Center."(Commonwealth Films, 223 Commonwealth Ave., Boston, Mass. 02116;617-262-5634; fax 617-262-6948).Back to Headline List WT03-B33-21IA059-000323-B028-14http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec35.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224618 text/html 109172HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:42:38 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:49 GMTContent-length: 108984Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec35.html Sample Issue Copyright SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNet January 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BUSINESS MICROSCOPE The Goldilocks Economy (732 words) PUBLIC COMPANY SPOTLIGHT Microchip Technology (OTC: MCHP) (275 words) Xilinx (OTC: XLNX) (281 words) HIGH TECH EQUITIES: What's Hot, What's Not Rumor or Truth? Sun Microsystems' Hot-and-Cold Talks with Apple May Bear Fruit at $33 Per Share (546 words) Oracle's Odyssey CEO Ellison Treks to Asia to Sell 'Magic Box' (148 words) Semiconductors Collapse As Some Profits Fall Short (35 words) Zoran Zoran Finds IPO Window (59 words) FINANCE: NEWS, FUNDING & AQUISITIONS What's Up Down Under? Quality Semiconductor Buys Wafer Foundry and Design Center from Australian Firm (299 words) ICS Angling For Spinoff Of Turtle Beach Systems (99 words) Oak Eyes Pixel Magic; Intel's Piece of Phoenix (55 words) Apple Backs IC Startup Exponential Technology (221 words) APT's Management Buys Out Sunstrand (33 words) COMPANY PROFILE: Wireless Logic, Inc. Answering the Spread Spectrum Call (2090 words) COMPANY REVIEW: SICAN Gmbh Background and Overview (1239 words) INSIDE CHIPS: THE INDUSTRY GRAPEVINE Late News Breaks Snubbing Oregon, Samsung Picks Austin for $1.3B Fab; National Buys SiTel Sierra (277 words) Taiwan's Wish List R.O.C. Seeks Submicron Processes; BiCMOS; GaAs; Low-Cost VLSI; Packaging (139 words) Unfortunate Punch Fortune Knocks Forbes The Man and Magazine (302 words) Alleged Tech Thief Could Pay With 35 Years, $1.75M (90 words) Legal Flash Points Atmel Files Against SST; SanDisk Takes on Samsung (85 words) Image Building Atmel Takes Long-Term View Plants Redwood Tree at New French Fab (167 words) TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCES AMD, Intel Bury Legal Hatchet; Sign Patent Cross-License Accord (123 words) Toshiba, Winbond Join Up to Make Memories (205 words) TI Links with 2 Firms For New PC Solutions (274 words) Conner Peripherals and QLogic Redefining SCSI (132 words) NEW PLANTS & EXPANSIONS Alpha-TI Venture TI Partners with Head of Alphatec to Build $1.2B DRAM Plant in Thailand (161 words) Chips Forges Foundry Accord with Samsung (38 words) Cirrus Ups Ante At Digital Facility (46 words) Sharp, Sanyo Rev Flash; Hitachi Goes Malaysian (121 words) Atmel Begins to Build $500M French Wafer Fab (164 words) Hot Off the Press! Global Semiconductor Fab Directory Is a Gold Mine of Sales Leads (180 words) THE FAST TRACK: PEOPLE & ORGANIZATIONS New Year Rocks With Corporate Shakeups at Micron, OPTi, and Weitek (433 words) Xilinx and Unitrode Ease in New Leaders (111 words) Late Breaking News Cyrix Snags Intel Exec For VP of Marketing (68 words) Intel Names Two Corporate Officers; Promotes 10 to VP (110 words) Micro Linear Does A Management Shuffle (33 words) ASIC DEVELOPMENTS GateField Now Shipping First FPGA to Beta Site (173 words) Crosspoint Readies, Aims CrossFire FPGAs (257 words) Altera Adds Member To FLASHlogic Family (139 words) QuickLogic Touts `First' FPGAs for Verilog, VHDL (228 words) NEW PRODUCT REVIEW: ICs `Fastest' DRAM Slashes Costs of Graphics Cards (249 words) Synchronous Graphics RAM is 8-Meg & 3.3V (176 words) Cypress Raises Speeds, Densities of EPROMs (178 words) IDT R5000 MPU Enables 3D and Internetworking (219 words) New Zilog DSP Core Lowers System Costs (167 words) Rockwell's MediaLink Fosters Interactive PCs (176 words) Level One Releases Ethernet Chip Trio (310 words) NEW PRODUCT REVIEW: DISCRETES IR Says New HEXFETs Set Performance Marks (246 words) Fast Harris IGBTs Win Voltage Competition (326 words) Motorola Adds Two RF Triple Video Drivers (200 words) MARKET RESEARCH NEWS The Japanese ASIC Market (72 words) DRAM/SRAM Market Opportunities & Trends (107 words) ROM Memory Market Opportunities & Trends (120 words) Power MOSFET Market Opportunities (91 words) Wafer Fab/Clean Room Market Study (142 words) SGS Thomson Microelectronics Strategic Company Profile (80 words) IC-Stats: Forecasts, Analysis & Trends (63 words) Discrete-Stats: Forecasts, Analysis & Trends (57 words) Flash EPROM Memory Market & Trends (79 words) CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996The Goldilocks Economy The 1996 brand of U.S. economic porridge should be just like inthe Goldilocks & The Three Bears folk tale -- "not too hot, nottoo cold, but just right." Which means an American recipe thatcalls for slower growth, lower interest rates, and virtually zeroinflation. Signaling a protracted slowdown at the end of 1995, therecently released "Leading Economic Indicators" fell by 0.3% inNovember, after dropping 0.5% last October, and 0.1% lastSeptember. Some economists forecast (but not with much certainty)a U.S. recession in the second half of 1996. We don't think thatwill happen, especially with a President who is up for reelectionthis Fall.  Scariest part of the Goldilocks Economy: What the Three Bears willdo. No, not Wall Street bears. It's that threesome of stubbornpolitical animals in Washington -- Groaning Dole, GrowlingGingrich, and Clawing Clinton. The budget mess sure doesn'tinstill confidence in business circles, especially since a deal tocut the deficit could quickly spur lower interest rates. But, didyou notice during the Government shutdown how smoothly America wasrunning without the Feds on the job? Maybe those bears should justhibernate this Winter. Yep. Just sleep it off.  Less Kicks in '96 After growing a bounteous 40% in 1995, semiconductor industrysales this year may post only half that growth rate, around 20% to22%. And by 1997, that growth could be halved again, or about 10%to 12%. However, the rate of capital spending on chip productionequipment will outstrip the sales of ICs during the next 24 monthsas chipmakers scramble to catch up with robust demand. Onememory/logic IC exec indicated to us that putting up fabs fastenough wasn't the issue, rather waiting to receive steppers fromits vendor was the hangup.  Confirming that growth is moderating, the industry's book-to-billratio slipped in December 1995 to 1.09 from 1.10 in November andbelow expectations of 1.11. Industry orders, however, continued torise on a year-to-year comparative basis. The SIA, which managesthe b:b data, sees North American semiconductor sales rising 29.6%this year, about 10% above our projection.  Crushed Chip Stocks ... They say that all good things must come toan end. Like the ballyhooed marriage of rock legend ElvisPresley's daughter, Lisa Marie, who filed for divorce from popking Michael Jackson after only 20 months of matrimony. Anotherhoneymoon that's over, at least for now: Investors andsemiconductor stocks. After starting to peak late last Summer,many chip shares have crashed, although late last week some ofthem were rebounding, driven by higher Q4 earnings. (For details,see our premier section, High Tech Equities, Pg. 7.)Poly Shortage Scare Whether there's a looming shortage of polysilicon depends on whomyou are asking the question. Last year SIBS had predicted a polyshortage could crop up as early as 1996. Now others are saying thesame thing. The advent of 8-inch (200mm) wafers coupled withrising IC demand will cause poly demand to outstrip poly supplystarting now and persisting at least through 1999. Those onceample inventories of poly are quickly being worked off aschipmakers put up new 8-inch fabs at a feverish pace. But, then,nobody ever said there wouldn't be growing pains on the way tobecoming a $300 billion-plus industry.  Electronic Sales Surge The semiconductor industry is booming because the business of itscustomers is booming. Worldwide sales of electronic productscatapulted to $334.7 billion in the first nine months of 1995, upstrongly from the $285 billion in the comparable nine-month periodof 1994, according to the AEA. Components orders in those ninemonths shot up to $100.8 billion in 1995, from $76.9 billion in1994; while orders for computers and office equipment jumped to$83 billion from $72.6 billion, year-to-year.  Closely tracking these higher sales have been rising electronicsemployment. More than 2.5 million work in the U.S. electronicsindustry, up 5.6% from 1994. Semiconductors are a hot sector. InSilicon Valley, for example, while hiring in hardware has beensoft, that has been easily offset by chipmakers' and softwarefirms' hiring. For example, Silicon Valley lost 4,000 computerhardware jobs in 1994, that was more than made up by the newly-created 11,500 software and semiconductors positions in the sameyear. -- Paul Plansky, SIBS Editor-in-ChiefBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Microchip Technology(OTC: MCHP)Microchip Technology reported record sales and net income for itsthird fiscal 1996 quarter ended December 31, 1995.Net sales for the third quarter of fiscal 1996 were $78.1 million,up 44% over $54.2 million reported in the third quarter of fiscal1995 and up 10% sequentially from the prior quarter.  Excluding a $11.4 million write-off associated with in-processtechnology acquired during the quarter, net income for the thirdquarter of fiscal 1996 was $14.0 million, up 48% over net incomeof $9.4 million in the third quarter of fiscal 1995.  After recognizing the one-time technology acquisition-relatedcosts, net income was $5.8 million.  With sales of OTP microcontrollers becoming such a large portionof the company's overall business, Microchip reorganized itsproduct divisions during the third quarter.  The reorganization is intended to focus the company's resources onbroader aspects of the OTP microcontroller opportunity and entailsthe former Logic Products division being split to form the newStandard Microcontroller division and Advanced Microcontrollerdivision.  Microchip believes that the field-programmable segment willcontinue to comprise an ever-larger share of the totalmicrocontroller market.  During the quarter, Microchip also acquired the technology andmarketing rights for the Keeloq secure data transmission productsdeveloped by Nanoteq Ltd. of the Republic of South Africa.     This type of technology is considered vital for the next generationof unidirectional security devices used in applications such asautomobile keyless remote entry, auto immobilizer systems,automatic garage door openers, and various "smart" transaction cardapplications.  Microchip anticipates the first product introduction from theacquired technology will take place in the first quarter ofcalendar 1996. Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Xilinx(OTC: XLNX)Xilinx recorded revenue and earnings growth for the third quarterended December 30, 1995.       Revenues rose to $144.1 million, up 58% from the $91.3 millionreported during the third quarter of fiscal 1995 and 2% from the$141.2 million in the immediately preceding quarter. Net income rose 107% to $32.2 million compared with last year's$15.6 million and 8% above last quarter's $29.8 million. For the first nine months ended December 30, 1995, revenuesincreased 67% to $411.1 million from $245.9 million reported inlast year's comparable period. Net income for the first nine months of fiscal 1996 rose 72% to$67.6 million compared with $39.4 million in the first nine monthsof fiscal 1995. Excluding the impact of non-recurring charges,operating income, net income, and earnings per share increased by108%, 112%, and 98%, respectively.  Gross margins increased to 64.1% of revenues from 63.4% lastquarter due to continued improvement in manufacturing yields, thestrength of the dollar, and a changing product mix.  Operationally, selling, general and administrative expenses aspercentage of revenues declined for the fourth consecutive quarteras did R&D spending. These two factors combined to expand operatingmargins to a record level of 34.2%, up from last quarter's 32.3%  While revenues increased sequentially, this quarter's performancewas impacted by a slowdown in bookings, particularly in the earlypart of the quarter. Highlights for this quarter included the growth of the XC5200family, an alternative to gate arrays. In other company news, Bernard Vonderschmitt has stepped down asCEO, but remains on as chairman. The new CEO is Willem Roelandts.(See People & Organizations, page 20 for more details).          Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Rumor or Truth?Sun Microsystems' Hot-and-Cold Talks with Apple MayBear Fruit at $33 Per ShareIf Sun Eats Apple,Will PowerPC Die?                                                                       With the board of Apple Computer (OTC: AAPL) slated to meettomorrow (January 23rd), Wall St. rumors have been flying thatembattled Apple may be ready to accept a buyout bid of $33 pershare, or about $4 billion, from workstation and server powerhouseSun Microsystems (OTC: SUNW).  As big as that $4B number sounds, it would be only half what Applewas said to seek from IBM during merger talks in the fall of 1994.Neither company would confirm an a reportedly "imminent"acquisition of Apple by Sun, but investors voted by driving AAPLshares up and SUNW stock down.  Despite past successes with its Macintosh line, Apple lately hasbeen a loser. It lost $68 million in its most recent quarter, hasbeen losing PC market share, and worst of all, is losing respect. Even if Apple stays independent, it appears doubtful that its CEOMichael Spindler will survive this corporate crisis. There arereports Spindler will either be forced out and see his managementrole greatly diminished.  Internet Interest?One reason Sun might want Apple is to enhance its Internetstrategy. Apple's Macintoshes can be used to create World Wide Websites, and the PC maker has also developed a $500 system, that whenconnected to a TV and phone, provides low-cost Internet access.  Next possibility: Sun could tap into Apple's well-establishedretail PC channels to push its own version of a "network computer".Apple also has in place a formidable sales force in Japan, which,until recently, was one of the strongest U.S.-based PC makersthere.Other SuitorsSun had been in takeover talks with Apple earlier but thesediscussions were broken off when the two computer firms couldn'tagree on an acquisition price.Even in this newest round, the buyout price could once again be thespoiler.  Other suitors that were said to seek a buyout deal with Apple haveincluded software maven Oracle (see box story at left); Hewlett-Packard, which wants a stronger home PC market position; andMotorola, which provides the PowerPC chip that drives the Mac.Among Asian giants which may have courted Apple: Cannon, Toshiba,and Sony.  But this time it's different. Apple has "serious problems", its ownchairman A.C. ("Mike") Markkula Jr. admitted. Markkula, a formerIntel microprocessor marketing manager (circa, 1970s), said hewouldn't be able to comment on whether Apple is for sale "until thetime is right."Despite its current woes, the Apple brand name is strong. Applepioneered the PC business, unveiling the Apple I in 1976, and theApple II in 1977. That was way ahead of IBM, which didn't offer itsPC until 1981. Apple's Macintosh was smash hit, but its Lisa andearliest version of the Newton PDA bombed. It's been a long battle,but it looks like the Intel/Microsoft camp has won.  From an MPU perspective, if Sun consumes Apple, we'd say thePowerPC is a dead part. Apple has been the only very large volumeuser of the vaunted processor chip co-developed by Apple, Motorola,and IBM to challenge Intel's Pentium dominance. If a Sun/Apple dealdoes happens, will future ads be touting, "the SPARC Inside"?Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Oracle's OdysseyCEO Ellison Treks toAsia to Sell 'Magic Box'While technocrats were buzzing about Sun longing to chew up Apple(see story at left), the CEO of another computer firm, softwaregiant Oracle Corp., took off recently in another direction -- theFar East.  Oracle CEO Larry Ellison's mission: To line up Asian manufacturersfor an Oracle project he has taken under his wings: a $500 networkcomputer (the "NC") for use by the masses to access the Internet.  Among countries reportedly on Ellison's itinerary: Japan, SouthKorea, and Taiwan.  Although Oracle's official line from its Redwood City, CAheadquarters is "no comment," SIBS' sources have identified Korea'sGoldstar and Samsung as two possible partners to build Oracle's NC.  Not as powerful as a PC, the NC will let users surf the net; sende-mail; do word processing.  (For details on our report, "Chipmakers Eyeing the Internet", seeInside Chips, Pg. 16.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Semiconductors CollapseAs Some Profits Fall ShortIntel (OTC: INTC)'s stock tumbled after it posted disappointing Q4'95 earnings. Other chip stocks falling hard for the same reason:Cirrus Logic (OTC: CRUS) and Motorola (NYSE: MOT). (See StockMarket Scan, Pg. 4.)                                             Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Zoran Zoran Finds IPO WindowDespite weaker chip stock prices, Zoran (OTC: ZRAN) managed tosqueeze through the IPO window recently and is now trading wellabove its initial target price. Pre-IPO, Israel's Elron Industriesowned 32% of Zoran. Since shipping a low-cost chip for digitalvideo and audio systems in 1991, Zoran has yet to log an annualprofit. Recent price: About $26.                                 Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996What's Up Down Under?Quality Semiconductor BuysWafer Foundry and Design Center from Australian FirmQuality Semiconductor of Santa Clara, CA (OTC: QUAL) has reacheda definitive agreement to purchase a fully operational waferfoundry business and product design center from AWAMicroelectronics (AWAM), a unit of AWA Limited in Sydney,Australia.  The AWAM assets will be acquired by a newly-formed subsidiary ofQuality called Quality Semiconductor Australia Pty, Ltd. (QSA).Purchase price of the AWAM facility is US$5.6 million. Thetransaction is expected to close by the end of this month.  The deal also calls for parent firm AWA Limited to subscribeUS$1.25 million of preferred shares in the new subsidiary, QSA, forworking capital.  Between July 1997 and July 1999, Quality will make the finalpayment of about US$7.5 million.  Quality Semi has also signed a strategic alliance pact with AWALimited to jointly develop new products and technologies.  24 Hours Per DayThe six-inch wafer fab facility is currently running seven days perweek, 24 hours per day. After the acquisition, the plant willcontinue serving existing AWAM foundry customers while providingQuality added flexibility. During the next two quarters, Quality plans to secure additionalsemiconductor production equipment to migrate the current facilityto deep submicron process technologies.  Quality Semiconductor, specializing in high-performance logic chipsand logic-intensive specialty memory ICs, sees the AWAM acquisitionas a way to refine its product and proprietary process development,accelerate its time-to-market, and, aided by shorter lead times,improve its productivity.  AWA Limited, formed 83 years ago, is a leading Australianelectronics company with a strong export business in Asia. Uponclosing of the deal, AWAM's managing director John Dougall willjoin the board of directors of QSA (Quality SemiconductorAustralia, Pty., Ltd.)Quality Semi's products target systems makers in networking, PC,and workstation markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996ICS Angling For SpinoffOf Turtle Beach SystemsIntegrated Circuit Systems (OTC: ICST), based in Valley Forge, PAand maintaining a large presence in Silicon Valley (San Jose, CA)is exploring alternatives, including a possible spinoff or rightsoffering of its Turtle Beach Systems subsidiary.  As part of the possible spinoff scenario, Turtle Beach has acquirednew product lines related to the PC multimedia and communicationsperipheral business of ValueMedia, Inc., developer and marketer ofkits for PCs.  For this acquisition, Turtle Beach will make payments of about$500,000 and issue one million new shares, comprising about 26% ofTurtle Beach common stock to ValueMedia.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Oak Eyes Pixel Magic;Intel's Piece of PhoenixTwo chipmakers have made money moves to insure their long-termcompetitiveness: Oak Technology (OTC: OAKT) of Sunnyvale, CA hasagreed to acquire Pixel Magic of Andover, MA, for $10.5 million incash. Meanwhile, Intel Corp. (OTC: INTC) of Santa Clara, CA paid$10.9 million for a 6% stake of Phoenix Technologies, a systemssoftware house.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Apple Backs IC StartupExponential TechnologyApple Computer (OTC: AAPL), whose own fortunes have taken some badturns lately (taking a horrendous fourth quarter loss and havingCEO Michael Spindler placed on the endangered species list), hasinvested in privately-held Exponential Technology of San Jose, CA,which plans to develop superfast microprocessor chips.  Exponential, a 2 1/2-year-old firm, is focused on cloning -- andsurpassing -- the PowerPC technology jointly developed by Apple,Motorola, and IBM. The startup's MPUs, due to be available in early1997, are expected to be two to three times faster than comparablePowerPC engines while also being Apple Macintosh- and IBM PC-compatible.  So far, Exponential has raised $15 million. Apple, whose positionin the fledgling venture was originally at 20%, has seen that stakediluted by other investors. Joining Apple as Exponential investorsare Venrock Associates, Nazem & Co.. and Woodside Fund. Also formerApple technical guru Jean-Louis Glasee, who now heads up Be, Inc.,has contributed personal funds.  Exponential's two founders -- George Taylor and Jim Blomgren -- areboth IC designers. Taylor's background includes stints at SunMicrosystems, MIPS, and BIT (Bipolar Integrated Technology).Blomgren was also previously with Sun.  Rick Shriner, a former Apple VP, is Exponential's CEO, while GordonCampbell, who started up Chips and Technologies and once headedSEEQ, is Exponential's chairman.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996APT's ManagementBuys Out SunstrandThe management of Advanced Power Technology (APT), the Bend, OR-based supplier of high-power MOSFETs, IGBTs, and FREDs, has boughtout Sunstrand's 51% interest in APT. Terms of the transaction werenot disclosed.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Answering the Spread Spectrum CallIt's a classic IC startup story: A small band of industry veteranshas focused on a niche opportunity -- wireless communications, withemphasis on the cordless telephone market. But the fledglingventure, Wireless Logic, Inc. (WLI) of San Jose, CA must movequickly to capture a sizable share of that business before largercompetitors start challenging its early lead.  That competition is indeed formidable, including such foes as AMI,Rockwell, Stanford Telecom, and Zilog (see  Table (available onlyin printed version)s 1 & 2). Short-term, the battle is for chipsthat play in cordless phones and wireless telecom products. Long-term, WLI is planning next-generation devices to target simplex andduplex consumer wireless markets such as phones, homecommunications, and computers.  After quietly forming in 1992, Wireless Logic is now emerging fromits R&D phase to hawk what it claims is the industry's first low-cost spread spectrum (dubbed S3P) communications processor.  The S3P processor operates in the 900MHz spectrum, which isprojected to rapidly replace the 46MHz-to-49MHz products currentlyon the market. The S3P is designed as part of a low-costarchitecture supporting full-duplex voice link and simplifiesspread spectrum technology in cordless phones.  Atmel: Foundry & InvestorPrivately-held WLI, chartered as a Bermuda corporation, did notreport revenues in 1995. Funding has come from the founders,private investors, manufacturing partners, and the Hong KongGovernment.  Atmel Corporation (OTC: ATML), which is Wireless Logic's ICfoundry, also has exclusive marketing rights to WLI products inNorth America, Europe, and Brazil; while WLI concentrates on Asia.Atmel and some Atmel executives are also investors in WLI, butneither firm would disclose the dollar amount. A secondary investoris chipmaker American Microsystems (AMI), which also does somefoundry chores for WLI.  Last year, WLI closed another financing round from private sourcesin order to ramp production of the expected shift to 900MHzproducts this year. In December 1993, the Hong Kong Governmentfunded WLI with HK$10 million, the largest "Applied R&D Fund" ever.WLI was the first hardware firm to receive such funding.  Partnering With CustomersAn estimated 90% of the world's cordless phones are made in Asia.Several of these Asian OEMs, anticipating next-generation phoneproducts, came to WLI's founders to request a solution. Thefounders determined these elements for a successful market entrywere present:A large installed base of low-frequency cordless telephones;Pent-up demand based on the limitation these relatively primitive(low-frequency) devices;An in-place manufacturing and distribution infrastructure; andHigher-powered spread spectrum technology (which greatly extendsthe operating range of cordless telephones) was approved by theFCC.  At its San Jose HQ (right next door to Sierra Semiconductor),Wireless Logic performs R&D and marketing. It also maintains aoffice in Hong Kong, within easy reach of the Asian makers ofcordless telephones.  Finding Markets, Filling ChannelsKey characteristics of the cordless telephone market which createbarriers to entry for new players are:It's a replacement market; It's also a high-volume consumer market;It has very high growth rates; It requires technical support; andIt demands a total system design approach (in order words, youcan't just create a chip and drop it into a socket).  Although WLI had a chip designed, it worked with makers of cordlessphones for another 1 1/2 years to create a finished 900MHz spreadspectrum radio product.  The main channel for Wireless Logic to sell its chips has beenthrough value-added distributors in Asia. The startup chipmakerprovides these outlets with technical support and applicationsengineering. WLI's distributor line-up includes: CTI in Taiwan;Eastele in Hong Kong; WinEdge in Singapore; and FM Korea.  Approximately 18 million cordless telephones were sold in 1994. WLIinvestor Atmel estimates this market will eventually be counted inthe "tens of millions of units." Looking at  Table (available onlyin printed version) 3 on the next page, we see that if theprojected U.S. market size of 21.1 million units is realized by1998, and if 25% of those units are 900MHz devices, then thatportion of the market would be about a $1 billion available market.  Wireless Logic isn't alone in its bullish assessment of this marketpotential. Besides WLI executives, Atmel, AMI, and the Hong KongGovernment, individual investors in the company include:Paul Lui, founder of Micronics Semiconductor; Eric Ochiltree, a VPat Exar Corp; Jerry Zis, VP of marketing at Analog Devices, Inc.(ADI); Dave Kress Jr., ADI's director of applications; and twoAtmel Corporation executives: Gus Perlegos, GM and co-founder; andJohn Bryant, director of marketing for the chipmaker's complexlogic products.  Focusing on the ProductsWhat's driving the cordless phone market are users. These consumerswant systems which are low power, capable of long talk time, andprovide privacy.  Now that Wireless Logic has distribution partners in place, thismonth its fab partner Atmel started volume shipments of its system-level solution for a 900MHz consumer cordless telephone. Suchconsumer products should be hitting the store shelves by mid-year.  WLI's communications processor consists of WLI's S3P (spreadspectrum signal processor), a microcontroller, and RF transceiver,which form the core analog and digital circuitry. While the systemarchitecture of the chip (designated WLT9010) and related RF moduleare optimized for cordless phones, they're also capable of workingin secured voice link, wireless headset, and other low-speedwireless data communications applications.  The WLT9010 S3P processor, which comes in a 64-pin PFQP package,is priced at $16 in 10,000 quantities; while the RF transceivermodule (called the WLT9510) goes for $350 in single units. Bothproducts are available immediately. WLI also offers a evalua-tion/development system (WLT9720) for a 900MHz cordless phone toassist OEMs in product development; the system's single-unit priceis $5,000.  The WL9010 processor provides hundreds of communication channels,four hours of continuous talk time, 7 days of standby time, autopower control to manage low power consumption, 7 million securitycodes, extended transmission distance with 50mW transmission power,real privacy, and security.  Keeping the Team Lean & MeanWhile John Lee, Wireless Logic's founder and currently serving asits president/CEO, has strong technical credentials in wirelesscommunications (see biographical sketch below), he also embracesthe wisdom of gathering the best and brightest in the field, evenif they are consultants instead of full-time employees. AugmentingWLI's engineering team, Lee relies on outside design wizards tocontribute specialized expertise in RF communications design,telecommunications signal processing systems, and processorsoftware.  When visiting WLI, we found a very spartan digs. The front door washard to find because it was on the side of the building. No frills.This is a lean and mean startup machine. John Lee, president and CEO. Lee is considered the `father' of theDTAD (digital telephone answering device) industry from when heheaded the technology marketing effort at DSP Group.  With more than 20 years of senior technical and managementexperience with National Semiconductor, Hewlett-Packard andSiliconix, he has also held academic appointments with theUniversity of California at Berkeley.  Andy Varadi, executive VP. With 30-plus years experience, Varadi,has most recently been an independent consultant for technical,business and intellectual property management. For two years beforejoining WLI, he was a founder and director of Sierra Wireless inCanada, and for the previous ten years, was founder and VP of R&Dfor Sierra Semiconductor. He holds five patents.  At National Semiconductor for 10-plus years, Varadi held successiveVP-level posts as GM for the Memory division, and later R&D. BeforeNational, he was director of VLSI development at General DatacomIndustries, and prior to that, was founder and VP of design forSolid State Data Sciences.  James Wong, VP. Wong's extensive technical background in electronicsystem design includes 20 years experience in designing hybrid ICs,A/D converters, D/A converters, amplifiers, and switchingregulators.  Wong has held senior technical and management posts at NationalSemiconductor and Texas Instruments. He was named an "InvitedMember of the Strategic Management Team" at a division of AnalogDevices.  Dan Babitch, VP of engineering. With 25-plus years of experiencedesigning military and commercial systems for communications andnavigation, Babitch joined Wireless Logic in 1994 as director ofengineering. He specializes in RF and microwave systems, includingglobal positioning systems (GPS) and satellite receivers.  Babitch was co-founder of Trimble Navigation, supplier ofcommercial navigation systems and a prime GPS supplier to the U.S.DoD. He has also held senior technologist posts with Hewlett-Packard and California Microwave.  Neil Halldorson, CFO. With more than 20 years of financialexperience, Halldorson joined WLI early this year. Concurrently tohis CFO post at WLI, he also holds a corporate finance positionwith Quest Capital Corp. in Vancouver, B.C., where he works closelywith companies seeking equity or debt financing, including publiclylisting of shares. and/or listing on stock exchanges.  Earlier, Halldorson held senior finance posts with the VancouverStock Exchange, and before that, was MIS manager for the B.C. FerryCorporation.  Roy Essex, GM, Asia operations. Essex has more than 20 yearsexperience in domestic and international manufacturing, marketing,system applications, and test development of electronic productswith National Semiconductor.  As a production control manager at National, Essex headed up waferfab, seals, test, turns, costing, and inventory of a $100 millionproduct line. His background includes long-term relationships withOEM/ODM customers in the Asian market.  Wireless Logic's board of directors, described by CEO Lee as"casual and loosely organized", is made up of Lee; executive VPAndy Varadi; and Joseph Wau, an investor based in Hong Kong. Thereis currently no one designated as chairman of the three-man board.  Assessing the OutlookIt was an easy decision. When formulating its initial strategy,Wireless Logic had to choose whether to address the cellular phonemarket or the cordless phone market. Cellular was out of thequestion: It was much too expensive for a startup to take on, andmany of the competitors were industry giants.  So, instead WLI chose the cordless arena, in which the only trulyhuge player is Rockwell. Ironically, Rockwell's large size couldalso be its downfall because it tends to move slow and is said attimes to be "arrogant" with customers. A big plus for WLI: Itsextensive wireless credentials, such as founder John Lee's DTADknowledge and the invaluable hands-on work of executive VP Varadi,who was a founder of Sierra Wireless in Canada.  If we characterize Wireless Logic as fabless, chipless, or even anupscale design house, we would be right on all three assumptions.But such labels are too narrowly defined. The key to WLI's model:"outsourcing", a major business trend of the 1990s.  As an outsourcing model, WLI goes outside for foundry work,engineering expertise, and value-added distribution. All of whichkeeps it running lean and mean, and more importantly, controlsexpenses.  Other examples of WLI's outsourcing: It has licensed Hexawave, asemiconductor producer in Taiwan to make its RF transceiver; isworking with JABRA Corporation to provide the JABRA Ear PHONETMCellular as a private hands-free option for OEM cordless phonedesign; and has developed with Hewlett-Packard a customizedstandalone test system for WLI's RF module.  Clearly, the cordless phone market is a door opener for WLI to suchfuture telephone products as multi-handset systems and PABX forbusiness systems.  Eyeing Equity DealsIt's quite obvious to us that Neil Halldorson's connections to theVancouver Stock Exchange (see his career bio at the left) suggestthat WLI has its eye on a public offering on that Canadianexchange, perhaps as a precursor for a larger offering on WallStreet. We've heard that Montgomery Securities, the same investmentbanker which assisted Sierra Semiconductor to go public, mightconsider underwriting a future WLI equity deal.  Perhaps the smartest thing Wireless Logic has done so far was notonly enlisting the submicron CMOS fab skills and proven marketingmuscle of Atmel but also having that chipmaker become a WLIinvestor. In high volume consumer markets, if you can't deliver,you're history. --By Paul Plansky, SIBS Editor-in-ChiefWireless Logic, Inc.2021 North Capitol AvenueSan Jose, CA 95132Tel:  (408) 262-1876Fax: (408) 262-2903Wireless Logic Technologies Limited2711 Asia Finance TowerCitibank PlazaThree Garden Road, Central,Hong KongTel:  852-2868-6728Fax: 852-2522-30756Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Background and OverviewGermany's semiconductor manufacturing industry is overshadowed bygiant Siemens in Munich. Others, such as Temic (part of theDaimler-Benz group), and smaller players, are in distant also-ranpositions.  In 1990, Hans Weinerth, a career technical veteran from PhilipsSemiconductors (previously called VALVO), was able to convince theGerman government to finance a new semiconductor venture inHannover. In April that year, SICAN GmbH was founded with backingfrom the Federal German States of Lower Saxony and Hamburg inconjunction with the Federal Ministry of Research and Technology.The company's charter was to offer design and R&D services tosystems companies developing semiconductor applications and tochipmakers.  The organization started with several employees and has grown toover 200 involved with microelectronics design, basic research,systems development, and related semiconductor support services.  This unique German semiconductor company is best described as avertically-integrated microelectronics design and licensingcompany. Its charter includes development of ICs, modules, andsystems. Technologies include bipolar, CMOS, BiCMOS, and RF.  SICAN was founded to foster microelectronics in Germany byproviding a design and service infrastructure for small and mid-size companies. Another aim: To provide design capacity to firmswhose resources were constrained. An overriding goal is to shortenthe critical time-to-market window to ensure its customers'success.  Services and TechnologyAs a full-service design house, SICAN functions like other Americandesign houses offering IC development services. The company hasexpertise in classical ASIC development using gate array andstandard cell architectures. Its ASIC development group, callingitself the "design factory," is involved with a variety ASIC logicdesign projects and acts as an authorized design center for severalworld-class ASIC vendors, including LSI Logic and Fujitsu.  Within the ASIC development group, special expertise exists for ICsused in ATM applications.  Besides its logic design capability, SICAN has a design groupfocused on mixed-signal and analog applications. In its mixed-signal group, the company has developed Sigma-Delta-Convertertechnology with 18-bit resolution which is available for license.The design team has know-how for implementing low voltage/lowpower, high voltage, high frequency, and smart power designs.  SICAN has developed special core expertise in MPEG video and audioencoding and decoding ICs.  Its MPEG hardwired solutions (versusDSP-based) enables low-cost MPEG solutions for multimedia IC andsystems suppliers.  SICAN licenses its multimedia IC buildingblocks to quickly customize projects tailored to specific customerrequirements.  The company has a flexible approach to development strategy. Itwill do a turnkey IC design where all tasks from concept to finaltape-out are done by SICAN. It will also work on a modular sharingof tasks basis where SICAN is responsible for well-defined tasksthat are part of the development project. One of the moresuccessful models is the joint-development team where the customerand SICAN engineers form a joint team.  Management and OrganizationThe SICAN group consists of the SICAN holding company called SIBEGwith its subsidiaries SICAN, SIBET, and SIAG. SIBET is the R&D armof the group which does basic development on new technologies suchas neural networks and fuzzy logic and has close ties to Germanuniversities and technical centers. SIAG is the company that ownsthe buildings and equipment and leases it to the operating unitsSICAN and SIBET.  The chairman and managing director of SICAN, SIBET, and SIAG isHans Weinerth. He has a doctorate degree from the TechnicalUniversity of Aachen and still has close teaching ties to his almamater. Weinerth started his career at Intermetall (Freiburg), andin 1968, he began a career at Philips (Eindhoven). Later in 1976,he moved to Philips VALVO (Hamburg). By 1990, when he left to startSICAN, he had achieved the post of technical director of PhilipsComponents in Germany.  Heinz Stephanblome is the CEO of SICAN GmbH reporting to Weinerth.He heads an organization that encompasses the various digital andanalog engineering groups, marketing/sales, operations, andadministrative functions. Prior to SICAN, Stephanblome worked atPhilips Components (Hamburg), engaged in strategic planning and ICapplication activities.  Plants and FacilitiesThe SICAN group owns a 65,000 square-foot multi-building complexat its campus on the outskirts of Hannover. An additional buildingis under construction which will effectively double the facilitysize.  The company through its lessor arm, SIAG, has acquired animpressive suite of CAD hardware, software, and testing equipment.  The design infrastructure includes 134 Sun SPARC workstations and77 H-P series 700 workstations. The workstations are divided intoclusters of five units in size connected together with an EthernetLAN. In addition, two Convex 3840s are used for R&D. A Cray 6448supercomputer is used in development and R&D. Other support designequipment includes five ZyCAD XP200 hardware accelerators, aQuickTurn M250 emulator, a Logic Modeling LM1200 hardware modeler,H-P 83000 tester, and other equipment.  Although SICAN does not operate a fab, it has close connectionswith CMOS, BiCMOS, and bipolar fabs to fabricate its digital andanalog designs. These foundry relationships include LSI Logic(USA), ES2 (France), Fujitsu (Japan), ABB-Hafo (Sweden), and AMS(Austria).  Financial SummarySICAN is a privately-held company started with government-backedfinancing. Since its inception, SICAN has invited other Americanand European partners to become strategic shareholders.  These include:LSI Logic Europe GmbHCadence Design Systems GmbHDVS GmbH (Digital Video Systems)Sartorius GmbHConvexZyCADCrayIn total, these industrial shareholders own 81% of the SICANshares. The balance of 19% is held by the Nord L/B (federal bankin North Germany) as trustees for future shareholders.  The company's total sales for 1995 were $30 million, which includesR&D programs as well as revenues from systems projects.  HTE Research AssessmentAmerican and Asian firms can utilize the services of SICAN invarious ways.  SICAN's Hannover location in the center of Europe makes the companya gateway to Europe for overseas companies. SICAN, for example, canact as a German-European design center for American and Asian ASICcompanies. It can also assist overseas companies in navigatingthrough a myriad of European specs, rules, and regulations in thetelecom and other industries.  The second major function of the company is to do custom andsemicustom design for semiconductor companies which either do nothave the appropriate in-house expertise or just want to subcontractdesign.  SICAN also offers this design service to OEM systemshouses and has the capability to broker production quantities withqualified foundries.  Thirdly, its core technology licensing activities have alreadyattracted a following in the U.S. and Japan.  It haslicensing/development contracts with a number of U.S. and FarEastern customers. Announced customers include AMCC, Alcatel,Cadence, Convex, Daimler-Benz, Ericsson, Exar, H-P, IBM, Siemens,and Schlumberger.  The company has completed successful designs in DSPs, medicalsystems, digital video editing systems, MPEG video and audiodecoders/encoders, and ATM projects, among others. SICAN has developed its U.S.A. activity base to the point where ithas decided to set up an Silicon Valley-based subsidiary calledSICAN Microelectronics Corp.  Located in So. San Francisco, the office opens at the beginning ofthe second quarter 1996.  It will initially focus on marketdevelopment and applications/design-in activities with a heavyconcentration on mixed-signal and MPEG/multimedia development andlicensing programs.  SICAN GmbHGarbsener Landstrasse 1030419 Hannover, GermanyTel: 49 511 277-0Fax: 49 511 277-2150Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Late News BreaksSnubbing Oregon, SamsungPicks Austin for $1.3B Fab;National Buys SiTel SierraThe guessing game is over. Samsung Electronics has chosen Austin,TX over a site in Oregon to build its first U.S. semiconductorproduction plant, in which the Korean chipmaker will invest $1.3billion.  The fab plant, to be located in Travis County, is reportedly thelargest Korean investment in a U.S. manufacturing plant. (AnotherKorean company, Hyundai Electronics, is still negotiating to builda large chip plant in Eugene, OR.)Samsung cited these criteria for selecting the Austin area: Ahighly educated and experienced local workforce; IC manufacturinginfrastructure; and efficient operating costs. Samsung plans tocreate about 1,000 jobs to staff the Austin operation.  Following groundbreaking during the current quarter, Samsungexpects to  complete construction by the second quarter of 1997,and begin production during the fourth quarter of 1997.  Among mainstay products to be made at Austin will be 16M-bit and64M-bit DRAMs. The new plant will employ .35-micron and 30-microntechnology with 8-inch wafers in a Class 1 cleanroom.  National Goes ShoppingNational Semiconductor of Santa Clara, CA (NYSE: NSM) has acquiredSiTel Sierra b.v., in Hertogenbosch, the Netherlands, which designsand supplies both components and subsystems for the wirelessmarket.  SiTel has also developed baseband solutions which couple well withthe RF receiver products offered by National Semiconductor.The first line of DECT (Digital European Cordless Telecommunica-tions) devices from National/SiTel have passed European standardsand are in volume production in Southeast Asia.  Because of the SiTel buy, National expects to incur a one-timecharge to expense for in-process R&D of US$11.4 million, or 6 centsa share, in the quarter ending February 25, 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Taiwan's Wish ListR.O.C. Seeks Submicron Processes; BiCMOS; GaAs;Low-Cost VLSI; PackagingLike their Asian neighbors in Japan and Korea, the Republic ofChina (R.O.C.) in Taiwan is willing to search worldwide to buyadvanced technologies from foreign firms for transfer to localTaiwanese companies. Among semiconductor technology officiallybeing targeted by R.O.C.:Submicron process techniques (from 0.5micron to 0.7micron) and0.35micron module techniques;Special manufacturing processes like BiCMOS, SCCD, and GaAs;Circuit design capabilities for both analog and digital ICs, aswell as communications chips;Wafer production skills involving single-crystal, multiple-crystalgrowth, cutting and grinding technology; andSuch packaging techniques as SMT, TAB, COG, 3D, and MCM.  For its communications industry, Taiwan has identified thesecritical needs: High-level transmission protocol; Code DivisionMultiple Access (CDMA); Spread spectrum techniques; Image formingand compressing; RF signal processing; Low-cost VLSI; and ASICswith ISDN CPE standard interface.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Unfortunate PunchFortune Knocks ForbesThe Man and MagazineWe were surprised and appalled that Time, Inc.'s Fortune magazinestooped so low. Fortune chose Republican Presidential candidateSteve Forbes and Forbes magazine as the target for an mean-spiritedcover story, which we suspect will help the Forbes political forcesmore than it will hurt them.  Fortune, in its February 5th cover story titled "What makes Steverun?," admitted it's a "fierce competitor" of Forbes and then didevery thing it could to discredit the Forbes family and publishingempire, raising questions about its tax write-offs and allegedshady real estate deals.  Sure, Steve's fair game now that he's running for office, but we'dsay that Fortune's professional jealousy is showing like an oldwound. After all, Forbes has been winning the battle for businesspress ad dollars for a long time.  Don't get us wrong. Fortune has its great moments. In fact, whenanalyzing mega economic and social trends, it easily outclassesForbes. And how can you fault Fortune when they put Cypress' T.J.Rodgers on the cover in a story on "America's Meanest Bosses" andanother cover on Intel's Andy Grove ("His Law: Only the paranoidsurvive".)But, back to the Forbes foray. Twisting its editorial knife deeper,Fortune ran an editorial headlined, "FORTUNE ENDORSES FORBES". Butwait. At the end of this ruse, Fortune editor John Huey writes:"Steve gives himself away when he admits to admiring only onemember" of Clinton's (team): The ambassador to France. "Now that'sa job fit for a Forbes. We hereby endorse him -- for theambassadorship, that is."Really, Fortune should know better. What if it put itsinvestigative zeal and skepticism into uncovering the truth aboutGM, Philip Morris, Exxon, or IBM instead of a magazine competitor.Why, those folks might even win some journalism awards.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Alleged Tech Thief CouldPay With 35 Years, $1.75M David Biehl, owner of Semiconductor Spares of San Carlos, CA hasbeen indicted on Federal charges for allegedly conspiring to obtaintechnical drawings from insiders at Applied Materials, LamResearch, and Varian Associates.  Biehl has been indicted on three counts of conspiracy and twocounts each of wire and mail fraud. Between 1992 and 1995, theindictment says, Biehl's firm made more than $5 million fromselling spare parts designed with stolen drawings. If convicted,Biehl faces a maximum of 35 years in prison and a $1.75 millionfine.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Legal Flash PointsAtmel Files Against SST;SanDisk Takes on SamsungAtmel has sued Silicon Storage Technology (SST) in Federal court,claiming that SST's Flash memory ICs infringe five of Atmel'spatents and asks for compensatory damages plus triple damages forwhat Atmel alleged was "willful infringement" of patents.  Separately, SanDisk filed a complaint with the International TradeCommission (ITC), pleading that ITC stop importing into the U.S.all NAND Flash storage products made by Samsung Electronics. Theaction also asks the ITC to halt importing of all end-user productscontaining Samsung NAND Flash chips.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Image BuildingAtmel Takes Long-Term View  Plants Redwood Tree at New French FabChipmakers have chosen creative ways to paint positive images ofthemselves that go far beyond peddling ICs. Cypress Semiconductoris very big on local community relations, while Intel has oftentaken the educational route by funding student scholarships.  But sometimes these PR efforts take bizarre twists. Take Altera,which last year sponsored a racing car, then ran a color pictureof it in recruitment ads with the headline, "Breaking NewBarriers."                                                                                                                                Nowhere comes Atmel. To symbolize a long-term commitment to itspresence in Southern France via the ES2 acquisition and groundbreaking for its Fab 7 plant there, the chipmaker has planted aCalifornia Sequoia tree at the entrance to the Fab 7 site.  The fire-resistant species has a lifetime expectancy in excess of2,000 years, thus symbolizing "the planting of deep roots ofCalifornian technology in French soil, and a long-term sustainedgrowth," says Atmel. Symbols are great, but all customers want toknow is: "How many weeks ARO until our parts arrive?"Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996AMD, Intel Bury LegalHatchet; Sign PatentCross-License AccordAdvanced Micro Devices (AMD) and Intel have jointly announced thatthey have signed a five-year, comprehensive patent cross-licenseagreement.  The companies had agreed to negotiate the license as a result ofa litigation settlement announced in January 1995.  The new agreement follows a patent cross-license arrangementbetween the companies that expired at the end of 1995. EffectiveJanuary 1, 1996, the new pact gives AMD and Intel the rights to useeach others' patents and certain copyrights, exclusive ofmicroprocessor copyrights.  AMD agreed in the January 1995 settlement agreement that it wouldnot use Intel microcode beyond the Intel 486TM processor code.  The cross-license is royalty-bearing for products that use certaintechnologies, through specific financial terms were not disclosed.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Toshiba, Winbond JoinUp to Make MemoriesToshiba Corp. of Japan and Winbond Electronics of Taiwan havejointly announced they have signed an agreement for the manafactureand cooperative development of leading-edge semiconductor memoryproducts. This is the first strategic alliance for Toshiba with aTaiwanese company in the semiconductor sector.  In the first initiative under the pact, Toshiba will provideWinbond with production technologies for state-of-the-art 16-megabit DRAMs and next-generation 1-megabit high-speed SRAMs. Winb-ond will produce these devices in new 8-inch wafer fabricationplant, which will start operations in late 1996.  The project allows Winbond to expand its current product line toinclude leading-edge DRAMs and to enhance its current position inhigh-speed SRAMs, the largest segments of the semiconductor market.Toshiba will be able to share the qualified engineering andproduction resources of Winbond, and increase its supply capabilityof main products.  Toshiba will procure the output of the fabs from Winbond, and sellthem under Toshiba brandname, mainly in the Asian market.Procurement volume will be discussed between the two companies.  Both companies also plan to cooperate on development of derivativeproducts based on the design of memory products transferred toWinbond, and will seek various other opportunities to develop thisstrategic relationship.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996TI Links with 2 FirmsFor New PC SolutionsNew low-cost videoconferencing capabilities should be availablesoon, thanks to development agreements disclosed by TexasInstruments, Precision Digital Images, Inc. and IAT AG.  The three companies will supply the hardware and softwaretechnology necessary for offering low-cost videoconferencingsolutions based on digital signal processing to manufacturing ofPCs and PC equipment.  At the core of each product design will be TI TMS320C8x digitalsignal processors (DSPs), which are designed specifically for thedemands of videoconferencing and other multimedia applications.`C8x DSPs provide the high-performance processing needed forhandling data, video, and voice and other audio simultaneously.  Included in the `C8x family is the TMS320C82, the industry's firstlow-cost, single-chip videoconferencing solution announced by TIearlier this year.  Each of the companies brings unique technology to the alliance.Along with its `C8x products, TI will provide its DSP designsupport capabilities. PDI will use its expertise in creating videosubsystems for PCI Bus platforms to develop videoconferencinghardware suited to the requirements of Windows 95.  IAT will bring parts of H.320, design knowledge in IntegratedServices Digital Networks (ISDN) and Windows 95 applications toproduct development, and testing to the alliance, as well as designknowledge in hardware structure on the board level.  Products resulting from the agreements will be used by OEMs tosupport such applications as desktop videoconferencing compliantwith the H.320 and H.324 standards, business and consumer videophones, and collaborative software such as interactive whiteboards,spreadsheets, and word processors.  New hardware and software products resulting from the alliance willbe announced as they become available. Release dates are plannedto begin early this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Conner Peripherals andQLogic Redefining SCSIValidating the performance advantages of Ultra SCSI technology,QLogic Corp. and Conner Peripherals have disclosed successfuldemonstrations that challenge the traditional notion of SCSIconnectivity.  Employing standard production products, the demonstration featureda 40 megabyte per second data transfer rate using 16-bit wide UltraSCSI with 15 Conner (CFP2107W) 2 GB disk drives attached toQLogic's QLA1040-PI host adapter across 14 meters of cable.  The demonstration shows the capability to extend operational limitsdefined by the Fast 20 standard; currently set at eight devices on1.5 meters of cable, or four devices on 3 meters.  The Ultra SCSI is a recently developed backward compatibleevolution of parallel SCSI that allows operation at 20 megabytesper second on an 8-bit bus and 40 megabytes per second on a 16-bitbus.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Alpha-TI VentureTI Partners with Head of Alphatec to Build $1.2BDRAM Plant in ThailandFollowing its cost-sharing model in other countries, Texas Instru-ments of Dallas is taking the same route in Thailand, joining withThai entrepreneur Charn Uswachoke to build a $1.2 billion DRAMfacility in Bangkok. Uswachoke heads up Alphatec Group, made up of20 firms with $1 billion in annual sales.  TI will hold a 26% stake in the new company (Alpha-TISemiconductors), while Uswachoke will have a 74% interest. The newplant will be located on a 40-acre site southeast of Bangkok.  16-Megs Now, 64-Megs LaterThe Thai venture will make 16M-bit DRAMs, and eventually, 64M-bitmemories, to serve the Asian market. TI will buy output from theplant and then resell it. Production is slated to start in thesecond quarter of 1997. TI maintains other joint memory plants in Singapore (with Hewlett-Packard and Canon), Japan (with Kobe Steel), and Taiwan (withAcer). TI also has a U.S.-based joint venture with Hitachi calledTwinstar Semiconductor.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Chips Forges FoundryAccord with SamsungChips and Technologies of San Jose, CA has inked a two-yearagreement with Samsung Semiconductor to provide IC fabricationcapacity for Chips' current and future products. This new pactextends an existing seven-year partnership between Chips andSamsung.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Cirrus Ups AnteAt Digital FacilityCirrus Logic of Fremont, CA will spend $355 million to boost a chipplant owned by Digital Equipment in Hudson, MA to full capacity.The plant, in which Cirrus has invested $450 million since 1992,provides some Digital's IC output to Cirrus under a mutual accord.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Sharp, Sanyo Rev Flash;Hitachi Goes MalaysianJapanese chipmakers continue to add IC capacity as the nationclimbs out of its long recession.  Sharp Corp. will invest $1.05 billion to build its fourth Flashmemory fab in the Hiroshima area, slated to start production inApril 1998. Much of Sharp's Flash output goes to its foundrycustomer Intel.  Sanyo Electric will expand output of Flash chips and other ICs byinvesting $1.33 billion over three years starting in fiscal 1996.Sanyo plans to raise output of Flash memories by 400% to 50 millionunits by the end of 1996.  Hitachi of Japan and LG Semicon of South Korea plan to spend $1.26billion on a joint venture plant in Malaysia to make high-densitymemory ICs.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Atmel Begins to Build$500M French Wafer FabAtmel of San Jose, CA has started building a $500 million IC waferfabrication facility (Fab 7) in Rousset, France, capable of making5,000 eight-inch wafers per week.  To help fund construction of Rousset plant and buy equipment forits eight-inch line, the company's Atmel ES2 subsidiary hasobtained about $65 million of 15-year financing and an option for$80 million in credit from a group of French banks led by CreditLyonnais.  Located near its existing Atmel ES2 fab and design facility, thenew plant will includes a 60,000-sq.-ft. cleanroom and will be ableto make 0.35-micron wafers. The new French plant is expected tocome on line in Q3 this year.  At yearend 1995, Atmel had invested about $30 million to enlargeand upgrade the original ES2 facility (Atmel Fab 6). Another $50million is slated for the Fab 6 project this year.  When completed, the two Atmel ES2 fabs will almost double thechipmaker's silicon output capability.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Hot Off the Press!Global Semiconductor Fab DirectoryIs a Gold Mine of Sales LeadsOne of the most comprehensive directories available on worldwidesemiconductor plant sites has now been updated by HTE Research,Inc. This one-of-a-kind, convenient directory is not soldseparately, but only as part of the SIBS ServiceTM. The SIBS Service consists of: The SIBS newsletter; The SIBS PlantSite Directory; and SIBS On-Line, giving PC access to 10+ years ofSIBS Newsletter back issues.  SIBS Plant Site Directory includes merchant and captive producers,assembly/test sites, and foundries. The directory's 950-plusrecords are arranged for easy access to listings by geography,company, product types, and plant activity. You receive thesebenefits: One Handy, Cross-Referenced Resource for SalesLeads/Contacts ... Most Current and Reliable Information AvailableAnywhere ... & ... Useful Locator of Chip Vendors, Partners, andCustomers.  To order the SIBS Service or to upgrade from Newsletter-Only to theService, Call (415) 871-4377; Fax: (415) 871-0513; or, Write: HTEResearch, Inc., 400 Oyster Point Blvd., Suite 220; So. SanFrancisco, CA 94080. For more details about the SIBS Service andHTE Research, check out our Web Site: http://www.hte-sibs.comBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996New Year Rocks WithCorporate Shakeups atMicron, OPTi, and WeitekThe New Year has already started with bang, as three chip companiesmade abrupt changes in top management. The companies involved wereMicron, OPTi, and Weitek.  Last Thursday, Micron Technology's top executive Steve Appletonresigned. The new CEO and chairman will be Tyler Lowrey, presentlyvice-chairman and chief technical officer.  In a brief company statement, Appleton was said to have resignedfrom his posts of president, CEO, and chairman for "personal rea-sons." Seems like deja vu for this Boise, ID-based company. InSeptember, 1994 Appleton's predecessor, Joseph Parkinson and twoother top execs departed from the company for "person reasons",after a board room showdown with major stockholder J.R. Simplot. Micron's shares have plummeted in the last 52 weeks from a high of94 3/4, closing Friday at 31 1/8. There has been some speculationin the press that Simplot and Appleton had disagreed on whether tocaution Wall Street on the slowdown of the memory chip market. SIBSsources indicated that Simplot forced Appleton to resign.  In other Micron moves, Ed Heitzeberg was elected senior VP of Boiseoperations and COO; Bill Stover was named senior VP of fiance andadministration, and Bryan Farncy was promoted to senior VP of legalaffairs.  In a very ugly palace coup, Raj Jaswa was fired as president ofOPTi, Inc in Milpitas, CA. According to Jaswa, he had just returnedfrom a three-week vacation, when he was called in to a  "surprise"board meeting and fired 10 minutes later. Jaswa, who claims to own 500,000 OPTi shares, is not giving upwithout a fight. He is seeking shareholder support to oust theboard and its chairman, Jerry Chang. OPTi's stock has fallen from 29 a share to 6 3/8, closing Fridayat 8 3/8.  Officials at OPTi could not be reached for comment on Jaswa'sstatements, but have already replaced him. The new president isStephen Dukker. Dukker has been an outside board member for OPTi since January,1993. His executive experience includes president of Videologic anda senior VP of CompUSA.  In another quick change at the top, Barry Cox has resigned aspresident and CEO from Weitek, Corp. of Sunnyvale, CA.  While thecompany conducts a search, his interim replacement, Dave Gellatly,a Weitek director and former Intel executive, will serve as CEO.  Cox has reportedly left to "pursue other interests", and thecompany would only say that his departure was amicable and a"mutual decision". In Weitek's third quarter ending September 30,the company incurred a loss of 1.1 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Xilinx and UnitrodeEase in New LeadersIn a more graceful passing of the torch of leadership, Xilinx, Inc.and Unitrode Corp. announced their changes in top management.  Bernard ("Bernie") Vonderschmitt steps down today as CEO of Xilinx,Inc. of San Jose, CA, but remains on as chairman. The new CEO isWillem Roelandts.   Vonderschmitt, who is 72, is one of the co-founders of Xilinx.Roelandts comes to Xilinx from Hewlett Packard where he was 28-yearveteran, most recently as senior VP.                                            Unitrode Corp. of Merrimack, NH has elected Edward Browder aspresident. Browder, a member of Unitrode's board since 1991 reportsto Robert Gable, chairman and CEO. Gable formerly held the titleof president.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Late Breaking NewsCyrix Snags Intel ExecFor VP of MarketingCyrix Corp. of Richardson, TX today appointed its new VP of market-ing, Lewis Paceley. Paceley was most recently a marketing directorat Intel.  Paceley will be in charge of marketing products at Cyrix, mostnotably the 6x86TM product family. Steve Tobak remains with thecompany as VP of corporate marketing, or as Cyrix explained it tous, marketing the "total image" of the company. Got that?Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Intel Names Two CorporateOfficers; Promotes 10 to VPIntel Corp. of Santa Clara, CA started the new year by awardingtwelve of its executives with new titles. The two men who werenamed corporate officers are Hans Geyer, who is VP and GM of IntelEurope; and Avram Miller, a director of business development.  The ten new VPs are: Richard DeLateur, VP, finance; Michael Fister,VP, Microprocessor Products group; Michael Maibach, VP, governmentaffairs; Sean Maloney, VP, sales; David Marsing, VP, technology andmanufacturing group; Jacob Pena, VP, technology and manufacturinggroup; David Perlmutter, VP, Microprocessor Products group; PamelaPollace, VP, corporate marketing; William Siu, VP, technology andmanufacturing group; and Stephen Smith, VP, Microprocessor Productsgroup.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Micro Linear Does A Management ShuffleArthur Stabenow relinquished his post as president of Micro LinearCorp. of San Jose, CA. He continues as chairman and CEO. TedMalanczuk, formerly VP of Operations, was elected president andCOO.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996GateField Now ShippingFirst FPGA to Beta SiteBy Amy Whaley, Section EditorPeople & OrganizationsGateFieldTM, a division of Zycad Corp. in Fremont, CA has startedshipping its first GF51K FPGA part to a beta customer.  This 51,000-gate chip is said to be the highest density single FPGAcurrently available in the market. Additional beta shipments ofthis part will be made in the next few weeks, with production ship-ments expected to begin later this quarter.  The GF51K is one member of Gatefield's GF100KTM family of high-density silicon. These chips are combined with GateField softwaretools, which are "synthesis friendly" and work with high-level,top-down design methodologies to comprise the GateField DesktopFoundry SystemTM, allowing ASIC designers to easily work withintheir current design environments.  Formed in August 1993, GateField develops Flash-based FPGAtechnology upon which its GF100K family of high-capacity FPGAs,including the "first true" 100K gate FPGA, is built. Closelycoupled with the GF100K family is the Desktop Foundry, a set ofautomated EDA tools optimized for top-down, HDL design andmethodology.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Crosspoint Readies,Aims CrossFire FPGAsCrosspoint Solutions of Milpitas, CA has disclosed an advanced newarchitecture for very high gate count customer-programmable ASICs.Crosspoint also provided a preview of a six-chip product family ofprogrammable gate arrays, with densities up to 100,000 gates, tobe released in 1996.  The "CrossFireTM" architecture is reportedly the first to combineadvanced ASIC design methodology with high-density, high-perfor-mance customer-programmable ICs. These devices will be the "firsttrue" customer programmable gate arrays compatible with existingASIC design methodologies, gate densities, and performance levels.  The new CrossFire architecture employs a proprietary super-finegrained half-gate basic building block called a CoreCell. TwoCoreCells can combine to form a 2-input NAND gate or a latchstorage cell. This approach has been optimized for mainstream ASICsynthesis-based design methodology, efficiently implementing bothmemory and logic.  The CrossFire product family will be implemented in 0.5-micron,3/4-layer metal CMOS. Initially, it will consist of six deviceswith gate counts from 20,000 to 100,000. The CrossFire technologyroad map calls for eventual migration to a 0.25-micron technologyresulting in chips at 250K-and-above gate levels.  The CoreCell technology uses a sea-of-gates architecture and theMicroFuseTM amorphous silicon antifuse technology. IndividualCoreCells are arranged in cell clusters called a "Tray." The Traysare distributed over the die as a sea-of-gates, forming a "Sea-of-TraysTM" array.  The CrossFire CP100K family will number six devices having densityranges from 20,000 to 100,000 gates. The operating voltage for thefamily will be 3.3 volts, and will have a speed of up to 100MHz.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Altera Adds MemberTo FLASHlogic FamilyAltera Corp. of San Jose, CA will begin initial shipments of theEPX880, a member of its FLASHlogic family.  The EPX880 offers 1,600 usable gates, 80MHz perfromance, andpredictable 10nSec pin-to-pin delay. The EPX880 offers fullcompatibility with the EPROM-based EPX780.  All FLASHlogic devices are built around the same full-featuredarchitecture -- Logic Array Blocks (LABs) links by the programmableInterconnect Array (PIA). Each LAB can be configured either as anindustry-standard 24V10 logic block with 10-macrocells, or as128X10 on-chip SRAM.  Samples of the EPX880 in a 321-pin QFP package are available now,with production slated this March. Price of a 10nSec, commercialtemp. grade is $60 for 100 pieces. EPX880 samples in a 84-pin PLCCwill be available in Q296. Altera's PLDshell Plus software addscompilation support for all FLASHlogic devices, including theEPX880.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996QuickLogic Touts `First'FPGAs for Verilog, VHDLQuicklogic Corp. of Santa Clara, CA has released the first FPGAsoptimized for Verilog and VHDL synthesis.  The seven-member pASIC 2 family ranges from 3,000 to 20,000 usablegates with datapath speeds exceeding 200MHz, and counter speedsabove 150MHz. The firm's ViaLink technology provides aninterconnect between the top two layers of a new 3-layer metal CMOSprocess. Moving the Vialink anitfuses over the transistor siliconresults in die sizes up to 50% smaller, lowering device costs.  The global connectivity of pASIC 2's logic cells combined with theViaLink's speed results in devices which can always route a design,maintain pinouts to a circuit board layout, and provide fast,stable timing. Thus, Verilog or VHDL designs are easy tosynthesize.  QuickWorks 6.0 will support pASIC 2 with Verilog, VHDL, schematicand mixed-mode entry. Language templates, Verilog source-leveldebug, timing/frequency driven placement, and interactive cross-probing between design windows are part of a package which sellsfor $2,995.  Prototypes of the 7,000 usable gate OL2007 device is available now;production ia slated in the next few months. Devices from 3,000 to20,000 usable gate devices are set for throughout 1996.  Beta versions of QuickWorks 6.0 are available now. QuickLogiccustomers under software warranty or maintenance will be upgradedat no charge. Sample quantities of the QL2007 start at $75.00;production pricing starts at $45.00.  Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996`Fastest' DRAM SlashesCosts of Graphics CardsBy removing the cost barrier that previously preventedmanufacturers from exploiting the entire bandwidth of a graphicsaccelerator's 1-Mbyte frame buffer, the industry's "fastest"128Kx16 DRAM from Mosel Vitelic at San Jose, CA lets thesesuppliers for the first time offer cards with 64-bit performancein benchmarks at aggressive mass market prices.  Until the new DRAM, called V53C16129H (45nSec row address strobe,RAS access time, 20nSec EDO cycle time, $8.00 in OEM volumes),256Kx16 DRAMs were the only choice. Since four 256Kx16 DRAMs costanywhere from U.S. $52.00 to $56.00 (as of mid-December, 1995),designers were forced to leave the bus empty to meet retail priceexpectations.  Now, for $32.00 (U.S.), four V53C16129H DRAMs let graphics cardmakers offer full 64-bit bus performance on graphics benchmarks atmainstream prices. Since 256Kx16 and 128Kx16 EDO DRAMs have thesame pinout, and most current-generation 64-bit controllers aredesigned for either choice, manufacturers can simply drop theV53C16129H into existing sockets to achieve a competitive 1-MBytebenchmark advantage.  The new DRAMs also offer an economical design alternative to moreexpensive SRAMs for network routers and switches. The DRAMs support set-top box, hard-disk, and low-cost, added-valuetelephony applications. The only other 128Kx16 DRAMs appears to bethe 75% slower (70nSec RAS, 35nSec EDO) Sanyo LC322266 in Japan. Mosel Vitelic's 128Kx16 DRAMs are available with and without EDOin 40-pin plastic SOJ packages. The V53C16129H costs $8.00(Q10,000), U.S. pricing.  Contact: Hiro Yoshida, strategic marketing manager, (408) 433-6000.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Synchronous GraphicsRAM is 8-Meg & 3.3VSamsung Semiconductor of San Jose, CA has disclosed the industry's"first" synchronous graphics RAM (SGRAM) device, organized as 256Kby 32 bit memory, is now in production.  Samsung's SGRAM is intended to address price/performance needs thatfall between high-end dual port memories such as Window RAM and lowcost 256Kx16-bit EDO DRAM.  Samsung's KM4132G271 SGRAM is organized as dual bank, 131,072 wordsby 32 bits. All data, address and control inputs are sampledthrough synchronous interface at the positive going edge of thesystem clock, simplifying designs and enabling better control overmemory subsystems.  The KM4132G271 SGRAM is available in variants operating at 66, 83,and 100MHz. The KM4132G271 is a JEDEC standard 3.3-volt part, andis 5-volt tolerant. It is packaged as 100-pin plastic quad flatpack (PQFP).  Full mass production volumes are available now. Pricing for the83MHz version is set at $40 each in lots of a 1,000, and the othertwo variants will be competitively priced.  Contact: Mark Ellsberry, VP of marketing for memory products, (408)954-7000.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Cypress Raises Speeds,Densities of EPROMsCypress Semiconductor of San Jose, CA offers two high-speed EPROMsthat extend the company's speed range. The 256K CY27H256 and 512KCY27H512 provide access times as fast as 25nSec (commercial) and30nSec (military), giving Cypress what it claims is the industry'sfastest EPROMs at every density from 64K to 1 megabit.  Among key applications for the new EPROMs digital signal processingcode storage for modems and high-speed RISC-embedded CPUs.  Higher speeds enable users to run code directly from the EPROMs tohigh-speed DSP engines and ultrafast RISC CPUs, eliminating theneed for SRAM and conserving board space.  The CY27H256 and CY27H512 are available in production volumes now.They are offered in 25, 30, 35, 45, 55, and 70nSec speed grades,and are available in industry standard 28-pin, 600-mil DIP, 32-pinLCC and PLCC, and 28-pin TSOP packages.  In 10,000-piece quantities in 600-mil DIP packaging, the CY27H256and CY27H512 are priced from $2.30 to $9.70 and from $2.95 to$14.80, respectively, depending upon speed grade.  Contact: Naushik Desai, product marketing manager, (408) 943-2600.      Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996IDT R5000 MPU Enables3D and InternetworkingIntegrated Device Technology of Santa Clara, CA has introduced thenext-generation R5000TM MIPS RISC microprocessor. Designed to enablenew levels of performance in embedded applications, IDT's firstsuperscalar processor provides enhanced graphics capabilities forvisual computing and high bandwidth for internetworkingapplications.  With enhanced floating point computing and scalable integer perfor-mance, the R5000 offers double the performance of Intel's i960 HTTMat greater than 250 dhrystone MIPS.  The two-way superscalar execution core of the R5000 permits dual-issue instruction capability, enabling the CPU to fetch twoinstructions from the cache per cycle for high-speed, low latencyALU operations with other instruction classes.  The R5000's high clock frequency and dual-issue instructioncapability offer 3D graphics customers scalable and enhancedfloating point performance required for applications such as arcadegames and graphics workstations. The R5000 accelerates single-precision floating point operations in 2D and 3D visualizationenvironments and is capable of up to 400 million floating pointoperations per second (MFLOPS).  The R5000 is available in a 272-pin ball grid array (BGA) packagein 180MHz and 200MHz versions with prices starting at $275 in10,000-piece quantities. Samples are currently available, with fullproduction expected in March, 1996. Speed upgrades will beannounced later in 1996.  Contact: Jamal Haider, RISC strategic marketing manager, (408) 492-8623.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996New Zilog DSP CoreLowers System CostsZilog Inc., of Campbell, CA has unveiled its newest DSP core, theZ8946X, which offers a cost-effective alternative to embeddedcontrollers traditionally used in modems, telephone answering ma-chines, wireless phones, and digital TV.  The 40 MIPS, 16-bit Z89462 device is the first implementation tomake use of this new core. It features microcontroller functions,on-chip peripherals and a host of DSP software development tools.  The device integrates a bit field unit to manage microcontrollersystem control functions and communications through single cyclebit manipulation, masking, and merging.  Peripherals, traditionally found on microcontrollers, such as two24-bit timer  counters, pulse-width modulators, bit I/O and high-speed synchronous serial ports, are integrated on the Z89462 tolower chip costs and reduce design time and complexity. An on-chipwait state generator eliminates the need for external hardware.  In a 100-pin PQFP surface mount package, the Z89462 is availablefor $11.00 in 50K quantities.  Contact: Walter Croce, director of Zilog's DSP channel (408) 370-8246.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Rockwell's MediaLinkFosters Interactive PCsRockwell Semiconductor Systems of Newport Beach, CA has introducedMediaLinkTM, an international standard-based technology, enablingPC users to exchange data and sound concurrently over a singlestandard phone line.  Rockwell's MediaLink products are ideally suited for network gamingenvironments requiring high-quality audio, low-delay and low-costmodem implementations for quick system response across standardtelephone lines. MediaLink devices also support applications such as multipartyconferencing, long-distance learning, on-line CD shopping,collaborative computing, shared white boards, remote multimediapresentations, and remote LAN access.  Rockwell's MediaLink ICs support data and fax operations, V.42/MNP2-4 error correction, 4.42bis/MNP5 data compression, MNP 10EC,EIA/TIA 578 Class 1 fax standard, Caller ID detection and worldwidesupport. They also include full-duplex speakerphone and telephoneanswering machines capabilities.  MediaLink products will be housed in 68-pin PLCC (plastic leadedchip carrier) packaging. Samples are available now; initialproduction is scheduled to begin in April. Pricing for 10Kquantities is $39.50 for the MediaLink RCV144ACF/SP and $79.50 forthe MediaLink RCV288ACF/SP.  Contact: Sophie Tollefsrud, product manager for value-addedproducts, (714) 221-4600.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Level One ReleasesEthernet Chip TrioLevel One Communications of Sacramento, CA has released threeEthernet transceiver products, each targeted at a fast growingLocal Area Network (LAN) market:The LXT944, which highly integrates four independent 10Base-Ttransceivers (Quad) for use in multiport                                                   backbone and workgroupswitches.  The LXT905, which offers transparent 3.3V-5.0V operation for10Base-T mobile computing applications.  The LXT904, which offers an economical solution for integratedEthernet LAN-to-WAN communications.  The three new LAN products are Ethernet transceivers, which providethe link between the Media Access Controller (MAC) layer and thephysical media. All three products integrate the ManchesterEncoder/Decoders (EnDecs) and LED drivers for ease of design. Thedevices have four operation modes which interface with most of theexisting IEEE 802.3 MAC solutions on the market today.  The LXT944 integrates four independent 10Base-T ports into a single100-pin PQFP package. Level One's on-chip integrated filtertechnology further reduces the number of external components neededfor a 10Base-T connection.  With 3.3V operation, the LXT905 is optimized for use in laptopcomputers, remote print servers, Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs)and other mobile or remote applications that require a LANinterface. The device offers transparent 3.3-5V operation to reduce powerconsumption. Its 28-pin PLCC package allows for reduced printedcircuit board size requirements.  The LXT904 is an Ethernet interface adapter that provides theEnDecs and an Attachment Unit Interface (AUI) necessary for anintegrated Ethernet transceiver product. This Ethernet interfaceadapter is essential for the development of bridges, routers, andLAN-to-WAN access products.  Samples are now available for all three products. Productionquantities will be available in Q1 of 1996. Pricing in 1000-unitquantities: LXT944 is $18.40 in 100-pin PQFPs; LXT905 is $7.41 ina 28-pin PLCC; and the LXT904 is $5.53 in a 44-pin PLCC.  Contact: Dave Chase, director of networking products, (916) 855-5000.  Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996IR Says New HEXFETsSet Performance MarksThe new fifth generation of HEXFET power MOSFET transistorsdeveloped by International Rectifier of El Segundo, CA reportedlyachieves significant reductions in the critical on-resistance,Rds(on), rating compared with similar chip sizes of existingdevices. Reductions of more than 65% are said to be attained forN-channel and P-channel MOSFETs.  These HEXFET devices offer maximum Rds(on) ratings down to 6m ,claimed to be the lowest presently available, establishingperformance benchmarks for power MOSFETs. Lower on-resistance is critical to users because it directlysupports more efficient device operation and lower system costs.  The new family of power MOSFETs ranges from 20V up to 150V. Basedon the fundamental HEXFET structure pioneered by IR, thedevelopment employs advanced process techniques to increase celldensities and reduce line geometries in attaining the Rds(on)improvement over present products.  The initial 55V product, the N-channel IRF3205, is offered in thepopular TO-220 package with industry-pacing Rds(on) rating of8mohms. It can replace up to three existing devices in parallelconfiguration such as the IRFZ48 at 18mohms, and deliver the sameRds(on) performance. Also available is the 30V series, featuring the IRL3803, with on-resistance down to 6m , and 4.5V and 10V Vgs gate drive options.  All of IR's HEXFET generation devices are available for sampling.Unit prices in 1,000 quantities of the IRF3205, IRL3803, andIRF4905 are $4.32, $4.97, and $5.18, respectively.  Contact: Gene Sheridan, director of strategic product marketing(310) 332-3331.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Fast Harris IGBTs Win Voltage CompetitionTo help motor controller designers cut system size and weightthrough use of smaller heat sinks, a new 600V, 12-A ultra-fastswitching (UFS) N-type, insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)from Harris Semiconductor of Melbourne, FL provides 45% to 31%lower saturation voltage losses (VCE(on)) than competitors.  The new IGBT, available as HGTP12N60C3 (TO-220AB package), HGTG12-N60C3D -- with internal Hyperfast anti-parallel diode (TO-247),HGT1S12N60C3 (TO-262AA), and HGT1S12N60C3S (TO-263 AB surface-mountpackage), switches 12 A at 110 degrees C case temperature, whichis 10 degrees to 20 degrees C higher than competing IGBTs. TheIGBT's 2.2V max VCE(on) at a 150 degrees C junction temperature lets Harrisrate maximum continuous collector current at 110 degrees C.  Designers can cut system size and weight by employing smaller heatsinks with 20% higher thermal resistance.  The 600-V, 12-A IGBT is ideal for high voltage switchingapplications where low conduction losses are essential. Examplesinclude AC and DC motor controls in conveyors, machine tools, andvariable-speed drives. In motor control circuits, IGBTs control thedelivery of power to brushless-DC, switched reluctance and AC-induction motors by varying frequency and/or voltage.  The Harris IGBT allows engineers to optimize designs by minimizingconduction losses. For example, at 12A, 480V, and 10kHz switchingfrequency with a 50% duty cycle, maximum conduction loss in theHGTP12N60C3 is 13.2W, versus 19.2W for the IRGP30U, a 6W differ-ence.  The HGTP12N60C3, HGTG12N60C3D, HGT1S12N60C3, and HGT1S12N60C3Sconstitute the latest offering from Harris' third IGBT generation,in which cell geometries have been optimized to extract maximumperformance. Future third-generation UFS offerings will switch from55A to 80A at breakdowns of 600V and 1200V.  The HGTP12N60C3 (TO-220AB) is priced at $1.86. The HGT1212N60C3(TO-262AA) is $2.20. The HGT1S12N60C3S (TO-263AB surface-mountpackage) sells for $2.25. The HGTG12N60C3D -- with anti-paralleldiode (TO-247) goes for $3.56. All prices are Q1000. Delivery isfrom stock.  Contact: Fred Lokuta, senior product manager in Mountaintop, PA,(717) 474-3273.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Motorola Adds Two RF Triple Video DriversMotorola in Phoenix, AZ has added two triple video drivers to itsCRT Hybrid Amplifiers portfolio. The MHW2528 and the MHW3528devices are wide bandwidth, high-voltage output amplifiers designedto provide large voltage swings in very short transition times.  The performance of the amplifiers are derived from a uniquecomplementary circuit design and the special high- frequency, high-voltage RF transistors. The MHW2528 triple video driver supports video clock rates beyond200MHz with a 2.8nSec transition time (10-90%). The device providesup to 50Vp-p output swing at a min. bandwidth of 100MHz, with a 60Vsupply voltage.  The MHW3528 triple video driver supports video clock rates beyond240MHz with a 2.7nSec transition time (10-90%). The device providesup to 70Vp-p output swing at a min. bandwidth of 120MHz, with a 80Vsupply voltage.  Pricing for the MHW2528 triple video driver is $21.00 in volumesunder 100 pieces. Pricing for the MHW3528 triple video driver is$22.00 in volumes under 100 pieces. Pricing is in U.S. dollars forU.S. delivery only. Samples and small quantities are available fromstock; production quantities have a seven week lead time.  Contact: Don Sundby, product marketing manager, (602) 244-6108..HEADLINEBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996The Japanese ASIC MarketThe Japanese ASIC Market report is a comprehensive review of allaspects of the Japanese ASIC market.  The report offers detailedvendor capabilities which include sales by ASIC type andtechnology.  The report provides many tables of top suppliermarket shares broken out by ASIC categories.  A section on CADtools supported and vendor interfaces details each ASIC vendor'scapabilities.  For additional information call (415) 871-4377. Or send email to: Szirom@hte-sibs.comSzirom Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996DRAM/SRAM Market Opportunities & TrendsThe DRAM/SRAM Memory study covers strategic aspects of theDRAM/SRAM memory market including:  applications, technologytrends, price forecasts, competition/supplier analyses,political/trade environment, market outlook/forecast, and relevanttopics.  The report provides capability profiles for all DRAM/SRAMvendors with an appendix listing key industry contacts.  The studyhighlights such strategic aspects as user demand, capacitylimitation, new fab facilities, and provides history/forecasts(1981-1992) by region, market segment, device type, and  bytechnology.  This report is invaluable for chip vendors and usersalike.  Tightly-written, it covers over 450 pages of hard-to-getdata.  Includes strategic profile of SGS Thomson Microelectronics.For additional information call (415) 871-4377.Or send email to: Szirom@hte-sibs.com Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996ROM Memory Market Opportunities & TrendsThe ROM Memory market study high is a unique report that addressesboth CMOS and NMOS markets.  It provides sales by technology anddensity through 1993.  The analysis covers strategic global trendsand highlights the concerns of computer makers that the ROMbusiness is coming under Japanese domination.  Since ROMs have alower market usage profile than DRAMs, the Japanese dominance isslipping through the viewfinders of U.S. trade and industry watchdog groups.  Detailed forecasts and pricing trends are discussed. A ROM industry personnel guide makes it easy to contact the rightindividuals in the semiconductor industry concerned with ROMs. Over 27 tables and figures illustrate this study.  For moreinformation call (415) 871-4377. Or send email to: Szirom@hte-sibs.comBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Power MOSFET Market Opportunities The Power MOSFET Market Opportunities report analyzes the marketand presents an analysis of the worldwide power MOSFET market byproduct, by technology, by application segment, and by geography. Market data is also presented for the high-power end of themarket.  The report reviews application areas, including a usagematrix by Voltage and current ratings.  The key suppliers and truecompetition environment are analyzed.  The report recommendsgeneral marketing strategy, sales, promotion, and pricestrategies/tactics.  Organizational considerations are alsoreviewed.  For more information call (415) 871-4377.Or send email to: Szirom@hte-sibs.comBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Wafer Fab/Clean Room Market StudyThis study was undertaken for equipment suppliers sellingequipment for the fab room environment in the semiconductorindustry.  It is also useful for companies who plan to constructnew fab facilities.  It is the only report available from anysource which provides details of new fabs constructed in the lasttwo years and the characteristics of each fab.  The reportanalyzes which architectural engineering firms were contracted todo the fab designs and provides details about these A/E firms. Strategic capital spending issues are discussed, as well as thefuture outlook for capital equipment firms.  The study includesa complete fab site database showing where every fab is locatedin the world and what products and technologies are fabricated atthe site (includes details on other activities performed at eachsite).  For more information call (415) 871-4377.Or send email to: Szirom@hte-sibs.comBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SGS Thomson Microelectronics Strategic Company ProfileThis Strategic Company Profile analyzes the business, strategy,and market performance of STM in the semiconductor industry.  Thisin-depth report, totaling 60 pages in length, provides aninsider's viewpoint of the company.  The sections include:Background & Overview; Product & Technology Capability; Plants &Facilities; Marketing & Sales Capability; Financial Analysis(publicly-held firms also include stock analysis charts);Management Overview (includes company organization chart), andStrategic Analysis and Assessment.  For more information call(415) 871-4377. Or send email to: Szirom@hte-sibs.comBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996IC-Stats:  Forecasts, Analysis & TrendsIC-Stats: Analysis & Trends provides a graphical analysis ofindustry business statistics by major IC product familycategories.  Over 125 graphs analyze business indicators and offerthe most informative service available anywhere.  Use this serviceto track your firms performance versus the industry and use it asthe basis for business forecasting.  For more information call(415) 871-4377. Or send email to: Szirom@hte-sibs.comBack to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Discrete-Stats:  Forecasts, Analysis & TrendsAnalysis & Trends provides a graphical analysisof industry business statistics by major Discrete product familycategories.  Over 85 graphs analyze business indicators and offerthe most informative service available anywhere.  Use this serviceto track your firms performance versus the industry and use it asthe basis for business forecasting.  For more information call(415) 871-4377.Back to Headline List CopyrightSEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY & BUSINESS SURVEY via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Flash EPROM Memory Market & TrendsAs the only major Flash EPROM report available, the study coverstechnology issues, reviews applications in all markets, providescapability profiles of Flash EPROM vendors, and analyzes processand production trends.  The report contrasts Flash EPROMs withother non-volatile memories.  An extensive section on markets andforecasts provides data by application, density, and speed(forecasts through 1995).  Key personnel in the EPROM industry islisted in the appendix (includes titles and phone numbers).  Formore information call (415) 871-4377.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-22IA059-000323-B028-70http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec102.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224755 text/html 107898HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:45:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:29 GMTContent-length: 107710Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec102.html Sample Issue Copyright SOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNet January 01, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES "IT'S THE END OF THE WORLD, AND WE KNOW IT" (3575 words) APPLICATION PARTITIONING ASIDE: WHAT'S FORTE GOOD FOR? (3067 words) NEW WINE IN OLD BOTTLES: CINCOM AND UNIFY (3416 words) RATIONAL SOFTWARE: THE ADA KIDS WIDEN THEIR APPEAL (2139 words) LET'S GET USER FRIENDLY: THE DSDM APPROACH TO RAD (2240 words) MY OWN PRIVATE I-WAY (898 words) INPUT/OUTPUT (385 words) NEWS AT A GLANCE (878 words) UK PRODUCTS (831 words) CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                  "IT'S THE END OF THE WORLD,                         AND WE KNOW IT"When you read these words, it'll be early January 1996. To putthat in a perspective that might cause you a minor spasm ofpanic: there are less than 210 weekends left before the end ofthe century.The Year 2000 will start on a Saturday, which is probably verygood news. Because you will be spending between now and thatFriday night, December 31st, 1999, spending vast amounts of timeand development dollars combing through code. And no, you won'tbe re-engineering, re-developing or re-vamping. You'll be engagedin a simple, desperate drive to stop your company - and maybeyour country - breaking its neck on the banana slip of theinfamous Year 2000 problem.Say what? You probably know the routine by now, but you decidedto forget about it until third quarter of 99. It goes like this:When a lot of business computer applications were first deployed,in the 1960s (some were rolled out in the 1950s!), space was at apremium, and languages like Cobol typically stored dates in atruncated fashion. Thus programmers quickly became habituated towriting date routines in the form 01-01-96, or MM-DD-YY.That works fine until programs start having to compute arounddates that cross (bi-directionally, remember!) centuryboundaries. This began to happen to some companies in theinsurance industry in the mid-1980s. Because of course there's no"CC" for "19" or "20" in a lot of those (now buried? lost? stillactive?) system calls. So when we deal with "2000" do the twozeros indicate to the computer that it is 1900, 2000, undefined,or an error condition? Well, could be any of the above, right?So slowly but surely there's been a rising sense of danger insome quarters as organizations begin to fearfully wonder ifthey're going to be presented with some Godawful headaches aroundthe turn of the century to do with century invalidity.These problems range from the trivial to the catastrophic. You'veprobably already heard the ones about sweet little old ladies of104 being invited to kindergarten because the local schoolrecords system sees they were born in "88" (only it was 1888, not1988!). Then there's the weird danger of things like planes nottaking off because computers thrash in panic at the "discovery"that they haven't been serviced in 100 years. Then there'll beheadline stories about customers being presented with a hundredyears' worth of unpaid interest on their credit card bills, orperhaps more happily, a hundred years of "unearned" interest ontheir savings. Going up the scale of danger, how about old folksnot being sent urgent age-related medical screening reminders,because they're too "young"? How would you feel if your Daddoesn't get his prostate test in time because of some dumbhospital program that thinks he should be being fixed for bracesinstead?And then there's the danger that companies will screw up theirfinancial health by non-payment or over-payment or mispayment-payment or whatever. The Gartner Group's Bruce Hall has said inall seriousness that less than half of US companies are likely tobe century compliant by the year 2000.Ed Yourdon (Application Development Strategies, June 1995)produced a quite sobering account of some of the time-lineproblems. Last year - though you may have been unaware of it -many five year financial forecast programs failed. This year,we'll have (at least) some five year driver license expirationproblems in the US. Next year, look for insurance policy crashes;the year after, credit-card expiration snafus; the year afterthat, purchase order and one-year contract bugs; and themillennium will herald the start of those age calculation errorsthat the press will so enjoy writing (remember all those $10mtelephone bill stories we thought we'd lived down in theSeventies?).More startlingly - Gartner has done some calculations based onthe amount of Cobol out there (no-one really knows - 50 billionlines in production use, according to IDC, with 80% of all codewritten in the language?) and the industry average cost of fixinglines of code (at least $1.50). It's seriously predicting aglobal IT spend on the Year 2000 problem of anywhere between$300bn to $600bn. The lowest figure anyone can come up with is$17.5bn for the US alone.If you want to cross-check with some other ways of putting ametric on all this proposed work, Gartner's minimum suggestedresource allocation is 24 people working for one full year. Andalso please bear in mind that since you'll have to test thesystem practically to death, you'll need ideally to be at thatstage one full year before that possibly cataclysmic Friday night- ie you need to do all this between this month and December1998.(Gartner has also been so concerned as to suggest that as many as10% of IT-using companies could go bust directly as a result ofthe Year 2000 crisis.)Think about that. Then think about the fact that the IRS is juststarting to look at fixing the problem. Then do what Ed Yourdonrecommends - check all your money out in gold coins and go andlive on a Pacific island for two years until the dust from thecrash of civilization settles!Hence the "End Of The World" scenario we've cheekily quoted fromREM. And do you feel fine?Maybe you do if you were one of the far-seeing individuals whomade it to the Software Productivity Group (of Westboro, Mass)sponsored Year 2000 conference in Orlando, Florida last October.Of the over 300 attendees, 13% were of IS director level and 18%were CIOs, Senior VPs or VPs, with over half (52%) othermanagement and only 17% on the developer or consultant level. Thepreponderance of management can be taken as a good sign, for aswe'll see the Year 2000 is not so much a technical as amanagement issue.Century date change and re-engineering specialist Adpac, of SanFrancisco, took the opportunity to poll attendees on theircurrent level of awareness and action on Year 2000 (see diagram).                     1 PER CENT ARE FINISHEDAs you can see, quite a few folks are still very much at theplanning and early adoption stage - only 1% were at the finaltest stage! But the scale of the problem can be glimpsed by otheraspects of the survey. Over ten per cent of the respondents haveover 100,000 Cobol programs - not lines of code, programs. Most(27%) have between 2,500 and 10,000, and nearly a fifth simplydon't know how many they've got. When asked if there wereapplication or database files that do indeed have only 2-digityears, an astonishing 85% admitted that was so. And a baremajority - 51% in this survey - said they were confident thatapplication components are "easily identified" by namingtechniques.It would be easy to continue to throw around some of these mind-numbing statistics, but we think the point is clear: the Year2000 problem is a problem, and there is a scale of possible direconsequences ranging from no effect to worldwide economic andsocial catastrophe. Obviously it's prudent to believe the actualimpact on you and your development team is going to be somewherein the middle - and like it or not, chums, that means that those200-odd weekends left to the end of the century are more likelythan not to be taken up with fixing this problem, rather than anyfun stuff (like new development) or sensible stuff (re-engineering badly deteriorating systems).Software Futures was interested in participating in the Orlandoexperience precisely because we wanted to sift away some of theArmageddon hoopla, so we could try and determine what real livesituations and strategies are going on regarding the "MillennialBug."If we heard any phrase in Orlando more often than "The year 2000is a serious problem and we've got to start doing something aboutit," it was "Start with inventory management - it's important!"We say this because of all the user war stories (and yes, thereare a few - some people are already doing the right thing!) theinventory management issue stands out as the common theme. Likethey say in metrics, if you don't measure something, how will youknow how you've done when you're finished? Inventory managementis the right first step because it can help you answer suchfirefighting questions as, How much source code is missing fromyour application portfolio? How many systems can be retired inthe next four years with no impact? And so forth.As Jennifer Schmidt, managing partner for Chicago-based systemsrenovation consulting firm SPR, puts it, you'll find that theactual physical changing of lines of code will be the smallestelement of your cost, ironically. Based on her experience of anumber of Year 2000 projects, a good rule of thumb would be 40%planning, 50% testing, and only 10% rewrites, she estimates.(By the way, that inventory check isn't meant to just cover yourin-house developed code - what about all your packaged softwareapplications. Yes, that means you, Mr Smug Client/Server. Howsure are you that all your glittering new distributedapplications are century-compliant?)The inventory management angle was in any case a factor in theexperience of Mike Smith, director of the Great AmericanInsurance Company, of Cincinnati,who co-ordinated the company'srecent Year 2000 fix."We have a bit of everything," he admits cheerfully, detailing amixed legacy and PC environment where systems using CICS, Cobol,Assembler, VSAM and PC upload to mainframe screens are all happyequals. And buried in this richness? At least 75 combinations ofletters and characters that dealt with dates, in the case of thePICTURE, REDEFINES and VALUE literals of his Cobol applications.We're sure Mike isn't the only one who might have to say afterlooking at some of his working code, "I didn't know you could goon for that many pages before a full stop." Assembler proved aneasier language to date decode, he adds, but warns that macros inthe language need careful handling.                      NOT MERE CODE PARSINGIn terms of fixing as a percentage of time spent, he agrees withSchmidt. "We found that impacted code was only about 5% - butimpacted logic was 80%."In other words, tracing the Year 2000 impact on all systems as aGestalt was more important than mere physical code parsing. Twoother valuable insights into getting the Year 2000 fix right:source and project management. As we said about that inventory(have we told you it's important yet?!?), using JCL is actually asurprisingly good way of doing easier impact analysis - but ifyou have missing source, problem. He suggests using your JCLresource as a good roadmap. As for project management: "It's toodangerous to think you can do all this in one go. The only reasonI'm able to speak to you today about it is we did it in phases."One thing that you must take away from Mike's project is that inthe end, with the right tools and approach, it became amanageable problem. A lot of the hard coded procedural logicproved acceptable so long as the right top level interface ischanged, for example. In over 95% of cases of needed code change,a simple expansion to include a century date field was all thatwas necessary. And he was able to use a cheap and plentifulprogrammer resource - "A task force of college kids did most ofthe mechanical work," he grins.But don't take that one user story as a safety blanket: "Thereare three certainties in life - death, taxes, and the Year 2000,"says Hall. "And it doesn't matter about the statistics - in theend, it's all about your situation."Dan Spragle, seconded from Andersen Consulting to the YellowCorp, a mid-Western trucking firm, does have some statistics,though. "Inventorying was easily the most time consuming aspectof our fix," he notes, since 9,000 programs were involved. In theend it took 17 people 3 years of effort to complete the work, or50 person years (350 in dog years, as he says...). That averagedout at about $75 an hour per programmer, a not inconsiderablesum. The team had also used the Adpac source editing tool tofacilitate that process.Bank of America's Year 2000 team had a neat way to persuadesenior management that this apparently "empty" way to spend goodIT investment (remember, you only have time to fix the Year 2000bug - you would be reckless to think you can do that long-postponed systems re-engineering at the same time). One of itsVPs, Howard Adams, declares, "We sold it to management purely andsimply as a business opportunity - we will use this work to gainmarket share and win customers in the face of our competitors'non-compliance."Howard contracted James Martin & Co, the Atlanta-based consultingfirm, to use its TSRM (The Systems Redevelopment Methodology). Hefound a massive 75 million lines of code needed scrubbing,including 50 different dialects of Cobol alone. "No tool can copewith all that code on its own; a methodology for process andproject management is vital," he believes.                        BUSINESS DRIVERSAbbott Labs, a Chicago-based pharmaceutical and health carecompany, used a combination of product and consulting fromQuintic Systems, Inc (also of Chicago). Again, this was asituation involving not just mainframe but DEC and AS/400 and,yes, over 30,000 PCs.The reason the organization took on trying to pick over thisgigantic IT inventory was simple - a system fell over in 1990 andanother produced incorrect results. Since a lot of its systemoutput has to go to the Federal Food & Drug Administration sincethe 50,000 strong outfit develops and sells new drugs, this waskind of an important business driver...To trap the problem before it got more out of hand, the companyinstigated a programming standard in May of 1990 to ensure that afour digit year was always used. It then divided up the probleminto four areas of concern; its mainframe legacy, PC andunsupported code, the software it purchased and the software itproduced or sold.The next step was to decide that as far as possible a four digityear code could be simulated as often as practical, rather thanphysically trapping and changing occurrences. This is similar tothe Great American Insurance approach, and also puts all thoseperhaps simplistic Year 2000 Cost = Lines Of Code x Change PerLine doomsday equations.If that was the case the Abbott Labs inventory would have beenpotentially cripplingly expensive - 8,700 external sorts, 8,800separate programs and 445 production systems needed attention.And as we said before, the decision to carefully carve out thesystems that will die a natural death soon anyway can reduce theworkload even further - 320 of the production systems were thuseliminated as Year 2000 fix candidates.Using this project management tip, the user was able to go backand cut the projected Year 2000 cost by 50%. But note that basedon this particular case, the systems inventory work isn't a once-only - quarterly updates may be advisable (old systems have ahabit, as we all know, of never quite dying on their own).Sandy Carroll, the Year 2000 project manager for Business andStudent Information Services at the University of Minnesota, inthe twin cities of St.Paul-Minneapolis, faced a similarapparently vast problem with 5 million lines of code (5,000programs). Thankfully, she too was able to revise her originalcosts down by bringing in the help of Phoenix, Arizona basedViasoft's Impact 2000 product, cutting the impact analysis phasealone down from 8.5 months to 6 weeks. Of the 5,000 programs,again, it turned out that not all needed changing - only 3,500were actually in need of attention.Don't think Software Futures is saying that this Year 2000 is atrivial problem simply because in practical terms it's thefeeling from some of these plucky century-date change pioneersthat in practice the actual amount of effort involved is simply alot - not crushing. All that means is that don't be so daunted bythe thing that you throw up your hands and don't start at all.But obviously the sooner the better.You might object that without support from the corner office, youmight as well hunker down and wait for the food riots. If youhear the slightest note of objection, you might want to point tothe example of Lou Gerstner.The financial engineer now turning IBM around has thrown hisconsiderable presence into supporting Big Blue's own efforts toclean house for Year 2000.If you download the very useful IBM's 180 page document on itsapproach to the crisis (at http://www.software.ibm.com) you'llonly get more confirmation that Gerstner knows it's vital IBMgets this right.The word from IBM spokespeople on the Year 2000 project is thatGerstner expects a full update every two months on the ongoingrollout of compliant products, and a 17-strong customer councilhas been established to help him get it right. In terms of IBMproducts and system software that need fixing, apparently VSE andMVS are on the minor casualty list, while VM needs quite a bit ofwork (not surprising, being that much older). While AS/400software is kosher, AIX is pretty much okay with a hint ofcaution - make sure routines that work with the counter all usefour digits for years, not two.On the PC BIOS side (and you've probably made the private joke toyourself about resetting the systems clock to 2000 and looking atthe, er, funny things the computer does), IBM claims a hardwareBIOS fix will be in place this year. (However, don't be surprisedif you have to get up a bit early from the "big party" to resetsome system clocks once again, just in case.) All in all, IBMfaithfully promises to be clean on the products side by the endof 1996, and on applications by the end of next year.IBM will also warn you about the Millennial Bug in a responsibleway, (quoting, once again, Gartner), "The time is now, theproblem is real, the solution is ugly."                   OUTSOURCING MIGHT NOT WORK!Well, one solution a lot of customers might immediately betempted to go for is outsourcing the whole wretched mess once andfor all. Simple, no? Hang on to your card from that nice guy atEDS or Andersen for a while longer. In a good article on thecrisis in the July, 1995 issue of CFO, technology editor JohnXenakis pointed out that the fixed-price contract nature of a lotof typical outsourcing deals doesn't fit well with the open-endednature of a 2000 fix."This problem is so big that we will consider these bugs to beout of the scope of our normal maintenance contract," says BennyPopek, managing partner for applications management for Coopers &Lybrand LLP in Burlington, Massachusetts. "For those clients whoinsist that we should take responsibility, we'll exercise thecancellation clause and terminate the outsourcing contract."One firm we've already namechecked as active in both Year 2000fixes and outsourcing, Cap Gemini America, now specificallymentions the issue in its contracts. More than mentions; itsinclusion raises the cost of a typical five year contract bybetween 5 and 20 per cent a year!Just to rub it in, Computer Sciences Corp has been quoted assaying it doubts "[any outsourcing vendor] will ever assume thecost of fixing this problem."There are any number of strategies like thinking you can ignorethe problem until the weekend before the century change, orthrough outsourcing, or hiring a bunch of cheap and cheerfulprogrammers in India or Russia to do it for you. The Web pagedevoted to the issue (http://www.2000.com) even has an amusingDavid Letterman style Top Ten reasons for ducking the issue; ourfavorites are, Nostradamus never mentioned this, I believe in thesanctity of all life - including computer bugs; and What dateproblem? Bill Gates will solve it.The Year 2000 problem is upon us. It's not a joke, but it's notlike a comet crashing into the Earth - ie, you can do somethingabout it. And it won't cost billions for you - just time andeffort, now.An analogy we'll steal from the management consultants is thestory about the frog in hot water. Put the little green fellow ina pan of boiling H20 and he'll naturally spring right out.But put him in a pan of cold water and slowly heat it up, and thepoor thing will stay happily there not noticing the temperaturerise until it is far, far too late. Feel that water bubble?Back to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                APPLICATION PARTITIONING ASIDE:                     WHAT'S FORTE GOOD FOR?Californian start-up Forte Software has always shouted loudestabout the joys of application partitioning. Clare Haney wonders,now that AP is becoming pretty commonplace, what else the companyhas up its sleeve?Being first with a technology (or even first to coin a groovybuzzword) can garner you lots of praise. But often thebreakthrough artiste rapidly loses its appeal as the world andhis dog jumps up on the bandwagon. Suddenly, the lone player onthe stage is swamped by the entire company of actors and his orher message is drowned out by the loud acclamations of thechorus.No one, as we saw last month, would dare to dispute the fact thatForte Software, based in Oakland, California, has made the mostnoise about application partitioning (AP) and all but forced therest of the application development tools vendors to declaim(whether truly or falsely) that they have it too. Today's concernabout Forte is: Has it won enough user hearts and minds to ensureits continued position as a leading three-tier second generationclient/server enterprise tool? Since most development toolsvendors are now practicing the black art of AP, does Forte need topull another interestingly shaped rabbit out of its top hat toget its magic tricks elevated above the jostling ranks of otherwould-be conjurers?Forte management has already admitted that maybe it's overplayedthe application partitioning card to the detriment of the rest ofits technology. Company president and CEO Marty Sprinzen told uslast month, "We over-emphasized AP; now we're much more balancedin our approach. We don't push technology. We're both anengineering and a sales driven company."We still tend to think of Forte as a tiny Californian start-up,but it's been nearly five years since ex-Ingres managers Sprinzenand Paul Butterworth founded the company, and it now employsaround 180 people. Of course, it took a while for real product toappear, with Forte Application Environment 1.0 only being releasedto general availability in August 1994. This month should see theshipping of version 2.0 of the tool (see diagram).                      FORTE'S NEW RELEASESRelease 2.0 is really a response to Forte's critics who savagedversion 1.0 for being too proprietary. The company has opened upthe system, meaning that Forte middleware independent servers arenow accessible not only through the Forte messaging system itself,but also via DCE and CORBA and users can employ the Encinatransaction processing (TP) monitor to manage Forte services. Thetool now additionally supports OLE 2.0. There's increasedplatform support for NT (as both clients and servers on eitherIntel or Digital Alpha chips), native PowerMacintosh clients andadded database support for ODBC, IBM's DB/2 6000, Microsoft SQLServer and Informix Online. It's added international languagesupport and, on the object-oriented side, now allows developersto use cross-platform window inheritance.If that wasn't enough, Forte is already looking for anotherdifferential in the overcrowded tools market. Sprinzen wasuncharacteristically tight-lipped when we met him recently, buthe did say that Forte has already acquired some exciting newtechnology from an unnamed company which it will release thisSeptember. "It's a new area, but it's still applicationdevelopment. It'll be a fully Forte product. We've got a group ofpeople already working on it and we'll keep it secret. Thecompany that sold the technology to us has no motivation forletting the news out," he confided. Intriguing. Apparently, thisdevelopment doesn't necessarily require Forte, another signal thatthe company is becoming less proprietary in its tools approach.Meanwhile, this month should see the release of an automaticapplication generator for Forte which has been under beta testingsince September and was solely developed at the tools vendor'sOakland HQ.All this acquisition and development takes plenty of green stuff,so how does the heavily venture capitalist-funded company'sfinancials look? As of last month, Forte says it did around $25min revenue. We use the word "says" since the company is stillprivately owned. Its first full year of sales, ending in June1995, netted Forte $15m in corporate revenues. It's hoping to makethe surprisingly ambitious $60m revenue mark over the course ofthis year.Critics will of course point to the whacking $36m VC investmentForte has taken over the course of four equity financing rounds,the last of which occurred in October 1994, as obligating thecompany to perform over and above the usual expectations of a hotstart-up. However, Sprinzen, who doesn't expect to add to that$36m seed funding, retorts that the VCs which hold about 58% ofthe company, among them Greylock Management Corp and NorwestVenture Capital, exert very little pressure on his managementteam. Interestingly, among the Forte VC ranks nestle hardwareveteran Data General, owning 4% of the company, and Mitsubishi,which is described as Forte's "master" Japanese distributor,holding a 3% stake.Sprinzen plans to take Forte public sometime this year, probablyin the summertime, and its banks are already carrying out duediligence. Just watch for the predictable "company adds new boardmembers" announcement as signalling the IPO process is trulyunderway. "Going public will give us a significant amount of freepublicity. We are doing very well financially, and it's a way ofgetting that information out there," he says. According toSprinzen, Forte has about $10m left in the bank, and he points outthat the company's also now generating cash. "This quarter marksa major milestone for us - we'll turn profitable."On the user side, Sprinzen reckons Forte has around 170 companiescurrently using its tool, with the average system supportingbetween 50 and 100 users. The company puts the average number ofdevelopers involved in a Forte project at seven. Competitors willcarp that Forte is getting vast chunks of its business through itsrelationship with Digital, which allows DEC to sell and supportForte worldwide as a Digital product. Sprinzen replies thatDigital sales of Forte account for between 20% and 25% of totalcompany sales and only contributes 10% to Forte's revenues. Thatnotwithstanding, VARs and systems integrators have been vital toForte winning deals, with Sprinzen saying a half to a third of itssales are done through partners.The Forte story in the UK hasn't been anything like as starry asits Stateside success, but Sprinzen reckons that the appointmentof Mike Hedger, another ex-Ingres staffer, as head of Europeanbusiness, based in Bracknell, Berkshire, should turn thatsituation around... fast. Currently the UK accounts for a meagre10% of revenue with a paltry eight customers. Europe as a whole,taking into account both indirect and direct sales, makes upabout 20% of total revenues. The company is just putting thephones into French and German satellite operations. The UKoperation employs 14 people, which will swell to 20 by April.Both Sprinzen and Hedger are keen to see Europe contributing 40%to revenues, but Hedger admits this is unlikely to be achievedbefore the millennium. He told us, "I think the UK will grow 300%next year. OK, that's off a pretty small base, but the averagesoftware deal will be #250,000 ($400,000) plus. We feel quitebullish."What of those users signing up for Forte? Well, SHL Systemhouse iscurrently hard at work redeveloping the 911 emergency IT systemfor New York City in Forte. Definitely a mission critical system!It should be deployed later this year and the systems integratoris hoping to be able to modify it and resell it to other citiesdue to the tool's object-oriented capabilities.In order to gauge Forte's appeal among the user community, wespoke to two US organizations which, like NYC, are starting touse the tool in anger to build mission critical systems.                       WHO'S USING FORTE?First up we talked with Mark Joyce, supervisor, Fibre SystemsEngineering, Computer and Information Services at CorningIncorporated's Telecommunications Product Division, based inWilmington, North Carolina. Global sales for 1994 for the Fortune500 organization which splits its businesses into three areas -communications, environment and life sciences - totalled $4.8bn.Corning's Wilmington plant is the world's largest manufacturer offibre optic waveguides and is currently in the pleasant positionof not being able to produce enough product to satisfy demand. Tothis end, the organization recently undertook a $150m expansionand a further $250m expansion is currently going ahead.As part of Corning's order fulfillment process, it provides allthe relevant data to its customers at product delivery time,including quantitive information about the length and strength ofthe fibre. Each customer expects this data in differing formats.Using Forte, Corning is developing an application that will gatherall the data, format it according to specifications, and thengenerate it automatically. Corning expects the application to gointo production early next year. "It's a beat your business onapplication because it's part of what the customer will see,"says Joyce.Despite being a Digital Rdb shop, Corning didn't get into Fortevia DEC, identifying the tool instead primarily by trawlingthrough IT publications. About two years ago, it begun theprocess of identifying and selecting a new applicationdevelopment environment. It considered Visual Basic, PowerBuilderand Dynasty; and having rejected these, then spent six or sevenmonths evaluating IEF from Texas Instruments because it seemed tofit its Rdb with Digital's ACMS TP Monitor environment reasonablywell, but decided against it on grounds of inflexibility inNovember 1994. Forte was the next product on its list. Corningthen carried out a five to six month evaluation of the tool anddid a dozen or so pilot projects using Forte.Was Corning worried about Forte's relative youth and small size?"One of our primary concerns was that Forte was a version 1.0product, and was new to the marketplace. However, several reasonsweighed in favor of the tool. Its partnership with Digital was astrong selling point for us; we thought we would get good supportfor our existing environment given that relationship. Also, theentire market for distributed objects was so new, it was hard tofind any vendor with a history of any kind. Finally, we saw Forteas a market leader and were impressed by the company'stechnology. Our concern about the newness of the product wasmitigated by these factors," says Joyce. "Forte will become ourdevelopment tool of choice." The company currently has about adozen developers on Forte - six working on the original orderfulfillment project and six on smaller projects.Around 80% of Corning's desktop units are Macintoshes. "One ofForte's primary selling points for us was that it supported alldifferent kinds of clients straight out of the box as version1.0, for example, Mac."As for future plans, "We believe in distributed computing anddistributing objects over the network. We intend to implement aCORBA backplane some time this year to make that happen. Whatreally excites us about Forte version 2.0 is that you can nowdefine your own objects inherited from base classes. You couldn'tdo that in version 1.0. International support is important to usbecause we have international customers. We're looking closely atEncina TP integration. Performance improvements are alsoimportant to us, such as native PowerMac and some native threadsupport."Next we talked with David St. Clair, president and chiefexecutive at MEDecision, based in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Hiscompany specializes in producing software for healthcareinsurance companies aimed at ensuring that in-patient and out-patient procedures for individuals covered by such policies aremedically necessary. Half of MEDecision's business comes fromBlue Cross/Blue Shield and its software is used to determinecoverage for requested procedure for around 20 million Americans.MEDecision decided that it needed to rewrite its current MUMPS-based application known as Utility Control System (UCS) whichruns on PC LANS early last year. The company wanted to be able tocreate a series of GUI screens which could be used both byinsurance companies and hospitals.St. Clair explains, "As the whole area of technology evolves, wesee more and more of the decision support technology being usedby the hospitals themselves, based on rules that insurancecompanies are happy with." The company also knew it needed athree-tier product, since the bulk of the new application wasgoing to be implemented in the middle application services tier,independent of desktop presentation services and input/outputmechanisms such as databases and Electronic Document Interchange(EDI). "We want to have all the clinical intelligence availableand put the logic out on the network and create an invisiblethree-tier application," he adds. The first decision the companyhad to make was whether to build the application itself in-houseor go out and find an integrated development environmentelsewhere in the marketplace. St. Clair vetoed his technicalstaff's suggestion that they should build the applicationthemselves. He felt that with only 70 employees, 30 of whom wereprogrammers, MEDecision didn't really have the necessarycapability both to support and maintain the product, given thateach of its customers would have their own variants of thesystem. So in the first quarter of last year, he turned to themarketplace. "We looked through everything from PowerBuilder toVisual Basic. There were only a few that were true three-tierarchitectured products - Forte and Dynasty."So why choose Forte? "The key distinction between the two for uswas that Forte used true messaging and had more of its tools builtin and integrated. With Dynasty we could've made messaging work,but it already existed in Forte. With Dynasty you had the optionto build tools, but it was really both an option and arequirement. The more a vendor can deliver to us in an integratedway, the less we have to do on that side and the more we canconcentrate on developing the application," St. Clair told us.We wondered if MEDecision was at all phased by Forte's relativeimmaturity and heavy VC-backing. "We're a start-up ourselves.It's very difficult to fault someone for being in the sameposition, certainly that issue was a topic of conversation when Ivisited them in Oakland. However the technology was new enoughand creative enough that it was highly unlikely that someone likeIBM would have come out with it," he replied.A key essential was scalability, both up and down. As St. Clairputs it, "The interesting thing in all these discussions is thateveryone is talking about scalability in terms of how large youcan get an application, very few people are discussing how smallyou can get it.""A significant area of growth for us is with start-up companies,for example, managed care ventures. We've been very successful inhelping companies start with two to four users and then grow.Often they grow explosively and that means they pay more licensefees to us. Some of the alternatives to Forte and Dynasty, inorder to make them work at all, you would have had to buy veryexpensive transaction monitors, which made something like thattotally unfeasible for a company with a small number of users.With both Forte and Dynasty we had the opportunity to go verysmall and grow."Just to prove scalability upwards is just as important to thecompany, MEDecision's average customer site has 120 users, butsome sites number 250 users and the company is keen to pursuebusiness with customers who have 500 to 800 users. Having optedfor Forte by the end of March 1995, MEDecision then spent the nextfour months training its staff on the tool and developing threesignificant prototypes. It only really begun its true developmentefforts in early September. The company's currently in the middleof the design and development phase of the as yet unnamedsuccessor to UCS. St. Clair expects to have the application readyfor the market by the end of 1996. It will run on Unix boxes asthe database servers, remaining with Windows on the client side.He adds that the company intends to develop rather comprehensivecore products and then be able to add enhancements for individualcustomers. It intends to make use of Forte's object-orientedcapabilities, in particular, inheritance, in order to handlecustomization. So that, for example, users can either stick withthe MEDecision standard eligibility screen or can override thatwith their own customized version, by using empty subclasses,which ensure that the original screen is still kept intact."This is a bet your company decision for us - if Forte fails,we're in trouble," St. Clair concludes. He sees the relationshipas very much a two-way street, since MEDecision will be payingForte a small amount of future licenses of its new product. "It'sin their interests to support us; we're dependent on each other."He reckons that so far the project has cost $1.5m, withinvestment in Forte accounting for 10% of that figure, but putsthe total cost of the project at around $4m. A pretty substantialinvestment for a company that expects to do $6m of business thisyear and proof if any were needed that there are users out thereprepared to wager all on Forte.Naturally, we have yet to see the fruits of these mission-critical applications written in Forte. If they go well, thistogether with the company's IPO later this year will undoubtedlyboost its name higher on users' most wanted tools lists. Ifhowever some of these systems crash or do not appear on time,Marty and the rest of the gang will have the kind of "can'tscale" cleaning up operation Sybase's Powersoft got hit by backin 1994. And as we all know, Powersoft hasn't yet fully recoveredfrom that body blow.                           CONCLUSIONFor the time being, Forte is definitely making all the rightnoises in widening its tool's appeal and exploring other relatedapplication management and development areas. So, we'd have toconclude that once the hoopla over application partitioning diesdown, Forte will still be a worthy tool for you to include on yourhigh-end development shopping list.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                   NEW WINE IN OLD BOTTLES:                        CINCOM AND UNIFYGary Flood hears how two survivors of the software industry areback in action once againFor both Cincom, perennially of Cincinnati, Ohio, and Unify, nowof San Jose, California, the management consulting wisdom ofGeoffrey Moore seems apt.Moore's 1991 "must-read" for high-tech executives, Crossing TheChasm, explains how the market for innovative and exciting newtechnology must be cultivated properly. "The point of greatestperil in the development of a high-tech market lies in making thetransition from an early market dominated by a few visionarycustomers to a mainstream market dominated by a large block ofcustomers who are predominantly pragmatists in orientation. Thegap between these two markets, heretofore ignored, is in fact sosignificant as to warrant [it] being called a chasm, and crossingthis chasm must be the primary focus of any long-term high-techmarketing plan. A successful crossing is how high-tech fortunesare made; failure in the attempt is how they are lost."Sound advice, indeed. Both Cincom and Unify are even as we speakplacing their toes on the thin, quivering tightrope thatstretches over that very chasm. On the side they're now on liesstagnation and tiny market share; beckoning far in the distanceis the shining Shangri La of cash-in heaven typified by anotherold survivor's recent good fortune, Toy Story beneficiary MrSteven Jobs.But even though Cincom actually contracted Moore to help itsrecent re-engineering effort, and Unify has recruited a whole newall-star management team from Informix and some of the otherdatabase companies, both find themselves in the curious positionof being long in the tooth and yet firing up their engines on thestarting line like hot new prospects. It's as if it weren't 1996at all, but their two respective annus mirabilii, 1968 and 1984respectively. Truly, new wine in old bottles.Let's see what each in turn is trying to use to excite thosefamous visionary customers and what they later earnestly trustwill be the stuff that the much-desired pragmatist larger blockwill vote for. What chance do these players have of dancingnimbly across the software marketing chasm?Cincom is a 28-year old privately held software operation thathas long specialized in database (relational and non-relational)and application development (4GL and now object-oriented)products. With its newly announced Total Framework (which initself gives a tip of the head to Tom Nies, founder and 99%"stock" holder, and his penchant for products with "Total" in thename) the company is focusing on that most talked about andtantalizing of markets, the high-end complex client/serverdevelopment market (with a hint of workflow to flavor the mix).Unify on the other hand is on at least its third iteration as acompany; it was born as a Unix database company in the early1980s, had a second run as a 4GL (Accell) supplier in the late1980s/early 1990s, and is now reborn a third time under its thirdCEO at least as a Forte-Dynasty-Seer competitor. With its newAppMan extension to its flagship Vision product it hopes to carveout a new place in the sun as a "complete client/server productfor building managed applications." As we said when its newmarketing team came to visit us here in New York, "We thoughtwe'd killed you guys off years back." So blind to our insight isits energizing new head Reza Mikailli that he's going ahead andplanning an IPO in July!We'll look at chasm-crosser Cincom first. Its fortunes seem tohave peaked in 1992 at $157m, but that figure has been decliningever since; it now quotes simply "over $150m" in its literature,but it's quite open that 500 of its 1,500 staff have been cut ina re-engineering program in train since November 1993. Over 60%of that figure ($90m) in any case is based on maintenance revenuefrom its existing Total, Supra, Mantis and AD/Advantage databaseand 4GL offerings.We last covered Cincom in any depth way, way back in September1992 when we talked to Nies and others on his team about a great-sounding distributed database product, the third version of itsSupra relational dbms... that Cincom in fact pulled back fromreleasing at the last minute. For it was around that time that ithad tempted DEC Rdb Star luminary Marco Emrich back (he'd workedthere in the early 1980s) to become senior director of itsAdvanced Technology Group.                       SAME TERMS AS NEXTIn this new role Emrich has spent the last three years crafting anew application development strategy based around objects andobject-relational databases, in a bid to establish Cincom as atechnology force to be reckoned with in the same terms asTaligent or Next. With this in mind a new superglossy rdbms thatwould have been trampled in the dust by Oracle 7 or even SybaseSystem 10 would hardly have helped put the outfit back on track,Nies had decided.Hints of what Emrich and his elves have been cooking up have beenfiltering out for a while (we alluded to it ourselves in our Julypiece on object databases). At last month's DB/Expo in New Yorkhe and marcomms manager Randy Saunders sat down with SoftwareFutures to tell us what this Total Framework thing really is.In essence it's a suite of application development tools basedlargely on products from third party software houses butintegrated by Cincom as a set of services, so that from acustomer's viewpoint they exist under a single point of support.The system includes Assembly, Workflow and Persistence frameworksbackboned by a CORBA object request broker. It went to Austin,Texas-based UniSQL Corp for its object-relational databasemanagement technology, to Burlington, Massachusetts-based EaselCorp, now part of VMark Software, for its ObjectStudiodevelopment tools, and to Alameda, California based Action forits workflow software. Thus Total Framework an object-relationaldatabase including an object-relational model, large globs ofsupport for Microsoft OLE, multimedia data integration framework,object-oriented SQL, call-level interface and graphical databaseaccess and application development tools; and an object-orientedapplication development technology that comes bundled withSmalltalk class libraries and comprises a series of relatedtools, both general and focused. It is targeted at applicationdevelopers, and Cincom says it has settled for Smalltalk becauseit is available under Windows, OS/2 and Unix.One problem that strikes one regarding Framework is trying to seehow it will be of interest to anyone other than existing Cincomusers unless it is directed at outside prospects with the righttag-line.This could be challenging. The company is hardly a name toconjure with on Marketing 101 syllabuses. It was thus extremelyhard to determine what precisely the thing is in the sense of,does it compete with products a, b, or c, or offerings, x, y. andz?For instance, Saunders chirruped that it had no competitors.Yeah, yeah. Then Emrich chimed in that it was an applicationassembly framework; on the slides it says it's best for "cross-functional business process requirements." Then turn and turnabout, Saunders posited it would be best for workflow basedapplications while Emrich sees it working in scenarios where thecustomer had already looked at CommonPoint or NeXTStep.This muddle may be perfectly legitimate multi-faceted stuffcaused by the richness and complexity of the Framework - or justas likely it's due to the extremely tiny brain God blessed yourhumble reporter with. We tried again. Who's it going to be soldto, and then we'll see what it'll be used for? There are twoaspects to Cincom's answer. One is that there are threeindustries being addressed - insurance, banking and financialservices. The second is that Cincom plans to bypass MIS and talkdirectly to the VPs of customer services, sales and marketing. Soif you're in that kind of company, expect one of the 40salespeople in Cincom (50% of the total) who have no existingclients to look after to come a-knocking on your door.When our sister paper Computer Business Review spoke to theCincomers back in September, there were nine trial customers bymid-August for the Framework. Two are quoted in the backgrounder,amid a host of enthusiastic statements from the right sorts ofanalysts. The customers referenced are an Alaskan based logdistance telephone carrier called GCI, which is using thesoftware to develop an integrated billing system, and a Swedishfinance organization called Time-To-Market which is developing aprivate-bond issuing application.We spoke to two other Cincom customers - Toronto-based consultingcompany Mark Winter & Associates and Dublin, Ohio-based CD-ROMmanufacturer Metatec. Both were enthusiastic endorsers of theFramework, which is a good sign. But the fuzziness of the TotalFramework message was not radically cleared up by ourdiscussions.For example, Mark Winter has been using some of the parts ofFramework for over five years but has only been in discussionswith Cincom for two. "It's very stable and very functional," hetold us, going on to detail applications built with Frameworkcomponents for an oil company, a savings and loan organizationand some retailers. But we were as hard-pressed with Winter as wehad been with Saunders to understand what niche the new Cincomproduct might fit into other than it was a first-rate technology.Again, maybe it's a case of us just not being able to see thewood for the trees, but be it a better mousetrap than the rest,it's focus that you need to stay above the rushing waters in thatchasm...As for Metatec, an existing Supra customer, Alex Deak, its CIO,said that his team was in "active evaluation" of Framework. Apilot manufacturing process application is in progress, and thedevelopers at Metatec like the combination of the object-relational database and the Smalltalk aspect, he adds. Heacknowledges that the 28 year old company has a great technologypedigree but that he's never been overawed by some other aspectsof its attack. "We've been a Supra user for seven or eight yearsand have known for a long time that Cincom is a strong technologycompany but is light on the marketing end. This has hadimplications for us when we periodically review our suppliers andwe have to say that Cincom is not high on the list of databasessupported by a lot of the third parties out there. This has beenan area of concern for us. Though I do believe that they willsucceed with Total Framework, I don't think it's going to be easyfor them."How much does it matter in addition that a lot of the good stuffin Total Framework is from third parties and is not "owned" byCincom? Emrich laughs, "It was a matter or build, buy or steal!"He goes on to stress that many of the links between VMark andUniSQL are based not on flimsy "joint marketing" but on "jointR&D agreements." He also notes that Cincom has a substantial teamof engineers (he himself brought 12 over from DEC when hedefected) who are working on finessing the products behind thescenes. Both Winter and Deak were emphatic in saying that theythink this "best-of-breed" approach is the best one for Cincom.Home brewed excellence rather than elegant synthesis seems to bethe theme at Unify, which in a veritable Dracula re-run has onceagain risen from its grave.                    THE "SMART TOOLS" COMPANYUnify now styles itself "The Smart Tools Company." And usingthose self-same Smart Tools are a claimed 6,000 Vision licensessold and over 200 "paying entities" paying support, according toits VP marketing (and yet another ex-Informixer!) Scott Canali.That doesn't count the surprisingly high claim of 350,000 endusers using its Unify and Unify 2000 relational databases. Alltold, this business has made the tightly held and sometimeswillfully obscure company into a $30m operation employing 180people worldwide - comparable to rivals Forte. Note that a yearago that was 300 - a side-effect of the appointment of RezaMikailli as CEO in November 1994, as we'll see.Why hasn't Unify faded away years ago? Well, it kept releasingsoftware like Vision that was just great enough not for it to betossed into the midden. Tony Lacy-Thompson, who was involved withthe launch of another second-generation client/server developmenttool, Informix's NewEra, typifies the sentiment as to why someexperienced software types have come over to the old-newcomer:"Coming from the NewEra stable, there were a lot of things I knewwere required in a high end tool that I said would be in NewEra -or I at least knew were coming soon. One of the things thatattracted me to Vision was all those things were there, such asRAD, ease of use, real native database drivers, and such like."In November it released version 2.1 of Vision, which is itselfinterestingly enough a total C-based rewrite of the existingAccell product using the Galaxy high-end toolset from Visix,which we will be revisiting this quarter. The biggest singlechange is enhanced software distribution features, primarilythrough integration of Tivoli TME.What is Vision? Unify claims Vision offers a "unique" ScalableRADD (Rapid Application Development and Deployment) architecturethat provides developers with the ability to quickly and easilyproduce complex, mission-critical business applications usingsecond generation, client/server technology. Developmentscalability is delivered through elements including components,built-in application and transaction models, an object-orientedprogramming environment, and repository-based, team developmentfacilitiesNow Unify has extended Vision through AppMan, a move into a newarea it's calling application (as opposed to systems or networkor server) management. It's a consequence, argues Unify, of thenew style distributed object applications, a new frontier thathas caused some interesting challenges for second generationclient/server developers and pioneers.Applications developed using Unify's Vision 2.1 developmentenvironment plus the new add-on layer called AppMan are claimedto automatically generate and report statistics about themselvesin the areas of configuration, performance and thresholds. In itsfirst iteration AppMan addresses centralized event management,performance monitoring, software distribution and configurationmanagement and administration. (Security and asset management andlicensing will follow in a subsequent release.)AppMan's centralized event management can report some 400 built-in events from Vision applications, and includes agents whichsupport BMC Software's Patrol, Tivoli Enterprise/Console and SNMPmanagement systems. On the performance management front it'soffering includes agents for HP MeasureWare and PerfView, BMCPatrol and SNMP management tools. AppMan's software distributioncomponent supports Microsoft SMS and Tivoli Courier, and theAppMan console can manage Vision application partitions andservers. A further release will include a baseline set of eventmanagement and performance management capabilities. AppMan 2.0,due in the third quarter, will provide agent-based integrationwith systems management products for security, controlled accessto application services, and asset management and licensing.To hear Unify folk talk it's almost like AppMan signals a wholenew area of application development - perhaps its answer toForte's famed AP? "This is a new distributed applicationsproblem," says Lacy-Thompson."We had a recent example with a defense contractor consultantcustomer of ours, who rolled out a mission-critical applicationonly to see it break. It spent six weeks trying to fix theproblem, spending all our taxpayer money, and in the end had togo in from the top and get out the can opener. It turned out tobe an overloaded partition. That was something that none of theexisting tools had detected. It was pure and simple anapplication problem. We're listening to hear these problems - butthe applications aren't talking."Another aspect to AppMan, says Unify, is the whole integration ofproducts like Tivoli's software distribution product Courier.Again, Lacy-Thompson has a startling anecdote - heard the oneabout the company that actually hires a Lear Jet once a month todistribute its 6,000 floppies to the field? Now that really isSneakerNet - SneakerNet++, if you like.But then again it's drawing back from claiming that this is thestart of a whole new sub-industry; AppMan is purely for Visionusers, and is essentially an added extra goodie. So how do theVision customers out there feel about it and the company?We spoke to a customer who has been quoted a couple of times inthe press already about Vision - Greg Hindson of Tustin,California financial apps provider Nortridge Software. He hasbeen using Vision (and before that Accell) since 1987, and toldSoftware Futures he was "very happy" with Vision's functionalityand performance, while noting of course that it'll never be quiteas fast as compiled C.And AppMan - good, bad or ugly? "I think it's a fabulous idea,"he says. "With this we're going to be able to cover a lot ofthings that other products don't have. Just in softwaredistribution - I'm tickled to death Unify's going to look afterthe licensing issue for me, a big issue in client/server."Now this sounds familiar when we recall Cincom: as for Unify as acompany, he's happy with the new talent on board, but adds, "It'salways been weak in getting new sales and getting that messageout there. I've shown it to PowerBuilder developers who say it'sneat, but they've just never heard of it. And they have afabulous database with no market share."Uh oh. Feel the winds from the chasm tugging at yourshirtsleeves?Not so Reza Mikailli, the Unify CEO, who enthuses that his trackrecord alone as lead developer of the OnLine rdbms for Informixand previous work at Ingres (where he claims he helped sellIngres to ASK - wouldn't brag too much about that one, Reza)should restore some much needed street cred to his operation."At Ingres and Informix we all had a lot of respect, internally,for Unify," he says. "But now I'm here I find that previous CEOshave not concentrated on growing the business; they seemed moreinterested in cutting down as much as possible in order to sellthe company."While admitting that the first release of Vision was a kind of"me-too" product, he says that the company is now doubling Visionrevenues every quarter and the firm is now firmly back in theblack. He has stripped out some "tired" executives and whipped upenthusiasm among some Silicon Valley ex-colleagues over theprospects for Vision in the telecommunications vertical inparticular. (By the way he's also hired people from Borland andOracle, so it's not all Informix II.) "We can easily grow to be a$150m operation," he enthuses.We asked Unify staffers on their New York press tour stop if theyhad any sense of who was top dog in this whole Forte-Seer-Dynastydog and pony show. (Seer they see a lot, but Dynasty very little."In fact less and less people are seeing Dynasty," quips Lacy-Thompson, the wag.) Internal figures that its UK marketing chiefJeremy Jackson told us put it on a very respectable 17% of theenterprise-level client/server market worldwide.So two quite mature companies are standing at the edge of theblack and awesome market acceptance chasm. Cincom faces thechallenge of refining precisely what it is that it's trying tobring to market - at the moment it still smacks a little of magicbeans. Plus it must ensure that it wins new beachheads outsideits successful but essentially static manufacturing home base.For Unify, issues of differentiation and credibility areparamount. Software Futures attended the 1989 launch of Unify2000 - and that has hardly swept all pretenders before it in therdbms market.                        THE WATER OF LIFEAs they stand on the brink both companies have the vitalingredient of maturity on their side. Both have temperedleadership who have seen more than one cycle in this industry andcould use that hard-won experience well. And remember that whatthe Scots call the water of life - whisky - tastes that waybecause it's matured in nice old aged sherry barrels. Will thesenew vintages tempt your development tastebuds?Back to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                RATIONAL SOFTWARE: THE ADA KIDS                       WIDEN THEIR APPEALIf you were evaluating dynamic programming languages, the chancesare darling of the defense industry, Ada, wouldn't top your list.Clare Haney asks whether Rational Software, previously one ofAda's strongest adherents, can successfully move across intoselling more mainstream tools?What do you think of when you hear the name Rational Software?Well, if you've ever had any dealings with them, the wordimmediately on the tip of your tongue would be "Ada." But no one,not even the programming language's most fanatical adherents,would claim that the market for Ada is exactly booming. As oneuser pointed out to us, "Most people who want Ada are probablyalready using it." Another corporate described Ada as "a bit of astigma" for any organization.So, obviously a tools company like Rational can't continue tothrive upon dwindling Ada revenues alone. The Santa Clara,California-based vendor has indeed already begun to cast aboutfor other means to make its fortune, by broadening its tools tosupport other languages, notably every object-orientedprogrammer's favorite, C++. We look at its efforts so far, andassess how successful they're likely to be in the future.Something to bear in mind at this juncture is that the Rationalmanagement have also had the smarts to try and put an end to theobject-oriented methodologies infighting that's been going on foryears. And they've gone about it in a rather interesting way. Thecompany already had OO guru Grady Booch, the man behind the Boochmethodology, as its chief scientist. He joined Rational in 1982.Next, the tools vendor persuaded Jim Rumbaugh, of OMT (ObjectModeling Technique) fame, to leave General Electric in 1994, andsign on as a Rational Fellow. Then late last year, Rational addeda third OO guru, bringing on board Ivar Jacobson, responsible forUse-Case, as vice president, business engineering - by the simpleexpediency of buying his company lock, stock and management!Who's next on its object guru shopping list? Double act StephenMellor and Sally Schlaer perhaps, or Ed Yourdon? Truth to tell,Rational probably doesn't need anyone else. According to IDC, ifyou lump Booch and Rumbaugh followers together, they account forover 50% of the OO methodology marketplace.Ever since Rumbaugh joined the company, Booch and he have beenhard at work on creating a joint methodology known as the UnifiedMethod, and have already released a draft version 0.8 of theUnified Method Notation. Rational says it has received 250requests per day via email for the draft. The putting aside ofold enmities was suggested in Rumbaugh's spoof on Joni Mitchell'ssong Both Sides Now, which he released on an unsuspecting publicat OOPSLA '95 in Austin, Texas.We quote: "But now our fans are acting strange/ Hey, Jim andGrady, you've both changed/ Well, something's lost, butsomething's gained/ In building unity.We've seen OO from both sides now/ Both his and mine, and stillsomehow/ It's OO strengths we'll still pursue/ We've tried tobring the best to you." Hmm, well Shakespeare it ain't, but we'resure you get the point!Adding in some Jacobson use-case stuff doesn't seem like itshould present too much of a problem. Apparently, Use-Case isalready in the Unified Method notationally.Gerard Rudisin, vice president, marketing at Rational US, toldus, "Both OMT-2 and Booch '93 embraced use-cases. Booch andRumbaugh say they're 85% to 95% there on their own already tointegrate Use-Case seamlessly." The dynamic OO guru duo is takingpublic comment up until next month and then hopes to finalizesummer release of the Unified Method 1.0 which will then be inthe public domain."If we make it good enough, we want the Object Management Groupand users to embrace it as a standard," says Rudisin. "We want totake the fight out of what OO methodology to choose and move itonto which tools to use. I expect that the Unified Method willmake OO grow even faster and reduce confusion in the market," headds.Certainly this is something users welcome, particularlycorporates beginning to investigate OO. As one Rational Adasoftware user told us, "With the company acquiring the objectgurus, the method we'll adopt is likely to be the industrystandard." Surely, having the de facto OO methodology, if that'sthe way it works out, is also going to help sell a bunch ofRational tools. So let's investigate the range of the company'sproduct offerings (see diagram).                      TAKING A ROUND-TRIP?The most important Rational product right now and for the futureis its software engineering family of Rose tools, which allowsusers to graphically develop, verify and document the analysisand design model of their software. According to Rudisin,comparing fiscal 1995 with fiscal 1994, Rose revenues increasedby 100%, a trend he expects will be repeated, if not bettered infiscal 1996. Like most software companies, Rational doesn't splitits revenues down into which products contributed how much, butit does admit that while Rose storms ahead, revenues for its Adasoftware are 'stable'. As Rudisin puts it, "The Ada market isstill larger than the Smalltalk market, but we have noexpectations that Ada will dominate in the mainstream market. Adais a slow growth market." Rational has grown its Ada business toa 29% market share, largely through the gambit of acquiring othersmaller Ada players.In fact, Rational is witnessing a something of a turnaround inits traditional markets. Back in FY 1993, 88% of its revenuescame from those Ada hardcore advocates the aerospace and defenseindustries. As of FY 1995 that business had shrunk to 65%, withthe commercial sector making up the remaining 35%. By the firsthalf of fiscal 1996, commercial business had grown to 42%.Rudisin predicts, "In fiscal year 1997, we'll flip thatcompletely in favor of the commercial sector."Returning to Rose - it derives 51% of its revenues from thetelecoms sector, and only 4% from the aerospace and defenseindustries. It comes in a vanilla language-independent version,as well as product variants which support Ada, C++ and Smalltalk.Client/server application development, including code generationand reverse engineering, is catered for by versions of Rose forSybase's PowerBuilder and Gupta's SQLWindows. Next up is Rose forVisual Basic due in March of this year. In addition, Digitalfunded Rose/IDL for its CORBA efforts. Rational has not yetproductized this, but did demonstrate the software at last year'sObject World (San Francisco). Japanese Rose user and Rationalpartner Osaka Gas Information Systems Research Institute (OGIS-RI) has already developed a Forte integration with Rose, whichRational intends to offer as a product in the near future.In connection with Rose, Rational rants a good deal about "round-trip engineering" which it defines as follows: "A user can gofrom graphical design to generation of source code, modify theresulting source code, reverse engineer the new source code togenerate a graphical depiction of the system as it exists afterbeing modified, and merge any changes made in the source codeback into the model and vice versa."We're talking "controlled iterative development" here - one ofRational's three main buzzwords, the other two being OOtechnology (naturellement!) and architecture-driven process. Thecompany claims Rose C++ is unique because it can support anunlimited number of "round-trips" without losing any data on theway. Rudisin sums up its appeal. "The old CASE tools largelyfailed because if you changed the code and then tried toregenerate it, the model fell apart. It didn't support iterativedevelopment. That's what Booch along with Rational has beenpreaching for years."In terms of competition, stacked up against Rose are productofferings from the likes of IDE, Select Software Tools and Cadre.The latter seems to be specializing in hoovering up other CASEvendors of late, notably Westmount and Bachman.Speaking of acquisitions, Rational is very keen to scotch thesuggestion that it only acquired Objectory to bring OOmethodology guru Ivar Jacobson into the fold. "We wanted to addto our expertise in business process re-engineering," saysRudisin. "Users need the same integrated support for systemsrequirements and systems engineering as they do for softwareengineering. That's been a real chasm. People just throw the codeover the wall - we'll knit them together." Objectory also producea software process which assists organizations in achieving ISO9000 certification. He revealed that Rational itself is hoping tobecome ISO 9000 certified by the end of this year.Rational's strategy is to extend its other tools for softwaredevelopment, until now mostly Ada-based, across to otherprogramming languages, notably C++.We wondered if the company planned to extend the same courtesy toSmalltalk? Rudisin replies, "We've no plan to do the same forSmalltalk yet. It could make sense. We've got to think, what'sthe business opportunity? People are skeptical. They're worryingabout Smalltalk's scalability and that Smalltalk may become aproprietary IBM language, since the ParcPlace/Digitalk mergerseems to have been complete a mess. There's real concern aboutviability of Smalltalk going forward."                         RATIONAL USERSTurning to users of Rational Software, we chatted with AlanNugent, executive vice president, global strategy and advancedtechnology, Global Process and Information Management (GPIM) atXerox, based in Rochester, New York. The self-styled "DocumentCompany" has made a significant commitment to Rational's Rosetool and has been using it for the past two years. Nugentexplains why the organization opted for Rose, "The genesis of itwas really Xerox's decision to outsource its legacy systems andto begin to focus its internal management community on developingand delivering object-based client/server applications. I came onboard to develop the architecture, methods and tools."Why choose Rose? "It was really the elegance, pureness andsimplicity of the methodology and the graphical notation thatdrove us to Rational. We looked at Booch, Rumbaugh and a varietyof tools vendors. Grady Booch was the only one who was drivingfor convergence. We kind of bought into the company, and intoGrady and his ideas and his passion for creating consolidationwithin the industry. Rational getting Rumbaugh and Jacobson juststrengthens that resolve," he says.Xerox uses a variety of different development environments forits object-based applications, notably C++, PowerBuilder andForte. In fact, the company paid Rational to do a PowerBuilderversion of Rose. It was willing to do the same for Forte, butRational already had that covered with OGIS-RI. It's alsointerested in the Visual Basic release for Rose since it hasabout a dozen VB programmers.The Rose tool is currently standard on Xerox engineers' desktops.Its Information Management (IM) organization is rolling outobject-based applications for internal use to help run thebusiness, while other Xerox divisions are busy creating OOapplications which are either visible to its customers orembedded in its products. Nugent reckons that at present thecompany has between 400 and 500 Rose licenses, but estimates thateventually close to 4,000 developers will use Rose. Xerox alsouses Rational to do all of its Rose training and is also hiringpeople out of the company to fill consultative roles.Although Xerox only uses Rose, it is well aware of Rational'scurrent product family and the vendor's future directions. Nugentmeets up with Rational's co-founder, chief technical officer andchairman of the board, Mike Devlin, twice a year to discuss whereXerox is heading and how Rational dovetails into that strategy.Already, some of the company's division are are showing someinterest in Rational's SoDA, software which allows users togenerate documentation automatically from a variety of externalinformation sourcesSo what does Nugent reckon to Rational? "Bringing Jim Rumbaughand Ivar Jacobson and his entire company on board gives them alot of opportunity. Rational's doing a lot of the right things.Given the size of the company they are, their lineage andplanning for the future and the fact that they're well managedand led, they should have a very bright future."                           CONCLUSIONRational does seem to be playing a very smart game. Weaningitself gradually away from its Ada heartland into the real OObattleground of C++ and Smalltalk and supporting mainstream toolssuch as Sybase's PowerBuilder and Microsoft's Visual Basic isdefinitely the right thing to do. But there's a veritable forestof ifs and buts for the company to safely navigate through beforethis turnabout plan can be deemed successful. At least no one canaccuse it of not trying to made a real go of things. The Ada kidshave it all to play for!Back to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                 LET'S GET USER FRIENDLY: THE                      DSDM APPROACH TO RADOrganizations embarking on their first Rapid ApplicationDevelopment project often feel baffled about how to manage theprocess. Clare Haney visits the Dynamic Systems DevelopmentMethod consortium to discover how it can assist confusedcorporatesImagine the scene. An architect has drawn up the plans forbuilding a house. A bunch of builders are responsible for makingthe blueprints a reality. Only some of them are none too happywith some of the architect's suggestions. They're just notpracticable. In fact these bricklayer has some ideas of their ownon how the house should look. But what are they to do? They'reonly the poor guys who've got to use the existing specificationsto make something workable. Right?Sound familiar? Just mutate the architect into a systemsprogrammer and the hapless bricklayers into end users and you'vegot a situation that still exists in many corporates today.Systems developers and end users are still not communicatingadequately, and systems are still being built that are destinedfor early obsolescence because no one bothered asking the peoplewho'll actually have to use the applications what they reallywanted and needed.Enter the Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM) Consortium, anon-profit making UK-based organization with the lofty aim ofcreating a non-proprietary user-centered Rapid ApplicationDevelopment (RAD) method which covers the whole of a project'slifecycle. According to DSDM literature, the method "provides aframework for building and maintaining systems which meet tighttime constraints through the use of incremental prototyping in acontrolled project environment."We last visited with the consortium back in December 1994. Atthat time it had been going for under a year and had only managedto attract 50 members, 40% of which were end users. The primemovers behind the consortium included corporate users such asAbbey Life Assurance Co, Allied Domecq Retailing and BritishAirways, as well as the UK operations of vendors like IBM, Logicaand Select Software Tools.What a difference a year makes! The body now claims that DSDM hasbecome the UK's de facto standard for RAD development and boastsmore than 500 supporters, with end users accounting for more than80% of the consortium's membership. Of this 500-plus figure, morethan 400 are Associate Subscribers which means for their #95($152) annual membership fee they receive the DSDM documentationand can go along to conferences, but are purely passive memberswithout voting rights. The rest, nearly 100-strong, are FullMembers, with end user organizations paying #980 ($1,568) a yearfor the privilege which allows them access to the two monthlyUser Forums and gives them voting rights at these gatherings.Vendors pay #2,800 ($4,480) to be Full Members and can becomeDSDM Accredited Training Organizations - there are currently 10of these, with more than 1,000 users and project members havingsuccessfully completed this consortium endorsed training. At lastmonth's European RAD Conference held in London, the organizationdecided to introduce another membership category, that of aConsultant at an annual fee of #400 ($640), which is anindividual active membership, allowing the person one vote at allDSDM meetings.Also in London last month, the organization unveiled version 2.0of its methodology; version 1.0 appeared last February. DSDM 2.0has been strongly influenced by the experiences of six so-calledEarly Adopter projects, one of which we'll look at later, whichhave been formally monitored to introduce feedback, new ideas andmetrics into the new release of the method. Particular new areasof focus in 2.0 are maintenance and reuse of RAD applications.The consortium intends to introduce more metrics into DSDM 3.0and to spend 1996 catching up on what RAD projects its membersare undertaking.So what constitutes the DSDM development lifecycle? Let's take alook at the diagram on page 19. The dark arrows show the transferpoints from one phase of the lifecycle into the next, while thelight arrows show the points where development can easily returnto an earlier phase. Fundamental to the DSDM approach is that"nothing is built perfectly first time, but that 80% of thesolution can be produced in 20% of the time it would take toproduce the total solution." In comparison to the traditionalwaterfall approach to development which assumes that each stagein development is completed before the next is embarked upon,DSDM assumes that you can always revisit previous steps andindeed suggests that "the current step need be completed onlyenough to move to the next step." At this point we should stressthe importance of configuration management (CM). The DSDM 2.0manual reminds us: "A DSDM development environment can representa very chaotic situation. Various areas of functionality may bein the process of development at any point in time. Within eacharea of development, different cycles of iteration are inprogress. Differing versions of the final system may be installedat multiple sites, many being geographically widely located.Configuration management is vitally important to ensure theproject does not degenerate into anarchy. Wherever possible,configuration management should be automated."Returning to the DSDM lifecycle. You begin with the FeasibilityPhase which considers both the feasibility of the project and thesuitability of DSDM and should take no more than a couple ofweeks. Next is the Business Study, probably of one to two weeksduration, where you determine the business functions that will besupported by your new system. The consortium stresses that thelines aren't so clearcut in real life as the diagram suggests andthat there can be blurring between the different areas, ie, youmay choose to combine the Feasibility and Business Study phases.The main part of the lifecycle comes in two iterative prototypingcycles, the first concentrating on eliciting requirements and thesecond ensuring the prototypes are sufficiently well engineered.The implementation phase marks the handover of the system tousers, along with training them up and determining futuredevelopment requirements.Why do we at Software Futures think that the activity of the DSDMconsortium is important? Well, RAD's been around since the mid-1980s as one of those hot to trot technologies that users aresupposed to get really excited about. But when you get down tobasics, it's more often one of those "anything you want it to be"acronyms... in other words, not very useful. The consortiumitself contends that vendors have offered users very little helpabout how to manage RAD projects; instead, they've tended tomerely talk up the capabilities of their individual tools. Thishas led to mucho confusion, with corporates often blaming a toolfor a poor system instead of the developers who never bothered tocanvass end user needs before building the wretched thing.The DSDM 2.0 manual contains a couple of valuable caveats aboutRAD tool usage. Namely, "The inexperienced tool purchaser shouldbe aware of imposters. Many toolset vendors are rebadgingexisting toolsets as new RAD tools. In practice the functionalityprovided is very limited. In most cases, the tools support onlyrapid program development, which is only a small subset of RAD."Obviously, it would be too politically sensitive for theConsortium itself to actually name names, but it does produce alist of 15 characteristics to which a RAD tool should conform.UK-based research organization Bloor Research is planning a RADtools report based on these characteristics, to be publishedlater this year.The consortium advises, "When selecting a DSDM supportenvironment, it is important first of all to decide on yourdevelopment process, then select the techniques which supportyour process and then decide on the required level of toolsupport. Many organizations fail to achieve the most from theirsupport tools by buying the tools first." It also suggests thatdevelopment teams should be skilled in using RAD tools wellbefore embarking on a critical project.So let's hear from one of the early adopters of DSDM version 1.0,The Boston Globe, the leading quality newspaper in the Boston,Massachusetts region and most of the most respected US printjournalism titles, with a daily circulation of 500,000 copies.This user is particularly interesting, given that DSDM is atpresent largely a UK phenomenon. Ever ambitious, the consortiumwants to evangelize the message worldwide. "The UK has areasonable reputation in that we created methodologies in thefirst place. But we're very concerned not to go and impose DSDMon another country. We're seeking people to kick start operationselsewhere." So says Nick Gill, manager, methods & tools,applications and systems integration services at Olivetti UKbased in London and chairman of the DSDM's promotional workgroup.There are already affiliate organizations in Australia, France,Holland and Belgium and interest has been expressed in launchingDSDM in Scandinavia and the US. Gill expects DSDM to beintroduced in Russia next month.Back to The Globe. It needed to be able the track the productionof the newspaper, to be able to know at which stage individualpages were, ie, if they were ready for printing or still neededheadlines or captions to be added. Initially the paper's prepresssoftware supplier Atex together with an unnamed software vendortried over the course of 18 months to create such a trackersystem. "They built a Macintosh Quark extension. It was trying toforce us into a round hole. I was writing criticisms andsuggestions that were largely ignored. It was as though they weretrying to wait us out," Paul McGeary, systems editor at TheBoston Globe told us. The system, developed in isolation from theeditorial staff that would use it, was ultimately neverimplemented. "It wasn't that the information on the pages wasn'tthere. It was that it was inaccessible to the casual user," headds.It was at this time that UK systems integrator and DSDMconsortium member Sysdeco came into the picture. Since it hadacquired Atex, it was a natural choice for The Globe to go withthe company for development of the Tracker system.So what was it like working the DSDM way with Sysdeco? McGearyenthuses, "They wanted to know about our processes. They had ageneric tool, Systemator, that was very customizable and wereusing a standard database and interface tools. It's a fruitfulworking relationship. Their people have an office in thebuilding, I meet them every day. They code all day and I test itat night. They're very prompt in making changes. The give andtake attitude really moves things along," He describes how theSysdeco people came and sat at the newsdesk and observed how TheGlobe's editorial staff worked from 3pm to midnight in order toget a handle on how Tracker needed to work."We have a 120-page newspaper to get out," McGeary explains. "Ourfirst deadline is at 10.30pm and then we have repeat deadlinesuntil 3am. We need to monitor the pages as the night goes on andgive the person managing the flow, the night editor, a sense ofwhere the problems are. We need to know at 8pm if there's aproblem; between 8pm and 10pm we can solve it. We literally domost of our work in the last hour. We're working in a verycompressed amount of time. It's really a matter of minutes andseconds."The Tracker system puts each page on a clock and after a certainperiod of time, an alarm will go off, alerting the editor to thefact that there's a problem. It could be that something's missingfrom a page or simply that someone's forgotten about it andneglected to push it on to the next stage. Sysdeco and The Globeare currently working on developing an electronic thumbnail ofeach page. "What's crucial to the speed of the project andunderstanding and efficiency is the constant interchange of ideasbetween us and Sysdeco," McGeary says.The Tracker project took six months from The Globe's firstmeeting with Sysdeco in late February 1995 until the paper had ausable product in early September, with three months of actualcoding. Interestingly, it formed a neat comparison betweentraditional waterfall methods and the DSDM RAD approach. Sysdecoran two development projects for Tracker. One was creating abackground database demon to update the database, and the otherwas developing a user interface so that the night editor couldeasily see the status of the pages. The database demon used thewaterfall technique, the user interface tried the DSDM approach.Looking at metrics, the DSDM project produced double the numberof function points compared with the waterfall approach, andperformed in terms of function points per man month three timesbetter than the traditional project.As we've seen the DSDM approach can significantly improve someend user organizations' understanding of how to direct their RADdevelopment efforts, as well as putting in place good businesspractice for future projects. What RAD technology has alwaysneeded is some common sense rules and with DSDM, finally we haveit. Take this comment from a customer to their software housequoted in the DSDM 2.0 manual as an able demonstration of thisfact: "About now, I would be worrying about what you (thesoftware house) were up to. With DSDM I know." What greaterrecommendation do you need?Back to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                     MY OWN PRIVATE I-WAYGary Flood reviews Bill Gates' new book on the InformationHighway, "The Road Ahead"Something's wrong with this list, and I wonder if you can pointout the mistake to a certain William Gates, III, an entrepreneurcurrently building a house for himself and his new bride nearSeattle: Apple, Compaq, DEC, HP, IBM, and Intel.Splendid companies all, as we know, and all important in theirrespective ways to the start of the Personal Computer revolutionthat made Mr Gates the richest man in the US. However, they havenot that much to do with the ostensible subject of the Microsoftsupremo's first book, The Road Ahead, the information highway,yet their names come up time and time again.For in all of this 286 page book we hear a lot about Bill's firstcomputer program (written when he was 13), his friendship withPaul Allen, playing poker at Harvard, the extremely sanitizedview of how he played around with the grownups at IBM, PCs (whythey're cool and why everyone should have one), wallet PCs, PCset-top boxes, PC software in general, and some stuff about whatthe Highway might be like. But completely absent are the words"Netscape," "Sun," and "Java." Silicon Graphics gets one namecheck in the rather poor index while Oracle, the tribe followingBill's rival software chieftain and I-Way contender LarryEllison, which is at least mentioned en passant, gets preciselynone.Since 1995 has seen the supernova appearance of NetscapeCommunications (not to omit Spyglass or Apache), the surge ofinterest in Sun's Java and the endless debate about whetherMicrosoft's Network (MSN) would destroy America On-Line andCompuserve at a stroke - not to mention the forbidden mergertalks with Intuit (no, it's not mentioned either) - this issomewhat of a partisan map of the Infobahn landscape. Come tothink of it, CNN gets talked about while NBC, in which Gates justinvested $220m, is blanked.So don't pick up The Road Ahead expecting the full unbiasedvision thing (check out Daniel Burstein and David Kline's RoadWarriors instead). No, what we have here is more than a curiousexperiment in vanity publishing. This is not John F Kennedy'sPulitzer Prize-winning Profiles In Courage (which he didn't writeeither), or not even a work as monumentally bad as Mussolini'splay about Napoleon, an item far from being a suggestive insightinto a great leader's secret soul like Winston Churchill'spaintings.This is Bill at his most down-home, gosh-gee, American Everyman(the prose is real written-by-committee stuff) telling the worldin the clearest words for those who read between the lines: I didit once, you saps, and I'm gonna do it all over again. Outta myI-Way!"My focus is to keep Microsoft in the forefront through constantrenewal," writes Bill. "It's a little scary that as computertechnology has moved ahead there's never been a leader from oneera who was also a leader in the next. Microsoft has been aleader in the PC era. So from a historical perspective, I guessMicrosoft is disqualified from leading in the highway era of theInformation Age. But I want to defy historical tradition.Somewhere ahead is the threshold dividing the PC era from thehighway era. I want to be among the first to cross over when thatmoment comes. I think the tendency for successful companies tofail to innovate is just that: a tendency... I never anticipatedMicrosoft's growing so large, and now... I unexpectedly findmyself a part of the establishment. My goal is to prove that asuccessful corporation can renew itself and stay in theforefront."Hence Bill spends the first three chapters attempting to convincethe mass of Joe Q Public readers, who don't know (or care) wherethe computer industry bodies are buried, that he and his buddyPaul started the PC thing, which seems to have done rather well,and that lightning will most emphatically strike twice. "If youwant to know how the race to build the information highway isgoing, keep your eye on PCs connected to the Internet," hesolemnly advises. "At least that's what I'm going to do."So the "information appliance" concept is simply written out ofBill's future history; it's the PC that will bring the Highway tous, not some pipsqueak 9,000 line program (as he dismissedNetscape recently, according to US economist and technologycommentator George Gilder).Gilder gives us the best summing up of Bill's book that I'veheard so far. Bill is seen on Annie Leibovitz's front cover snapin a cuddly sweater standing on an empty road somewhere. "Sothere's Bill standing in the middle of the road ahead trying topersuade the world that he's not missed the bus. He's out there,and he's going to catch it someday!"This book is a good introduction for plain folks and works finethat way. For other readers it will provoke a raised eyebrow ortwo, but that's not the point. This is Bill's raspberry to thepunks who think he's falling behind, and deserves very carefulscrutiny in the offices of all I-Way companies."The Road Ahead," by Bill Gates, Nathan Myhrvold and PeterRinearson. Viking/Penguin, 1995, ISBN 0-670-77289-5, pp286 withcompanion CD-ROM. $29.95 (US).Back to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                         INPUT/OUTPUT                DOES APPLE HAVE A CORE ANY MORE?Like hyenas cackling around a fatally injured animal, the likesof IBM and HP have been circling around the sick bed of Apple.But what, on the software side, does the company really have tooffer a potential buyer?Whatever Apple may say about Windows 95 being a pale imitation ofthe Macintosh operating system, no one really cares any more.Microsoft walked off with the desktop market in its pocket yearsback and only Apple and IBM would argue any different. And, who'sthe largest supplier of Mac applications? None other than thelovable Redmond Rampager, which could (not so lovingly) dump theproduct line any time it chooses.Elsewhere, we've seen IBM, like a spurned suitor, giving Appleback the fruits of their joint foray into multimedia, Kaleida;while their object endeavor Taligent has wound up as an IBMsubsidiary. Both ventures were mega money pits and have still tohit pay dirt, if indeed, they ever do. Other Apple work ondeveloping applications for its unsuccessful Newton PDA has alsoyet to prove sellable.The most likely bidder at the Apple auction is IBM - after all,it still has several billion dollars left in its acquisitions warchest. A few years back, when IBM first attempted to buy Apple,the prognosis was not good. Wits came up with the joke, "What doyou get if you cross IBM with Apple?" The punchline, as newly BigBlue-assimilated Lotus found out to its cost all too chillinglyrecently is, "IBM."Many top execs at Apple are reputedly in favor of selling thecompany. In fact, that's the reason behind so many of themquitting. But CEO Michael Spindler is holding firm and refusingto jump the sinking ship. Maybe Apple should, as Oracle's LarryEllison suggested earlier this year, sell off its hardwarebusiness, and concentrate on what it's good at, developingsoftware and hardware technology. He believes an Appleunencumbered by the Mac would be perfect for designing his"network computer." Can Apple save itself before it's swallowedwhole by one of those hyenas? Or is it doomed to become thefavored MBS term paper in ten years' time: How Apple Flubbed It -Big Time?Clare HaneyBack to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                       NEWS AT A GLANCE                            INDUSTRY* Farmington Hills, Michigan-based Compuware Corp will upgradeits Uniface application development environment in the firstquarter. Over a year on from acquiring the Dutch eponymoussoftware company, some might say this is overdue. Compuware saysversion 6.2 will include new model entities, features andextensions to accommodate additional forms, reportsandapplication objects. Upper CASE tools will also be able totransfer design work into Uniface automatically, the companyclaims.It adds that 6.2 incorporates the canonical four objecttechniques (abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance andpolymorphism, class!). The company also plans to introducedynamic partitioning by the end of 1996, which will include itsEcoTools distributed management performance software.* Umang Gupta has had to fall on his sword to save what's left ofhis company. The start of the year found the ex-Oracle founderannouncing his departure from his once eponymous company (to berenamed the anonymous Centura Software). New head Sam Inman (whohas been jointly running the company since April) took theopportunity to push through a 17% headcount reduction (takingstaff numbers down to 330) and it will also have to take arestructuring charge of $9m for the quarter. We at SoftwareFutures were surprised - mainly because we'd been so sure itwould fall to stakeholder Computer Associates instead.* Howls of protest were heard throughout the Valley at PresidentClinton's decision to veto a widely-supported bill to curb thenumber of lawsuits hi-tech companies have to face from supposedlyirate shareholders each time they have a poor quarter. TheAmerican Electronics Association notes in its angry statementafter the last minute blockage that this is a $2.4bn quasi-industry, which benefits lawyers reaping a third of that figure.* The Object Management Group took its recent emphasis onvertical markets to retune itself along such lines: and as aresult its technology request process will be exanded to includebusiness applications as well as underlying infrastructuresoftware. The body now also claims an impressive 555 members - ofwhom only 103 have full voting rights, however.* Now how's about this for responsible behaviour? A Spanishstudent called Alvaro Martinez spotted a weak point in theInternet connection of his prime minister, Felipe Gonzalez. Butrather than egregiously misbehaving, the 23-year old called theauthorities to point out the danger, and then preceded tovolunteer to come and fix it. Glad to hear that not all hackersare irresponsible clowns, we wish him Feliz Navidad!                            BUSINESS* Just exactly how many people are on the Internet - 25, 30, 40million? According to what's claimed to be the firststatistically defensible study of Internet users, the whole ofthe USA only contains 5.8 million real users. The study, puttogether by Internet veterans O'Reilly and Associates and TrishInformation Services, polled 29,901 individuals, giving asampling error of less than 1% it's claimed. The previous dearthof hard data is highlighted by the fact that the company gotfunding from International Thompson Publishing, IBM/Lotus, TurnerBroadcast Systems/CNN, MCI/News Corp Online Ventures and a fewothers who might reasonably want real data. The study defined'Internet users' as people of 18 years of age or over who havedirect access to the Net and use email, as well as one or moreInternet-specific applications, such as FTP, gopher, telnet or aWeb browser. Thus people who connected via a commercial onlineservice aren't included in that six million. The company predictsthat the total online population will grow to 15.7 million; thenumber of pure online-service users is reckoned to remainconstant at 3.9 million, with a further 6 million using bothonline and Internet services and 5.8 million using nothing butdirect Internet feeds.* Just prior to the holidays (could that timing be acoincidence?) Taligent Inc's fate was sealed, with the ill-fatedjoint venture rolling back into IBM and becoming a subsidiarycalled the Taligent Object Technology Center. More than half ofits 400-odd staff will be laid off, with the rest continuing tooperate out of its premises in Cupertino, California. Its othertwo investors, Apple and Hewlett-Packard, will continue to haverights to the unit's CommonPoint technology, though only IBM hasdisplayed any real enthusiasm for the C++ system.To the amusementof our sister paper Unigram.X, a HP spokesperson claimed thecompany had met all reasearch goals expected from Taligent - butwas flummoxed because the piece of paper they were reading fromdidn't list what those goals might have been...* Hats off to Buzz! Pixar Animation Studios Inc has repaidbigtime for Steve Jobs - its IPO made him a paper billionaire forthe first time, with his stake valued at $1.2bn on the first dayclose - more than his Apple shares were ever worth while he wasthere! And that for a firm bought for an estimated $10m, but inwhich admittedly he went on to invest at least $50m. Pixarcreated its own cluster of 117 Sun 20 workstations - 87 duals and30 four-processor models, to handle the rendering of each of the114,000 frames in the 77-minute Toy Story epic. Expectparallelised versions of its software for Sparc and Solarisarchitectures.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOFTWARE FUTURES via NewsNetJanuary 01, 1996                          UK PRODUCTS                       BROWSING ASYMETRIXBellevue, Washington-based Windows multimedia and client/servertools vendor Asymetrix has announced a new database browser InfoAssistant. The company claims the software "replaces arcanedatabase terminology with plain language commands." Primarilyaimed at large corporates in multi-user environments, InfoAssistant is designed to help users of complex databases - Oracle7, Sybase SQL Server 10, Microsoft SQL Server and Borland'sdBase, Paradox and InterBase - extract information in the formthey require. It uses the Borland Database Engine to obtaindirect access to the database systems. In addition, users canimport data from Excel, Lotus 1-2-3 and Quattro Pro spreadsheets,or text files. The browser is a 32-bit Windows 95 application,compatible with industry standards such as MAPI, OLE and ODBC. Itconsists of four elements: Fact Browser, Query Generation,Analysis and Presentation Views and Integration with popularoffice suite software. Info Assistant is available from UK valueadded distributor ICS Solutions initially at an introductoryprice of #349 plus VAT for at least the first three months ofthis year. Thereafter the price will be #545 plus VAT and you canreach ICS on (01256) 469 460.                     LBMS' SYSTEMS ENGINEERNow fully settled in its new home of Houston, Texas, former UKCASE company LBMS is shipping the latest version of its flagshipproduct Systems Engineer (SE) Version 6.1. This is aclient/server analysis and design tool for workgroup-basedapplication development. Optimised for Windows 95, the toolcontains design objects with what the company describes as a richset of properties beyond their standard name and textualdescription for easy editing in a tabsheet approach. This meansusers can now view and edit all properties of an object in onewindow. The software incorporates OLE linkage through therepository, enabling any SE object to be linked in any OLE-capable application, including email, word processing and drawingpackages. Along with the Windows 95 enhancements, the CASE vendorclaims that the new features will simplify object creation andediting, reduce the number of key strokes for users and improveintegration with other desktop tools. Speaking of third partyproducts, Systems Engineer Version 6.1 works with leading 4GLtools including Microsoft's Visual Basic and Sybase'sPowerBuilder. Supported databases include DB/2, Oracle, Sybaseand Microsoft SQL Server. In terms of platform requirements, thetool needs Windows 95, 3.1 or NT for the client workstation andDOS, OS/2, NetWare 3.x and 4.x and Windows NT 3.5x for theSE/Repository server. TCP/IP workstation connectivity issupported for NT servers. Systems Engineer Version 6.1 costs#3,000 per user. If you require further information, please feelfree to contact Pete Stone at LBMS on (0171) 878 8762.                    SEEING IN FOUR DIMENSIONSJust when you thought the Windows client/server database marketmust be fully saturated with the likes of Access, Approach andParadox, along comes another would-be entrant. Already dominantin the Macintosh rdbms arena (according to Newsweek, it has 75%of the worldwide market), software vendor ACI wants a piece ofthe Windows piece. To this end, it has launched 4D Server 1.5,its client/server relational database which now supports both theWindows and Mac environments. 4D Server is the multi-user versionof 4th Dimension, ACI's platform-independent relational databasesolution. The company claims that 4D Server 1.5 manages teamdevelopment simply and logically by acting as an applicationserver as well as a data server and can automatically controlobject locking and version control by check in/check outcapabilities. The database ships with 4D Backup which allows fullbackup and restore, logfiles and logfile restoration andmirroring to a range of media. Both 4D Server 1.5 for Macintoshand Windows come with two clients at a cost of #995. Existing 4DServer uses can upgrade to the new Mac version for #395 or to theWindows release for #795. Additional user licences can be addedin units of 1, 5 or 10 by purchasing expansion disks. If you needmore data, please ring ACI UK on (01625) 536 178.                    FIREWALLING THE INTERNETEuropean network connectivity specialist Integralis,headquartered in Theale, near Reading, Berkshire, has released anew version of one of its Internet security products. CheckpointFirewall-1 version 2.0 features multiple encryption schemesincluding FWZ1, a proprietary algorithm which allowsorganisations to encrypt all communications. The application'saddress translation capabilities enable companies to leverage asmall number of registered IP addresses into multipleconnections. Organisations can use this for day-to-day Internetcorrespondence which reduces reliance on public telecoms orexpensive leased lines. The software provides comprehensiveremote connectivity for all TCP, UDP and RPC applications,supporting standard smart cards or soft key solutions, such asSecurity Dynamics SecureID. Supported platforms include SunOS4.1.3 and Solaris 2.4 for Sparc, Intel 80x86 and Pentium-basedsystems, along with HP-9000 workstations and servers running HP-UX. Firewall-1 version 2.0 is available from Integralis pricedfrom around #4,000. If you require further details, pleasecontact Paula Irvine at Integralis on (01734) 306 060.Back to Headline List WT03-B33-23IA059-000323-B028-99http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec96.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224843 text/html 46599HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:46:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:14 GMTContent-length: 46412Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec96.html Sample Issue Copyright SYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNet January 9, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *LATEST NEWS* A NEW STRATEGY... (476 words) MMTF RELEASES FOUR PROPOSED MOBILE MIBS FOR SNMP (728 words) IBM'S INET TO SPARK INTERNET APPLICATIONS (707 words) LOTUS LAYS OUT INTERNET STRATEGY (912 words) IBM TO EXPAND RMON SUPPORT (375 words) IDC FORECASTS A GLOOMY 1996 FOR THE INDUSTRY (994 words) TELEGENICS LAUNCHES TELECOM NETWORK MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS (125 words) HORIZONS TECHNOLOGY ENHANCES LANAUDITOR (531 words) PLATINUM TECHNOLOGY RELEASES CHARGEBACK SYSTEM (469 words) WEB SERVER TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT ENABLED (179 words) MICROSOFT TEAMS WITH WALL DATA FOR ENTERPRISE CONNECTIVITY (289 words) NETMANAGE RELEASES INTRANET FAX SERVER FOR DESKTOPS (260 words) SPECTRUM PARTNERS MORE THAN DOUBLE IN 1995 (289 words) ON TECHNOLOGY ANNOUNCES NLM FOR IP ADDRESS MANAGEMENT (164 words) CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996A NEW STRATEGY...We knew this day would come.  Even before we launched theDistributed Systems Management Report in October 1994,we knew that network management and systems managementwould eventually become indistinguishable.  We knew thatwe would have to merge our two newsletters, DistributedSystems Management Report and Network Management Systems& Strategies -- for what good is a network without thesystems attached to it, and what good is a system withouta network to connect it to other systems?NMS&S has been providing information and analysis ofadvances in network management since 1989.  Althoughmanaging networks remains a primary concern for manylarge companies, the technology has reached a certainlevel of stability.  In the last couple of years, therehas been a very strong trend toward extending networkmanagement schemes to reach out to the systems at theother end of the network.All four of the top network management platform vendorshave responded to this trend, sealing the merger of thetwo disciplines:* Cabletron Systems last August formed partnerships with13 companies to give its Spectrum network managementplatform systems management capabilities.  The companiesincluded systems management specialists like ComputerAssociates, Compuware, and Tivoli.* Hewlett-Packard over the past couple of years has addedsystems management applications to its OpenView platform.These include OperationsCenter for operations and problemmanagement and AdminCenter for configuration and changemanagement.* IBM last May introduced SystemView, which forms moretangible links between the systems management productsit has offered for some time to its NetView networkmanagement platform.  In the future, all the systems fromIBM will be able to be managed from a central point ofthe customer's choosing.* Sun Microsystems early last year built a systemsmanagement solution called Solstice around its netmanagement engine, SunNet Manager.  Solstice covers eightdifferent management disciplines with 15 products, andSun enlisted the aid of several other companies,including the some of the same ones that are working withCabletron.These moves are not an end, but a beginning.  Vendorshave a long way to go before they satisfy all of themanagement requirements of their customers.  And usersstill need to figure out what it is that they need fromvendors, as their networks continue to expand at alarmingrates and last year's systems are connected with thisyear's.The network manager's job isn't getting any easier.  Butin the coming years there will be new ways to dothings -- and a lot more information that can be gatheredfrom network devices and end systems.  The challenge willbe in choosing the right tools to decipher it all.  Weat DataTrends will lend a hand by keeping you informedof the latest developments and putting them intoperspective.  Welcome to Systems & Network ManagementReport.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996MMTF RELEASES FOUR PROPOSED MOBILE MIBS FOR SNMPThe Mobile Management Task Force (MMTF) yesterdayannounced the group has finalized a family of MobileManagement MIBs designed to extend current networkmanagement standards to encompass the multiple needs ofmobile computer users.  In addition, these proposals havebeen designed to be suitable for adoption by both theInternet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the DesktopManagement Task Force (DMTF).  The release of these fourproposed MIBs marks the culmination of almost a year'swork; Epilogue and Xircom began working on a MobileManagement MIB at NetWorld+Interop last spring, which ledto the formation of the MMTF in August.The MMTF has developed four Mobile Management sub-MIBsthat can be implemented as extensions to the SimpleNetwork Management Protocol (SNMP): an Adapter MIB, aSystem MIB, a Link MIB, and an Extended System MIB.  Byusing these MIBs (management information bases) eithersingly or in combination, developers can create networkmanagement applications customized for a mobile computerenvironment.  For those interested in testing the MIBs,copies are available from the MMTF via the World Wide Webat http://www.epilogue.com/mmtf."As we discussed mobile management with industry experts,we discovered there is no single definition for `mobile'computing," said David Preston, President and COO ofEpilogue Technology, one of the MMTF founding members."Some mobile users are looking at cellular solutions,others at infrared technology, and still others think ofmobile computing as dial-up access.  With such diverseconnectivity criteria, it became clear that if we wereto create a single mobile management MIB to fiteveryone's requirements, that MIB would be so large andrequire so much processing power and network overhead itwould be impractical to deploy.  By developing fourdifferent mobile MIBs with specific functionality, we canhelp SNMP developers extend more targeted, customizablenetwork management support to their mobile networkingenvironments, rather than forcing them to use aone-size-fits-all approach."The four mobile MIBs define objects that addressadministration issues specific to different aspects ofmobile computing.  The System MIB is designed to providedata about the mobile system drivers, card and socketservices, power status, and related system conditions.The Adapter MIB provides information about the mobilenetwork adapter, including network hardware information,whether the mobile computer is connected using a wiredor wireless connection, etc.  The Link MIB providesinformation about the mobile network link itself, suchas link status and performance, that can be useful introubleshooting and optimizing the actual connection.Finally, the Extended System MIB contains informationabout system extensions, such as the Proxy Group.In creating the four mobile management MIBs, the MMTFdevelopment team consciously worked to draft proposedstandards that would be acceptable to both the IETF asa Management Information Base (MIB) extension to SNMP,and to the DMTF as a Management Information Format (MIF)file for their Desktop Management Interface (DMI).  Thesefour mobile MIBs have been developed from a core base ofDMI MIFs, analogous to the SNMP MIB.Using a Common Agent architecture such as those used inDMI Software Development Kits (SDKs), the MIFs can betranslated into corresponding MIBs.  Thus implementerscan use MIFs under a Common Agent or DMI Service Layer,or MIBs under an SNMP agent, to provide either SNMP orDMI support for mobile users in a managed networkenvironment."From the outset, the MMTF has stated that we have nointention of duplicating the work of standards bodieslike the IETF and DMTF," said Jim Soriano, Vice Presidentof Product Development for Xircom, another MMTF foundercompany.  "By using creating a set of extensible mobilemanagement objects that can be implemented as both MIBsand MIFs, we hope to help point the way to a commonsolution to mobile management problems that will beacceptable to both the DMTF and the IETF."The MMTF's Mobile Management MIBs has been made availablefor testing and will be submitted to both the DMTF andthe IETF for consideration later this month.The Mobile Management Task Force was initiated byEpilogue Technology Corp. and Xircom Inc., to promote newstandards to administer laptop, palmtop, and other mobilenetwork computer users. Membership in the MobileManagement Task Force is open to computer systemsmanufacturers, software developers, MIS personnel, andnetwork administrators concerned with issues surroundingthe administration of mobile computer users.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996IBM'S INET TO SPARK INTERNET APPLICATIONSApplication developers can now "test drive" theirInternet applications in a driving course sponsored byIBM.  IBM announced an iNet porting extension to itsSolution Partnership Center (SPC) in San Mateo, Calif.The SPC uses the IBM RS/6000 platform, running IBM'sversion of Unix, AIX.  The iNet porting facility providesdevelopers with access to systems, support, andtools -- either over the Internet or in person at theSPC."We intend to make the RS/6000 the Internet server ofchoice," said Tom Fornoff, director of workstationmarketing for IBM's RS/6000 Division.  "We're confidentthat developers using this facility will realize theadvantages in performance and flexibility that theRS/6000 offers."INET OFFERINGSThe iNet porting facility's complete list of resources,free to developers (as available), include:* An iNet porting World Wide Web (WWW) home page athttp://www.spc.ibm.com that provides information on thecenter and how to use its resources* Internet access to a number of RS/6000 systems runningAIX, allowing developers to test drive the platform andexperience its Internet server capabilities* Scheduled, secure Internet access to a range of RS/6000servers, software development tools, and technicalsupport that let developers port or create Internetapplications for the RS/6000 platformIn addition, developers can use the latest RS/6000uniprocessor, symmetric multiprocessor, and scalablePOWERparallel systems (RS/6000 SP).  IBM developmenttools will also be available.  These include productsfrom IBM and third parties like BlueStone, IllustraInformation Technologies, Lotus, Netscape, Prodigy,Progressive Networks, RAD Technologies, Spyglass, VDOnet,Verity, Worlds, Xing Technology, and others.  Thesevendors will also provide technical support and training.Marketing support is also available for Internetapplications created for or ported to the RS/6000platform.  Marketing support includes a listing on a "HotInternet Applications" Web page directory on the SPC'shome page; marketing links with IBM channels, productdivisions, and the Industry Solution Units.BOON TO BIG BLUE, DEVELOPERSIndustry observers were excited about IBM's announcementand said the iNet porting facility is a boon to both IBMand developers.  "This allows IBM to immediately allowdevelopers to begin testing code, testing new marketideas -- without building an infrastructure of cornerstores," said Rich Doherty, a director of TheEnvisioneering Group (Seaford, N.Y.).Doherty described IBM's iNet porting facility as a"virtual service bureau," but said developers who stillwant the security and sanctity of testing theirapplications in person can take their applications to thefacility in San Mateo.The Envisioneering Group has accessed the site and builtports on IBM's supercomputers.  "There's nothing elselike it," Doherty said.  "You can call into the heart ofthe technology, try out ideas in private, and have accessto thousands of dollars of development time."TRY BEFORE THEY BUYNot only can developers test out their applications,developers can bring their clients in and walk throughthe applications with them to work through any problems,Doherty explained.  "This is a `try before they buy' setup," he said.  "You couldn't ask for a better match ofcustomer and vendor."Other companies may try to copy elements of IBM's iNetporting facility, but Doherty said IBM gives developerslots of access to its system.  "These things are usuallyportioned out in terms of minutes, not in terms of tensof hours," he said.  "IBM has dozens of ports to ensurethat each developer has 22 continuous hours.  That'sunique -- that's not just driving the car around theblock; that's like borrowing it from the dealer for aweekend."Another analyst agreed that IBM's interest in Internetapplications is good for the company.  "IBM has a pointof leverage in this new environment -- it's called data,"said John Robb, an analyst with Forrester Research Inc.(Cambridge, Mass.).IBM has huge amounts of data, mostly on its back-endsystems, Robb explained.  "IBM wants to help companiesdistribute or publish or integrate that data with theirWeb offerings," he said.  "So anything that IBM can offerin the way of tool sets is positive.  Everyone wants toWeb-enable their legacy systems.  IBM should be in thebusiness of helping companies do that."(RACHEL BROWN)Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996LOTUS LAYS OUT INTERNET STRATEGYKeeping in line with the trend of major computercompanies going public with their Internet strategies,IBM subsidiary Lotus Development Corp. (Cambridge, Mass.)held a conference last month to outline how Notes willintegrate and interact with the Internet.The company is working with the Internet -- not againstit, was the message Lotus stressed to conferenceattendees.  Lotus said it aims to combine its Notes'smessaging and groupware services with the ubiquity of theWorld Wide Web (WWW).  As part of that plan, NotesRelease 4 will support key WWW protocols, such as HTTP,HTML, and Java technology -- which will allow users witheither Notes clients or Web browsers to benefit fromNotes applications.Michael Zisman, Lotus's executive vice president and CEO,offered three specific strategies for Notes integrationwith the Internet:* Deliver a Notes server in 1996 that joins HTTP, HTML,and Java technology with existing Release 4 Notes servertechnology to provide a Web development and applicationhosting environment* Deliver extensible Web-enabled business applicationframeworks that can be customized by Lotus businesspartners and customers* Extend Notes clients with the InterNotes Web Navigator,a Notes Release 4 Web browsing facility that allows usersto automate Web access in Notes applications.LOWER PRICESFearing that many companies would shift theircommunications onto the relatively low-cost Internet asan alternative to pricey software, Lotus also lowered theprice of Lotus Notes Mail to $55 per seat.  In addition,Lotus' InterNotes Web Publisher, which originally soldfor $2,995, will soon be available free via the Web toNotes.  Also marked for discount are Lotus's upgrade forNotesSuite Desktop, its SmartSuite desktop productivityapplications, and the NotesSuite ApplicationCollection -- these will all be reduced by 33 percent,from $299 to $199."The new, more aggressive pricing for Notes will allowour customers to more quickly deploy Notes throughouttheir organizations," said Jeff Papows, Lotus' executivevice president and chief operating officer.  "Inparticular, the new mail client and lower pricing willmake Notes much more attractive for users who needelectronic mail and Internet access."Lotus said its merger with IBM allowed the company toestablish its new pricing model.  "Lotus can now take alonger-term financial perspective and position ourselvesas the price and value leader in the messaging andgroupware market," Papows said.But the company raised the price of its Notes serversoftware from $275 to $495, rationalizing that the newand improved software will be able to link more PCs withNotes to centralized computers.NOTES IS THE WEB"Lotus is not giving customers a choice of Notes or theWeb -- Lotus is saying Notes is the Web," said DavidMarshak, vice president and senior consultant for thePatricia Seybold Group (Boston, Mass.).  The concept ofNotes as the Web is very appealing to users because manybrowsers don't offer E-mail, Marshak said.  "Lotus offersadditional benefits with its browsing," he said.  "It canorganize the work, run agents against it, have additionalsecurity."With Notes as a Web browser, users can browse and do allthe things with it they can do internally with Notes --workflow, connecting to transaction processes, tracking,and monitoring, Marshak explained.  Marshak praised thecompany for lowering its prices.  "Lotus is saying thatthe price of the client should not be a barrier towhatever you want to do," he said."Lotus is making a very powerful statement," Marshakcontinued.  "Lotus is saying: We want you as Notes users.Whether you want E-mail, a Web browser, or Notesapplications, we have the best client in any of theseuses."LOOK FOR VALUEBut another analyst said pricing incentives are notnecessarily the news.  "Pricing is not the issue withNotes and the Internet," said Tom Austin, researchdirector with the Gartner Group (Stamford, Conn.).  "Thevalue is in supporting Web browsers."Within two years, there will be millions of browsers outthere, Austin said.  "By supporting the browsers and theInternet protocols, Lotus will have extreme breadth ofcapability," he said.  "The value to Lotus is that itwill gain access to 100 million people.""Lotus is modifying its technology so that anyone witha Web browser can have access to everything that's on aNotes server," Austin said.  "Lotus has opened up Notesto the point where users can take advantage of Notesserver without using a client."While Lotus has accomplished its Internet goals from atechnical point of view, the company must focus on itsmarketing message, Austin said.  "How do they establishthe tens of millions of people interested in the Internetas Notes users, rather than Netscape users?" Austinasked.  "That's their problem: marketing."Lotus needs to figure out how to establish a new positiveimage in the marketplace, as well as to make peopleunderstand the benefits that Lotus delivers and to makethose benefits as easy as the Web, Austin said.  "A lotof people call Lotus groupware `gropeware,' with everyonegroping around trying to find its meaning," he said."Whereas the Web is intuitively obvious to users withinfive minutes.""At their conference, Lotus stressed that users can buildgreat applications.  That doesn't excite people," Austinsaid.  "Lotus does the Web, Lotus does groupware --that's not enough.  Lotus needs a stronger marketingstrategy."(RACHEL BROWN)Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996IBM TO EXPAND RMON SUPPORTAlthough IBM has supported RMON for some time, thecompany is introducing extensions to the networkmonitoring standard across its hub products starting inthe next few months.The extensions include two probe modules, one designedto resemble the RMON 2 standard once it is finalized andanother to generate test traffic on a local area network.Right now, IBM has only one probe capable of performingthese functions: an Ethernet probe for its 8250 Nwaysintelligent hub which can monitor three Ethernet segmentssimultaneously.In the coming months, IBM will announce thesecapabilities for the 8260, at the top of IBM's line, saidSallie Matlack, an IBM-certified IT specialist.  LesserIBM hubs will receive these extensions sometime in thefuture.RMON (remote network monitoring) is an industry-standardmethod of collecting statistical data at the physical anddata layers of network segments and sending the data backto a central site for analysis.  RMON-compliant probescan also detect problems and send warnings to themanagement station.RMON 2 will expand the range of data that can begathered, looking at higher functions such as networkprotocols and applications, and will provide an end-to-end view.IBM's Enterprise Communications Analysis Module (ECAM)is a block of software that looks at the same things RMON2 will when the standard is complete.  IBM has createda mechanism where ECAM can be automatically downloadedfrom a management station into a probe that has beenengineered to accept modules like ECAM.IBM's other RMON extension, called Traffic TransmissionManagement Module (TTMM), can take network trafficcollected through other monitoring tools and spit it outonto a local segment.  This lets network managers monitorthe impact on that segment via performance monitoringtools.PUTTING IT TOGETHERTo handle the information gathered through RMON probes,IBM last October introduced a version of its softwareproduct Nways Campus Manager - ReMon, a version thatincludes ECAM and TTMM.  In November, IBM brought thesoftware from NetView for AIX to HP OpenView.ReMon lets managers tell the distributed agents whichpackets to capture and send back to the managementplatform.  It also displays the information gathered fromthe probes graphically.(JEFF CARUSO)Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996IDC FORECASTS A GLOOMY 1996 FOR THE INDUSTRYIn spite of a bullish 10-year outlook for on-linecommerce, researcher International Data Corp. (IDC)yesterday predicted 1996 to be a year of disappointmentas investors and corporations suffer through thediscouragingly slow development of a significant consumerbase.  By this time next year, IDC predicted 20 percentof the Fortune 500 companies that have commercial Websites will close or stop maintaining them, resulting in"ghost" sites.On-line information service providers (such asCompuServe, America Online, Microsoft Network, andProdigy) will derive more than half of their revenue fromproviding access to the Web by mid-1997.  IDC predictsthat two of the four will struggle to survive."In 1996 we predict that the Internet/World Wide Webphenomenon will shift from today's `intoxication' stageto a `hangover' stage," said Frank Gens, senior vicepresident of research at IDC, the world's leadingprovider of information technology (IT) data, analysis,and counseling.  "The high-flying Internet suppliers willhave disappointing financial results, while technicalcapabilities of the Internet are stretched to thebreaking point."Gens also said IT industry revenues will jump from $500billion to more than $2.5 trillion by 2010, and corporatespending on IT will rise from 2 percent of revenues tomore than 5 percent. In addition, IDC said it believeson-line commerce volume will hit $150 billion or more bythe year 2000 and more than $1 trillion by 2010."Some financial service companies, retailers, andpublishers will bail out in the initial hangover period,"Gens said.  "In the process, they will cripple theirbusinesses' ability to compete in the growing `virtualeconomy.' In contrast, leaders in the emerging electronicmarketplace will significantly increase theirinvestments. In the process, the seeds will be sown forthe creation of new leadership and the downfall of somecurrent giants in many industries."INTERNET APPLIANCESBy this time next year, IDC predicts that manufacturersof "Internet appliances" -- low-cost devices that allowthe user to access on-line information -- will ultimatelyslash prices in half by year's end.Internet Appliances will arrive in 1996, but thesuccessful ones won't be priced at $500, Gens said.  Theywill come out of the gates at $100 to $300.  The gameconsole crowd is already slicing away at the pricing forsimple Web surfing devices.  Within two years, InternetAppliances will emerge as giveaways (less than $100 tofree) by businesses that want customers to access theiron-line services, according to Gens."Price competition in data to the home will becomebrutal," Gens said.  IDC predicted that high-performanceInternet access will be delivered to the home for aslittle as $15 to $20 per month in 1996, down from $25 to$70.  Pricing will drop to $10 to $15 per month withinthe next two years, partially because cable companies(with the help of affordable cable modems) will play theInternet card as their first foray in thetelecommunications business.  Telephone companies willrespond with more aggressive pricing.According to IDC, in 1996 and 1997, suppliers willaggressively explore new home PC designs to drive downprices of multimedia devices to $800 to $1,000 (and less)in an effort to penetrate broader segments of theincreasingly important consumer market.  It will beparamount for PC vendors to become better acquainted withthe mainstream consumer electronics market and mentality,and learn a whole new meaning of "price-competitive."Without doubt, the winners in the PC business in thecoming decade will be those that crack the mass-marketbarrier, IDC said.MICROSOFTIDC predicted Microsoft will have a great year in 1996,but its hold will be challenged by the Internet-based"Revenge of the (Unix) Nerds."  One effect of theInternet phenomenon of 1995 has been that many on WallStreet and within the IT industry now are forecasting theundoing of Microsoft's hold on the industry, and hailingthe rise of Netscape and Sun Microsystems as the newindustry leaders."While IDC recognizes the potential of the Internet worldto weaken several of Microsoft's key levers on theindustry, such as OLE and Visual Basic, there will berelatively little revenue effect from this in 1996," Genssaid.  "We also believe in spite of the recurring rumorsof Department of Justice investigations, Microsoft willescape any major antitrust activity in 1996, an electionyear.  Additionally, Microsoft will conclude that itsventures into new businesses will have a greater chanceof success without the Microsoft brand."OTHER PREDICTIONS FOR THE NEW YEAR* There will be an Internet-driven shakeout in theapplication software and application development toolsbusinesses in 1996 and 1997.  The emergence of the Web,and the growing importance of entertaining,multimedia-rich interfaces, will challenge the currentcrop of client/server tool suppliers like Microsoft,Powersoft, Dynasty, Forte, and Seer, as well asapplication package companies like SAP and Peoplesoft.* Software licensing will support network access andshort-term "rental."  Behind the scenes, suppliers arecurrently exploring how to "crack the code"  on thischarging model; the leaders will begin experimenting inthe marketplace in 1996 and 1997.* Large systems will become "politically correct."High-end servers will increasingly be required to scaleto support direct access by thousands to potentiallymillions of users, as opposed to today's hundreds tothousands of corporate users.  This accelerated scalingrequirement will put pressure on Microsoft's enterprisestrategy due to NT's relatively low-end design point,and boost the Unix camp's high-end business.Beneficiaries will be IBM, Hewlett-Packard, SunMicrosystems, and -- perhaps -- a rejuvenated Digital.* The increased scope of the Net will favor suppliersthat excel in creating "virtual organizations."Successful suppliers will be able to play well in a"virtual organization"  structure -- able to act ascreator, investor, producer, and/or partner.A full copy of IDC's 1996 predictions can be found onIDC's home page.  The address ishttp://www.idcresearch.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996TELEGENICS LAUNCHES TELECOM NETWORK MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONSTelegenics announced last month that its EmbeddedTelecommunications Solutions (ETS) product line foradvanced network management is now available.  The ETSproduct suite manages advanced networks, such asSONET/SDH, ATM, and PCS, by providing integrated,optimized, embedded software solutions fortelecommunications equipment.  Eight equipmentmanufacturers are integrating the ETS product suite intotheir telecommunications products.ETS products are vertically profiled for specificprotocol stacks, subnetworks, and MIBs.  These modulesintegrate into a number of supported real-time operatingsystem (RTOS) environments.  The product suite alsosupports software downloading and remote login.  Currentelements of ETS support CMIP agent and SONET/SDHmanagement over both full and partial OSI protocol stacksand a variety of subnetworks including 802.3, X.25, andthe embedded data communications channel.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996HORIZONS TECHNOLOGY ENHANCES LANAUDITORHorizons Technology Inc. (HTI) recently adopted asubscription license model for its flagship networkmanagement product LANauditor.  The news coincides withthe release of LANauditor 3.1, which incorporates newfeatures and major enhancements.  LANauditor providescontinuous hardware/software inventory scanning of localarea networks.  LANauditor works as a standalone productor can be integrated into popular help desk,troubleshooting, asset management and accounting systems.The enhancements in the 3.1 version include:* Windows 95 and Windows NT workstation auditing* Audit of registered DMI information* Enhanced client scanning, including TCP/IP address andsub-net collection* New customizable administration screen for up to 46fields* Compaq and Dell detail recognition, including BIOSinformationRegistered LANauditor 3.1 users will also receive the Win'95 Migration Tool for free.  This cost analysis toollets users determine the productivity gains needed torecover the potential investment costs of migrating toWindows 95.  HTI's Win '95 Tool is based on a financialcost analysis model developed with the chairman of theFinance Department of the Business School of San DiegoState University.  With more than 20 user-definedvariables for aspects ranging from cost per hour fortraining and upgrade support to the cost for hard diskupgrades, the Win '95 Migration Tool can be applied toplanning scenarios for many types of business.LANauditor is available in 25-user and 100-user perpetuallicense packages from resellers worldwide.  Both packagesinclude the database and the Console Module to access thedatabase.  Packages can be integrated to match the nodecount of the user network.  For example, two 100-userpackages and one 25-user package will support a networkwith 225 nodes.  One year Premium Support is includedwith the package product and can be renewed on an annualand biannual basis.NEW PACKAGEWith LANauditor 3.1 HTI is introducing its EnterpriseProgram for customers who need to manage information fromlarge sites and desire a lower-cost alternative tostandard packaged products.  Participants in theEnterprise Program can license LANauditor for either oneyear (Gold Program) or two years (Platinum Program).  Atthe end of the license period, the user can renew thelicense, or the software can be returned to HTI.  TheEnterprise Program allows licensing for exactly thenumber of nodes required and nodes can be added at anytime during the licensing period.  A Platinum user canbuy the product outright through a perpetual license fora small additional per-node fee.The Premium Support Program is designed to assure usersof continuous enhancements and improvements as PC systemsevolve.  The program includes: free upgrades, quarterlysoftware dictionary and hardware agent upgrades, freeutilities for LANauditor such as the Win '95 MigrationTool, free telephone support, free Internet technicalsupport, free monthly electronic newsletter, and producttips.As an asset management tool, LANauditor providescontinuously updated, detailed records of network assets.For help desk and troubleshooting operations,LANauditor's reports on changes to network nodeconfigurations highlight probable causes of problems forquick and easy correction.  LANauditor is the onlyinventory product that tracks all user and networkchanges that occur between each scheduled inventory.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996PLATINUM TECHNOLOGY RELEASES CHARGEBACK SYSTEMPLATINUM technology inc. last month released CIMS, anintegrated chargeback system for heterogeneous,distributed computing environments.  The system providescritical chargeback services that track informationresources used organization-wide.  The CIMSapplications -- including job accounting, chargeback,cost analysis, resource utilization reporting, capacityplanning, and resource monitoring -- simplify the ISmanagement process, according to PLATINUM.On Dec. 13, 1995, PLATINUM technology acquired thedeveloper of the CIMS integrated chargeback system, theprivately-held BMS of Newcastle, Calif.  BMS will becomea wholly owned subsidiary of PLATINUM technology.  Termsof the agreement were not disclosed.  The company saidthe addition of BMS chargeback software is a keycomponent of PLATINUM's plan to provide complete,integrated operations and systems management solutionsfor the Open Enterprise Environment (OEE).HOOKS TO CABLETRONIn related news, PLATINUM technology formed an alliancewith Cabletron Systems.  The company said a broad arrayof its diverse software product line will support andintegrate with Cabletron Systems' Spectrum EnterpriseManager.  As part of a technology alliance to provideplatform integration, PLATINUM will provide its systemsand database management customers the ability to managea wide variety of open, distributed enterprise networkedenvironments using SPECTRUM.PLATINUM has recently announced additional relationshipswith HP and AT&T, as well as development plans for itsown framework, POEMS.Various point products could be adapted to hook intoSPECTRUM by different means.  The first phase ofintegration for most partners is through the use of aCabletron-provided toolkit that PLATINUM could use toenable event passing, database information exchange, andscript integration.  Another phase of integration wouldbe via published APIs.  Further levels of integrationbetween SPECTRUM and PLATINUM -- including enhanced alarmintegration and knowledge-based integration -- will beevaluated on an application-by application-basis.Regardless, the companies said they are confident theopen nature of SPECTRUM will allow quick integration totake place.Among the PLATINUM products being considered foradaptation to SPECTRUM are:* Apriori, PLATINUM's client/server help desk product:customers have the need for network events, such as anexceeded network threshold, to be reported to thecorporate help desk.* Xfer, PLATINUM's software distribution tool: IS supportstaffs need to have a way to distribute software andrevisions across networks.  When integrated withSPECTRUM, Xfer actions can be seen from SPECTRUM'snetwork map, providing a graphical view of distributionactions.* AutoSys, PLATINUM's client/server job management tool:clients need to reliably schedule jobs across theirentire networked enterprise.* DBVision, PLATINUM's database performance managementand monitoring tool: customers need to monitor and ensuredatabase availability across networks and assure databaseintegrity.* Database management tools: PLATINUM's databasemanagement products support the DB2 family, Sybase,Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle, and Informix.  SPECTRUMexports to these and other popular formats.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996WEB SERVER TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT ENABLEDNetwork security and analysis software vendor e.g.Software introduced WebTrends 1.0, a way to obtaindetailed analysis of the traffic on web servers.WebTrends automatically produces reports showing useractivity by market, interest level in specific pages orservices, which products are most popular, and whethera visitor has a local or national origin.It offers access not only to the number of potentialbuyers who visit a web site but also their demographics.The program also includes a built-in scheduler to printreports based on specified criteria.  Reports generatedby WebTrends include statistical and graphicalinformation that can be viewed either on a local serveror from a remote location, as well as tables and graphsgenerated as HTML files that can be edited or viewed byany browser.WebTrends also includes an international database ofInternet addresses, including company name and addressby city, state, and country.  Beta and trial versions ofWebTrends are available immediately throughhttp://www.egsoftware.com.  The retail version will beavailable in February 1996 for a suggested single-userprice of $299.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996MICROSOFT TEAMS WITH WALL DATA FOR ENTERPRISECONNECTIVITYMicrosoft Corp. and Wall Data Inc. released the RUMBA-SNAServer Solution Pack, which provides an enterpriseconnectivity solution for business users.  IBM mainframeand AS/400 users can now access and use host data fromMicrosoft desktops.  The product package consists ofMicrosoft SNA Server, five client access licenses for SNAServer, and five copies of Wall Data RUMBA OFFICE forSNA Server.  The product is offered exclusively by TechData, a U.S. distributor, and is available immediatelyfor an estimated retail price of $1,484.  The SolutionPack is also available in 25-, 100-, and 250-userversions.RUMBA OFFICE is a Windows-based software product thatprovides access to a range of latent client/servercapabilities on business-critical systems which includeIBM mainframe and AS/400 systems.  It enables users toleverage business information and applications across theenterprise.  RUMBA OFFICE also includes Data Access,which provides direct access to relational databases sothat end users can easily integrate business-criticaldata into their Windows-based applications, andQuickAssist, which can increase productivity byremembering and entering information in user entryscreens based on previous actions.Using a client/server architecture, Microsoft SNA Serveroffloads the communications processing from hostcomputers and desktop PCs.  Each PC uses only standardLAN protocols, such as TCP/IP, IPX/SPX, NamedPipes/NetBEUI, Banyan VINES or AppleTalk to connect toone or more SNA Servers.  The SNA Servers then connectto the mainframe and AS/400 systems using SNA protocols.SNA Server offers advanced tools for easy system setupand centralized graphical administration. It supportsevery important PC and network operating system, LANtype, SNA host connection, and host type. You can connectclients and manage SNA Servers across LAN and WANbridges, routers and over dial-up lines.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996NETMANAGE RELEASES INTRANET FAX SERVER FOR DESKTOPSNetManage Inc. released a Windows-based Fax Server thatallows users to send and receive facsimile documentsdirectly from their Windows PC using Internet technology.Chameleon Fax Server lets users send, receive, route andmanage their faxes over the Internet.The product integrates with NetManage's Chameleon Desktopmail client and runs on Windows and Windows 95 platforms.Chameleon Mail supports MAPI (Messaging ApplicationProgramming Interface) and provide users with a point-and-click solution for sending and receiving MS Word orother MAPI-compliant application files.  ChameleonDesktop includes the NEWTView application for viewing faxdocuments.  Chameleon Fax Server's DID (Direct InwardDial) support allows users to automatically receive faxesin their mailbox as a MIME (Multi-purpose Internet mailextension) attachment.Users can store important fax numbers in the ChameleonMail Address Book or in the company's ECCO phonebook.Once the user sends a fax the data is stored in the FaxLog by date, time, number dialed, size and length ofdocument. Additionally, inbound faxes are marked bysubject and sender and can be stored into folders bydefining Chameleon Mail rules.Chameleon Fax Server is available immediately for US $299for a 30 user license.  Chameleon Mail is included in theChameleon Desktop application suite and is available inWindows and NT platforms.  Chameleon Desktop is pricedat $400 per single copy and includes over 50 desktopapplications including host connectivity, file andprinter sharing, messaging, workgroup collaboration,desktop management and Internet access.  A Windows 95version will be available in the first quarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996SPECTRUM PARTNERS MORE THAN DOUBLE IN 1995The number of Spectrum partners has grown more than 125percent during 1995.  Spectrum partners supportCabletron's Spectrum Enterprise Manager for network andsystems management in three ways: application providers;integrator and professional service providers; andacademic or research affiliations.  Currently there are133 Spectrum partners worldwide with broad geographicalsupport -- in 31 countries -- including partners inEurope, South America, North America, Africa, Australiaand Asia. Of these, 74 provide applications, 55 provideintegration capabilities, and seven support Spectrumthrough research.  Through its partners as well asin-house development, Spectrum offers more than 220applications.Some of the most recent partners to join the SpectrumPartners Program are:* PLATINUM technology inc. provides products andintegrated solutions that help IS organizations managecomplex, multiplatform, multi-operating system,multivendor environments -- from help desk support to jobscheduling to database management (see related story).* Telco Research Corp.'s TRU SERVER System addresses thedaily operations and the recurring problems of a businesstelecommunications office.  The system provides functionsfor accounting, decision-making tools for planningexpenditures, tools for work-order generation andtracking, tools for maintaining inventories, tools foroptimizing employee productivity and tools to monitor andreport telephone abuse.* Storage Computer Corp. develops and markets acomprehensive line of high-performance, high-availabilitystorage systems. Customers will be able to manage StorageComputer's RAID7 Storage Servers from Spectrum throughthe company's newly announced Storage Administrator bypointing and clicking on icons within the Spectrumscreen.* BMC Software Inc.'s PATROLVIEW for Cabletron givesSpectrum customers an integrated view of informationabout applications and data managed by PATROL AutonomousAgents.  This new partner further enhances Spectrum'srich set of options in systems and automated management.Back to Headline List CopyrightSYSTEMS & NETWORK MANAGEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996ON TECHNOLOGY ANNOUNCES NLM FOR IP ADDRESS MANAGEMENTON Technology Corp. announced the first NetWare LoadableModule (NLM) that provides central IP address management,a frustrating and onerous task placed on NetWareadministrators in the rush to get Internet access toevery desktop.  Awareness of the IP address managementproblem has grown as a result of demand for Internetaccess and a shortage of IP addresses under the currentaddressing system.The company said the new product, IPTrack, is the firstimplementation of a TCP/IP protocol called Dynamic HostConfiguration Protocol (DHCP) specifically designed asan NLM for NetWare environments.  ON Technology's IPTrackautomates the work it takes for a NetWare administratorto assign an IP address, maintain a log of addressassignments, track the address if the workstation ismoved, troubleshoot IP address conflicts, and re-assigninactive addresses.To purchase IPTrack or receive additional information,network administrators should send inquiries over theInternet to info@on.com or visit the ON Technology homepage on the World Wide Web at http://www.on.com.Back to Headline List