WT03-B34-1IA059-000323-B028-125http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec31.html 205.156.212.5 19970114224902 text/html 26061HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:47:13 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:44 GMTContent-length: 25874Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec31.html Sample Issue Copyright UNIX UPDATE via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL UNIX FOR NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEM (1022 words) TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIX (453 words) AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQL SERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORD (1039 words) DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCE PLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENT OF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONS (969 words) CopyrightUNIX UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996BEST WESTERN HOTELS SELECTS DIGITAL UNIXFOR NEW GLOBAL RESERVATION SYSTEMBest Western International, Inc., the world's largest hotelbrand, has selected multiple AlphaServer 8400 "TurboLaser"systems, the world's most powerful servers, together withthousands of Digital personal computers, to power BestWestern's new worldwide central reservation system (CRS).Digital and Best Western announced this agreement, among thelargest AlphaServer 8400 sales to date, at the InternationalHotel/Motel & Restaurant trade show here.When fully implemented, the deal will be worth more than $12million in Digital revenue. A total of 10 AlphaServer 8400systems will power Best Western's operations center centralhost server, located in Phoenix, Ariz., as well as BWI'sreservation centers located in Phoenix, Wichita, Kan., Dublin,Ireland, and Milan, Italy. The new servers will run Oracle7relational database management system with the 64-bit DigitalUNIX operating system, handling in excess of 2,000transactions per second. AlphaServer systems will replaceoutdated and over-extended mainframes.In addition, Digital will deliver some 3,500 Digital Venturis535 PCs to every Best Western property worldwide, where theywill provide a full range of inventory and rate managementcapabilities. This part of the system will enable hoteliers toenroll in Best Western marketing programs and create their ownprograms and pricing packages."Today we unveil the hotel industry's most ambitious, advancedcustomer reservation system. We selected theDigital/Oracle/UNIX solutions because of its superiorperformance, flexibility, and growth potential -- at one-tenththe cost of competing systems," said William S. Watson, BestWestern International's executive vice president."We expect the Digital/Oracle solution to dramatically improveour ability to respond more rapidly to customer needs, toquickly provide our client agents more and more relevantinformation on our customers' travel preferences, to increaseour sales and revenues, and to enhance our company's image,"Watson added.The new system is expected to to generate more than $50million in incremental annual room revenue and willsignificantly reduce corporate and property level operatingcosts.Pace-setting Global Reservation SystemBest Western's new central reservations systems, scheduled fora March 15, 1996, start-up, offers unprecedented features andfunctions, both at the property level and at the Best Westerncentral reservations offices. It will be a serviceenhancement for the 40 million travelers worldwide who stay atBest Western hotels each year.With the new CRS, Best Western will be the only hotel chain toprovide comprehensive geographic, pictorial, and textualinformation to its reservation sales agents. These featureswill enable guests who call a Best Western central reservationoffice from any location, whether at home or on the road, tofind the Best Western hotel that is closest to their desireddestination.The new system will enable Best Western to provide detailedguest histories, group booking capabilities, revenuemanagement service, travel agent commission data, and a widerange of property-specific and destination information.Yet the new system is much more than a traditionaltransaction- oriented network. It will provide the businesstools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing andfuture customers."Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bringradical changes to the way products are distributed to itscustomers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital andOracle as technology partners for the new millennium," saidPauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServerBusiness Segment. "While Best Western customers may never knowwhat's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, BestWestern managers will sleep better knowing our systems areproviding those customers the fastest, most reliable servicesin the travel industry."Digital's AlphaServer 8400 SystemsAlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastestmicroprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 12service, travel agent commission data, and a wide range ofproperty-specific and destination information.Yet the new system is much more than a traditionaltransaction- oriented network. It will provide the businesstools to more clearly target and service BWI's existing andfuture customers."Best Western recognizes that emerging technologies will bringradical changes to the way products are distributed to itscustomers. This vision led Best Western to select Digital andOracle as technology partners for the new millennium," saidPauline Nist, Digital vice president of the AlphaServerBusiness Segment. "While Best Western customers may never knowwhat's 'under the hood' of the new reservation system, BestWestern managers will sleep better knowing our systems areproviding those customers the fastest, most reliable servicesin the travel industry."Digital's AlphaServer 8400 SystemsAlphaServer 8400 systems are based on the world's fastestmicroprocessor, the 300 MHz Alpha 21164. They support up to 1264-bit processors and 14 Gbytes of memory, and can beclustered for far greater performance.Recently, Digital and Oracle together shattered thetransaction processing world performance record in benchmarktesting (tpcC) defined and audited by the independentTransaction Processing Performance Council. This wasaccomplished on an AlphaServer 8400, Digital UNIX operatingsystem, and Oracle 7 database system. The Digital/Oraclesolution bested the previous record held by Hewlett Packard by75 percent, and was far better than the best systems from IBM,Sun, AT&T, and Tandem.Taken together, the 64-bit Alpha technology, 64-bit DigitalUNIX, and 64-bit databases such as Oracle7 enable thebreakthrough performance and price/performance of VLM64.Digital is unique in the industry in its ability to deliverthis capability to customers today.Applications such as data warehousing, financial management,and online transaction processing take particular advantageof VLM64 solutions. This is because more than 4 billion timesmore data can be stored in memory than even the most powerfulmainframe systems, at a fraction of the cost. This providesdramatic improvements in processing speed, applicationperformance, and system affordability.Digital's Venturis PCsDigital Venturis is Digital's value-oriented desktop PC familydesigned to meet the computing requirements of generalbusiness users in standard office applications, as well asthose of users in a client/server environment. Ideal for thevolume purchaser, Venturis systems are simple to install, easyto use and easy to maintain, while providing room to expand ascomputing needs evolve.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996TEXAS INSTRUMENTS SOFTWARE SHIPPED FOR DIGITAL UNIXTexas Instruments (TI) Software will begin shipments ofComposer for Digital Equipment Corporation's Digital UNIX.Texas Instruments Software's Composer is a market-leadingcomponent-based development tool for client/server applicationdevelopment.  Standards-compliant, high-performance DigitalUNIX is the industry's leading 64-bit UNIX operating system.The combination of Composer and Digital UNIX provides themaximum performance, modularity and scalability available inthe client/server application development market today. WithComposer, users can design, develop and deploy flexibleclient/server applications that allow maximum use of computingresources regardless of the client/server architecture. Incombination with Digital UNIX, Composer gives users the highperformance needed to run client/server applications in a UNIXenvironment. Applications developed with Composer can bedeployed on the Digital's Alpha* workstation running DigitalUNIX or OpenVMS*."Digital UNIX offers Composer customers an industry standardhigh-performance UNIX operating system that lets them movetoday to the next generation of open computing," said SusanMorgan, alliance manager for Texas Instruments Software. "ThisTI and Digital solution enables customers to develop anddeploy client/server applications in a reliable, distributedenvironment where top transaction processing performance is amust and customers can be assured of scalability that meetsbusiness growth needs," Morgan added."We're pleased that TI has decided to port its market-leadingapplication development tool to Digital UNIX," said MarkSilverberg, UNIX product marketing manager at DigitalEquipment Corporation."The combination of Composer, Digital UNIX and 64-bit Alphaplatforms provides users with the ideal combination offlexible tools and robust power to develop mission-criticalclient/server applications."The Implementation Toolset module of Composer will beavailable for Digital UNIX. This module, which ensures theautomation of the compilation, linking and installation ofComposer-developed applications, allows migration of thedeveloped code to the target deployment system.As part of its strategy to provide customers with manydevelopment and implementation options for softwareapplications, Texas Instruments Software provides Composer fora broad range of operating systems. In addition to DigitalUNIX, these operating systems include Digital OpenVMS, IBMMVS, Tandem NonStop Kernel, Tandem NonStop-UX, Hewlett-PackardHP-UX, IBM AIX, Sun Solaris, Sequent Dynix/ptx, PyramidDC/OSx, Siemens/Nixdorf SINIX, AT&T GIS SVR4, MicrosoftWindows 3.1 and NT, and OS/2.For information on U.S. pricing and availability call (800)838-1843.About Texas Instruments SoftwareTexas Instruments Software is the market leader in softwareapplication development and assembly tools and services fordepartment and organization-wide implementation ofclient/server technology. Texas Instruments Software is adivision of Texas Instruments Incorporated (NYSE:TXN), ahigh-technology company headquartered in Dallas, Texas, withsales or manufacturing operations in more than 30 countries.For more information on Texas Instruments Software and itsproducts, please visit the division's World Wide Web site athttp://www.ti.com/software/software.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996AlPHASERVER 2100 SYSTEM AND MICROSOFT SQLSERVER SHATTER TPC-C PRICE/PERFORMANCE RECORDDigital Equipment Corporation and Microsoft Corporation hasunveiled audited transaction benchmark results that establishnew records in the highly competitive market for database,application and PC LAN servers. The results furtherdemonstrate the companies' leadership in providing customersthe industry's most powerful, most cost-effective open serverplatforms.Breakthrough results of 3194.4 transactions per minute (tpmC)at $196/tpmC, based on the TPC-C(2) benchmark Revision 3.0,were achieved on the AlphaServer 2100 5/300 64-bit SMP systemrunning Microsoft Windows NT Server operating system V3.51 andMicrosoft SQL Server V6.5 client/server database managementsystem. No other Microsoft SQL Server platform from any systemvendor delivers such impressive results.The 3194.4 at $196/tpmC result is the industry's best price/performance using any system, any database, or any operatingsystem. In fact, no other system has ever come close tobreaking the less-than-$200/tpmC barrier.With a total system cost of $626,102, the AlphaServer 21005/300 delivers transaction performance and price/performancesuperior to any other system priced below $1 million -- 24%better throughput performance and $46/tpmC less than itsclosest competitor, the Intel-based Compaq ProLiant 5/133Model 2. It also provides better performance and price/performance than many systems costing much more than $1million (see charts below).The Digital/Microsoft combination even outperforms a TandemHimalaya K10000-16 system with 16 processors and costing $3.5million. And compared with competitive systems from IBM, HP,Sun, Bull, AT&T, and others, these results are far superior."These independent benchmark results again demonstrate thebreakthrough performance and affordability of the Alphaarchitecture," said Pauline Nist, Digital vice president ofthe Alpha Server Business Segment. "For customers, thisrepresents the industry's best value in high-performanceserver capabilities. It also further demonstrates theengineering achievements of our strategic alliance withMicrosoft."The TPC-C benchmark is the industry-standard test formeasuring database transaction processing performance andprice/performance. The $/tpmC result reflects the cost ofacquisition and ownership of the system over a five-yearperiod, including hardware and software maintenance, softwareupgrades, and extended warranties."Today's news is one more way Digital and Microsoft arebringing to customers computing solutions that offerunprecedented value and flexibility," said Rich Tong, generalmanager of the Business Systems Division at Microsoft."These TPC results demonstrate the power of the Microsoft SQLServer and Digital Alpha platform for transaction- andcompute-intensive business applications in heterogeneousenvironments."Heterogeneous Computing EnvironmentThe AlphaServer 2100 5/300 benchmark was conducted using threeCPUs and 2 gigabytes of memory. These results were achievedin a heterogeneous computing environment, using VisigenicsODBC client software for SCO UNIX running on Digital'sIntel-based Prioris PC systems."No longer must customers limit themselves to a singleoperating system to get interoperability, performance, andaffordability," said Nist. "With these results, Digital hasproved that one of the best ways to solve business problemscan include a heterogeneous environment. Digital demonstratesthat a customer can leverage the strengths of both Windows NTand UNIX to provide a cost-effective high-performancesolution." Competitive ComparisonsPRICE PERFORMANCE tpmC $/tpmC total system costDigital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 $196 $626,101Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216Digital AlphaServer 8400 5/300 9414.06 316 2,972,726Compaq ProLiant 4500 5/100-1 1516.77 319 484,108IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831HP 9000 K410 3809.46 364 1,384,763TRANSACTION THROUGHPUT tpmC $/tpmC total system costHP 9000 K410 3809.46 $364 $1,384,763Sun SPARCCenter 2000E 3534.20 495 1,751,004AT&T 3555/4-XP 3312.70 587 1,942,593Digital AlphaServer 2100 5/300 3194.40 196 626,102IBM RS/6000 PowerPC J30 3119.16 349 1,089,831Tandem Himalaya K10000-16 3043.49 1160 3,529,520Bull ESCALA Deskside D401/8 2660.03 530 1,409,965Compaq ProLiant 45005/133-2 2454.97 242 593,216Customers Deploying Enterprise Database SolutionsThe Potomac Group, of Nashville, Tenn., provides doctors andhospitals in 20 states instant on-line access to Medicaidsubscriber data. According to Bill McClary, executive vicepresident of operations, "Our AlphaServer 2100 / Microsoft SQLServer solution enables us to compete and win in a marketdominated by giant companies with multi-million dollar legacysystems."At Ruben H. Donnelley Corporation, the world's oldestpublisher of Yellow Pages, AlphaServer 2100 systems andMicrosoft SQL Server are greatly expanding the company'sInteractive Yellow Pages, with new features such asFAX-on-demand and sophisticated database manipulation.And at the Los Angeles Times, the third largest newspaper inthe country, AlphaServer 2100 systems and Microsoft SQLServer, together with Autologic for Windows NT, are powering arastor image processing (RIP) systems that enables the Timesto product more pages faster, with more graphics and higherresolution, at lower cost.300MHz Processor Upgrade, Special PricingIn announcing the benchmark results, Digital also unveiled aprocessor upgrade program for the AlphaServer 2100 and 2000systems, raising the performance of the Alpha 21164 CPU usedin this system to a blazing 300MHz. The Alpha 21164microprocessor is still the industry's fastest and only BIPS(billion instructions per second) chip.Through December, this upgrade is specially priced at only$4,000. Complete 300MHz AlphaServer 2100 systems will begenerally available in Q1 of CY1996.60-Day Payment-Free Leasing OfferDigital also announced a limited-time leasing offer on allAlpha servers and workstations. Through June 1996, DigitalFinancial Services, a division of GE Capital, is offeringcustomers who migrate to Digital from competitors' systems a60-day payment holiday on all 36-month leases. The program isavailable to all direct and partner channels worldwide.The Digital/Microsoft AllianceDigital's AlphaServer systems provide a highly scalableenterprise platform for the Microsoft BackOffice suite, whichincludes Microsoft Windows NT operating system, Microsoft SQLServer, Microsoft Systems Management Server, Microsoft SNAServer, and Microsoft Mail Server. In June, Digital announcedan OEM agreement with Microsoft to bundle the MicrosoftBackOffice server suite with Digital AlphaServers andIntel-based Prioris servers.In August, Digital and Microsoft announced a major alliance,the Microsoft-Digital Alliance for Enterprise Computing,which will help customers implement and support Windows-basedcomputing in the enterprise. The enterprise level performancenumbers announced today demonstrate the results of the jointefforts of Digital and Microsoft to deliver Windows NT-basedsolutions to the enterprise.Back to Headline List CopyrightUNIX UPDATE via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIGITAL AND MACROMEDIA ANNOUNCEPLATFORM FOR DEVELOPMENTOF INTERACTIVE APPLICATIONSMediaplex Application Development System Offers Best Of ClassCross-Platform Authoring EnvironmentDigital Equipment Corporation and Macromedia Inc. (SanFrancisco) have forged an agreement to create a developmentsolution for applications that can be deployed on desktop PCs,the World Wide Web, and interactive broadband networks.Digital's Mediaplex Application Development System will bebundled with Macromedia Director, Macromedia Extreme 3D, andMacromedia xRes. This enables developers to create multimediaapplications deliverable on multiple platforms for maximumrevenue potential at the lowest possible cost. As part oftheir agreement, Digital and Macromedia will engage in jointtechnical development and marketing, and provide technicalsupport to developers."We've already achieved critical mass with the number oftelecom and cable companies using Mediaplex servers in theirtrials and deployments," stated Peter Ryus, director ofworldwide marketing, Digital's Video and InteractiveInformation Services. "By combining Macromedia's authoringtechnology with Digital's Mediaplex Application DevelopmentSystem, we can offer both the platform and middleware strengthof Digital and the industry-leading cross-platform authoringcapabilities of Macromedia to provide developers a turnkeycontent creation solution.""Because we already have the Director Player running on avariety of delivery platforms, we are in a unique position tobring multimedia to the end user, regardless of the devicethey have attached to the network," added Travis Huch,Macromedia's manager of technology partners. "With theircost-effective architecture and strong understanding of whatbroadband interactive networks will look like, Digital is anideal partner."Commenting on Digital's and Macromedia's agreement, SashaMagee, director of multimedia for Infrared Communications,said, "This is really nice for us. Because we're already usingDirector, Digital and Macromedia can now provide us with asmooth and continuous path to move our business to thebroadband marketplace, particularly because both companies arecommitted to delivery on multiple computing and set-top boxplatforms."Complete Authoring ResourcesThe Mediaplex Application Development System will incorporateseveral Macromedia authoring solutions, including: MacromediaDirector 4.0, a complete authoring resource for creatingmultimedia productions; xRes, a tool for high-resolution imageediting and compositing; Extreme 3D, a modeling, rendering andanimation tool; and a digital sound editor, Sound Forge bySonic Foundry. For developers seeking to create content forthe World Wide Web, Shockwave for Director -- an applicationfor compressing and playing Director files on the World WideWeb -- is included.These products will enable developers to create clientapplications that run on set-top boxes or PCs that are fullyintegrated with the streaming capabilities of the mediaserver. For custom client/server applications such asinteractive home shopping, distance learning, and homebanking, Digital provides an optional software developer's kit(SDK) that enables content creators to develop new classes ofapplication services on the server.Robust Content Design and Testing PlatformThe Mediaplex Application Development System also includescomplete hardware resources for creating applications,including an Alpha-based Mediaplex Development Server and aPentium) - based Digital multimedia PC. Using thisconfiguration, developers can design content on the PC andtest their applications on the Mediaplex Development Server.Using standards-based Digital and Macromedia networkextensions, these applications can be run on Windows PCs, theWorld Wide Web, as well as set-top box environments fromApple, Online Media, and Microware (DAVID).The Mediaplex Application Development System comes equippedwith a 166 Mhz Alpha processor, 64 MB of RAM, 4.7 GB of harddisk capacity, 8 GB DAT drive, internal modem, 17" monitor,and keyboard, all enclosed in a convenient deskside cabinet. Adual-boot option allows the server to run either Digital UNIXfor testing interactive broadband applications, or MicrosoftWindows NT for harnessing Alpha's 64-bit floating pointprocessor capabilities for graphics rendering and videoediting. The Mediaplex Application Development System comeswith Ethernet connectivity, and supports RAID as an option.The Digital multimedia authoring PC includes a 100 Mhz Pentiumprocessor with a 256 KB burst cache, 16 MB of RAM, 1 GB ofhard disk capacity, quad-speed CD-ROM drive, MPEG video card,16-bit audio card and speakers, 17" monitor, keyboard, andEthernet connectivity.Pricing and AvailabilityThe Mediaplex Application Development System, with this fullcomplement of hardware and software resources, is pricedstarting at $33,900, with significant discounts available forqualified developers, and will be available from Digital inthe first quarter of 1996. This price includes a one yearmembership in the Macromedia Developer's Program, access tosupport forums, and general support from Macromedia. Digital'sSDK and World Wide Web testing environment are priced asseparate options.About MacromediaMacromedia, the leader in multimedia and digital arts softwaretools, offers a full range of products for the Windows andMacintosh platforms. The company's flagship products include:Macromedia FreeHand, the most powerful tool for design andillustration; Macromedia Director, the industry-standardanimation and authoring tool for multimedia production;Authorware, the most powerful multiplatform authoringenvironment for interactive information; Extreme 3D, the mostpowerful solution for 3D graphics and animation; SoundEdit 16,the easy-to-use digital sound recording and editing solution;Fontographer, the industry-standard for type design andediting; and Action!, the most popular multimedia presentationapplication.About DigitalDigital is currently the market leader in interactiveinformation technology, supplying media server solutions formore trials and deployments than any other vendor. Cabletelevision companies using Digital's Mediaplex serverarchitecture include Svenska Kabel-TV in Sweden, andWestminster Cable in London. Trials by telecommunicationscompanies using Digital technology include US West's trial inNebraska, Belgacom in Belgium, and NYNEX and Ameritech in theNortheast and Midwest of the United States. Digital's serversare also being used in production environments to insertadvertising on more than 1,000 channels across 57 cable TVheadends served by Adlink in California, and to deliverpay-TV and near video-on-demand services by TMN Networks inCanada.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-2IA059-000323-B028-200http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec08.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225105 text/html 278704HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:47:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:28 GMTContent-length: 278516Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec08.html Sample Issue Copyright VAR BUSINESS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 Vol. 12 No.1 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EDITOR'S LETTER Sit Back and Enjoy Your Upgrade (430 words) MAILBOX Web Wherabouts (136 words) Proper Netiquette (157 words) More On ISO (123 words) CORRECTIONS (105 words) @VARBUSINESS -- A ROUNDUP OF ONLINE NEWS Heard On VIX (336 words) Cool VAR Home Page (145 words) Training Tips (76 words) Hot Online Products -- Authoring tools to write home about (281 words) VARBusiness Online -- Join us on TechWeb and VIX (128 words) PRODUCTS What Price Technology? -- It's tough to measure the cost of a satisfied customer (155 words) Product Report: Hub Verdict: Cost is King -- Standard Microsystems Corp. wins first place, but 3Com sells best (1040 words) Beta Test: Is Sybase Back on Track? -- With SQL Server 11, our VAR beta testers say yes (1149 words) Editor's Choice: HP Scans the LAN -- New ScanJet brings more power to the network (357 words) Editor's Choice: Doubleplay Delivers -- Dual drive is twice as nice, in function and in price (420 words) Editor's Choice: A Changing Worldgroup -- Galacticomm's groupware-BBS hybrid is VAR-friendly (435 words) TECHNOLOGY One World, Many Systems -- Make your resolution to bring pieces together (154 words) Networking: `Productizing' Service -- New England VAR paves way into new net management trend (1448 words) Networking: Your True Voice (348 words) Networking -- What VARs Are Saying: Know Who's In Charge (250 words) Software: Building a Warehouse -- More data and more disparate systems make it a great VAR market (1425 words) Software: PEN COMPUTING -- PENTt Up Demand? (293 words) Software: Software VAR -- Direct Marketing 101 (379 words) Computer Telephony: Ringing Up Small Business -- Low-cost telephony products offer fast payback for VARs (1018 words) Computer Telephony: Wireless Telecom -- How One VAR Makes the MOST of Telecom (296 words) FEATURE You Can Break Through Desktop Barriers -- Connect with high margin remote computing markets (2631 words) Ultimate Solution -- Connecting the Road Warrior (423 words) Availability Concerns -- Why Are Compaq Servers So Hard To Get? (221 words) Business Interview: Compaq Pushes Beyond the PC -- On top for now, Ross Cooley aims to keep Compaq there by moving agressively into the enterprise (2695 words) Are you Ready for Some Teamwork? -- Everyone talks teams, but it takes more than an ad hoc group of people to make up a winning one (2808 words) MASS STORAGE QUARTERLY Your Mission In Storage -- RAID, flash and RAM are critical to your customers (188 words) Know Your Raid? You've Got It Made -- The explosion in network storage needs is driving business to VARs who understand RAID technology (2792 words) Roundtable: Get it Done In a Flash -- Flash memory is rugged, compact, and needs little power-benefits that are making it pop up in new applications every day (2894 words) Memory: RAM Realities For Resellers -- Rising prices, tight supplies and shortages promise to make the memory market unstable for the next several years, but there are ways to protect yourself and your customers (1775 words) Chip Storage: Supply-Side `Dis'Economies (393 words) Net Gain from Networked CD-ROMs -- The growing need to access corporaate data on CD-ROMs opens doors for network-savvy VARs (1627 words) Case Study: Driving CD-ROM Sales -- VAR's slick system helps oil companies access information online (287 words) Tomorrow's CD-ROM -- High-density formats will open up new uses (325 words) BUSINESS Real-World Challenges -- From dealing with substance abuse to paying taxes, it's all part of the manager's job (181 words) Executive Challenge: The Hidden Problem -- Develop a policy to fight substance abuse (1140 words) VAR Deals: Trio's In the Army (93 words) VAR Deals: COLD Cola Coming (76 words) Customer Speak: What I Want In a VAR (342 words) Program Profiles: CA's Varsity Program Gives Each Player a Fair Turn (263 words) Program Profiles: Attachmate Ramps Up Business (254 words) Program Profiles: Maxoptix Pops the Question To Optical Storage VARs (161 words) Distribution: Financial Planning -- Taxing duties and coping with mergers (507 words) Heads Up: Sales Cycle Is As Sales Cycle Does (86 words) Industry Watch: Revenge of the Nerds -- Despite bad press, CTOs have become the darlings of our industry (830 words) Taking Care Of Business: Apart From the Crowd -- To stand out you need a unique selling proposition (360 words) VAR SHOPPER Monitor Mining (189 words) Doc Management With the Greatest of Ease (171 words) It's Time For An Update (175 words) PentiumPower From A to Z-Note (243 words) End Accounting Nightmares (206 words) Dedicated to Network Faxing (184 words) A WebScan a Day Keeps Viruses Away (174 words) Fargo's Colorful New Persona (176 words) Comtrol Launches RocketPort (198 words) ATM Access Gets a Boost (153 words) Look, No Driver (103 words) CLOSERS Up & Comer: Sky to Earth: You're Covered (152 words) VARNews: Now, Let's Talk Profits (82 words) Hot Stuff: The 'Universal Client' (121 words) COMPUTER TELEPHONY SUPPLEMENT Riding the CTI Technology Explosion -- Maturing, standards-driven technology sets off a computer telephony boom (1336 words) The Customer for Computer Telephony - The profile is broad, since telephon productivity is mission-control for most businesses (781 words) The High-Tech Way to "Hold the Anchovie (500 words) How to Make The Computer Telephony Sale -- VARs who have been there suggest finding a champion and layering solutions from the desktop (1496 words) Personalized Marketing for Every Customer (465 words) CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Sit Back and Enjoy Your UpgradeBy:Richard MarchIt's a new year and a new look for VARBusiness. Whether youflipped through the pages or consulted the table of contentsto get here, you've probably noticed something's different.It's our design. The typeface, the format of the charts, andthe layout of print and graphics are new. Those changes arepart of what we're calling an upgrade. We haven't changed ourprimary mission of providing you with technology, product andbusiness information. What we've changed is the way you getthat information. Foremost, the pages are easier to read. They'reless cluttered. In some cases the subheads or decks are longerto give you a better idea of what the story is about. The smallerstories-known as sidebars-that accompany larger stories are"aired out" and not text-heavy. The charts and informationboxes are cleaner and more direct, allowing you to scan andabsorb the information faster.Another way to maximize your time with VARBusiness is to knowwhere your favorite departments are. Therefore, we've streamlinedthe magazine's format by grouping similar departments togetherinto supersections. In the Products supersection you'll findProduct Report, Beta Test and Editor's Choice (formerly TechAlert). The Technology supersection covers Networking, Softwareand Computer Telephony.Our expanded Business supersection includes familiar departmentssuch as Program Profiles and Distribution from our former BusinessSense section. But there are also new departments such as ExecutiveChallenge, which tackles difficult management topics. CustomerSpeakgives insight into what your clients want from you. VAR Dealsprovides details and analysis of noteworthy contracts and installations.Heads Up is a collection of research and statistics that shapethe market. The VAR Biz Quiz will keep you on your toes-andto keep your vendors on their toes, we've restructured theAnnual Report Card In Depth, highlighting exclusive findingsfrom our yearly survey.Between the supersections you'll find our familiar cover andfeature stories and quarterly sections. Our in-depth contentwill continue to point out ways to adopt and sell new technologiesthat will increase your profits. But the new look of thosestories will reflect the reader-friendly approach you see elsewherein the magazine. Last but far from least, there's a new sectionup front called @VARBusiness. You'll find bite-sized bits andtips on the Internet and online markets. Our State of the VARMarket research found that four out of 10 VARs will be sellingInternet solutions this year. We'll be paying close attentionto this burgeoning market and delivering you targeted information.So kick back and enjoy your upgrade.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Web WheraboutsI've noticed with some chagrin that when you list companiesand their contact information, you fail to list their Internetand/or Web addresses. Clearly this must be an oversight onyour part. Given the degree of commitment CMP has to the Internet,one could only come to this conclusion.Today, any computer company that does not have at least an email address cannot truly call itself a computer company. Anymanufacturer who does not have a Web page is doing a disservicenot only to its clients, but also to itself.Wayne SpivakPresidentSBA.NET.WEBInternet & WWWConsultingBellmore, N.Y.waynes@netcom.comEditor's Reply: Wayne, we couldn't agree more. As of our Dec.1, 1995 issue, we started listing Web addresses in our QuickScans.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Proper NetiquetteSomewhere I remember seeing a list of Internet/Online Etiquetteand acronyms. Do you have this or know where I could get acopy? I have a new client who actually wants to read a littlebefore he ventures into the great unknown of cyberspace. (Readingbefore trying? What a concept! )Thanks to all of you at VIX [the VARBusiness Interactive Exchangeon CompuServe]. My time on VIX is probably the most gainfulhours of the week as far as knowledge goes. It's really niceto share ideas, information and resolutions with others.Keith CampPresidentCamp Data SystemsSpartanburg, S.C.73243,2201Editor's Reply: There are quite a few books with chapters devotedto this topic. One is The Online Marketing Handbook by DanielS. Janal (published by Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York), whichexplains "netiquette" in simple terms. Also, check out www.organic.com1800collect/Netiquette/index.html on the Internet.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1More On ISOThe article "Everything About ISO 9000 (Sept. 1, 1995, page39) was missing information regarding the application of ISO9000 to software (computer programs and data). While ISO 9001could be related to the software as a product, organizationsinterested in being certified to ISO 9000 standards shouldfollow the guidelines stipulated in ISO 9000-3. These guidelinesapply to the application of ISO 9001 for the development, supplyand maintenance of software. The article was correct as is,but I think your readers would benefit to know of ISO 90003 as well.My organization, the Software Certification Institute, offersconsulting and seminars in ISO 9000-3.L.G. EganDirectorSoftware Certification InstituteSanta Maria, Calif.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1CORRECTIONSThe conclusion of "Taking a Stand on Disk Interface Standards"(Nov. 15, 1995, page 149) was omitted due to a printer's error.The complete article is now available on the VARBusiness InteractiveExchange on CompuServe (Go VIX) and on our Internet home page,techweb.cmp.com/vb.In Distribution Briefs (Oct. 1, page 48), PC Service Source'sphone number was incorrect. The correct number is (800) 7272787.Interactive Solutions Group should have been identified as amultimedia VAR established by former members of Intel's TechnologySolutions Specialist digital video VAR team (see "MultimediaVARs Make the Video Connection," Nov. 1, page 3A)Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Heard On VIXDespite industry efforts, home PC sales are below expectations,and margins are lower than for traditional consumer electronics.One solution has been proposed by Oracle CEO Larry Ellison:an easy-to-use $500 box that provides Internet connectivityand basic computing power. In this thread from VIX, the VARBusinessInteractive Exchange on CompuServe, VARs and editors kick aroundthe merits of such a box.T.C. Doyle, industry editor, VARBusiness: Ellison is right aboutone thing. PCs are too difficult to use. They should cut downon the optional functionality and make it more appliance-like.Then it will sell by the gazillions, just like VCRs.Gary McClellan, president, Gary D. McClellan and AssociatesLtd.: We'll see the ultimate consumer box show up as a bigPDA.Hillary Rettig, technology editor, VARBusiness: You're reallyonto something here. Maybe a little PDA with a robust dockingstation. Then I can have my PDA call your PDA .McClellan: Combine a PDA with a robust docking station and havethe cable industry finally get around to making TCP/IP available.Price it around $500 and include the services in my cable billand I'll buy it!Ian G. Jacobs, software editor, VARBusiness: Why do you needlimited performance? You can put together a clone system forless than $1,000.Rettig: Right, then you spend $3,000 fixing and maintainingthat clone over the next few years. Does anyone think thatany of the big consumer electronics companies, or even oneof the toy companies, couldn't produce this box?Jim Ziron, owner, JR Consulting: It's been tried. Is the marketmore ready for it now than in the past? How does your ideal$500 unit keep up with changing technology?Rettig: I can think of three possible solutions: Make it modular;make it "thin"; or make it disposable. After all, replacinga $500 unit once every three years is still a lot cheaper thanwhat most home users spend on PC hardware right now.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Cool VAR Home PageBy:Krista OstertagNetworking VAR BTG Inc.'s Web site offers real value to itscustomers, including an online catalog with current prices."With pricing changing as rapidly as it does, it's easier toupdate prices online than on paper," says Chip Bumgardner,vice president and chief technical officer. Online orderingwill be available soon. BTG's site lists news releases, linksto other Web sites, employment opportunities, investor infoand a "how to contact" page. Even with graphically rich pages,download time is fast. More than 25 people contribute to BTG'sWeb site. Webmasters add HTML coding to the pages without usingan authoring tool, but BTG will use Netscape Gold once it'sreleased. Advice for the rest of us? Bumgardner suggests VARsstructure their sites so updating the information is easy.Contact BTG Inc., Vienna, Va., (703) 556-6518, www.btg.com-Krista Ostertag, kosterta@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Training TipsBy:Ian JacobsLooking for a way to expand your training business? Microsoft'sonline service, the Microsoft Network, has a section devotedsolely to computer training. The Microsoft Online Institute(MOLI) lets VARs create online classes and solicit customers.You can also create an internal training center for one customer.MOLI includes a bookstore and a library accessible to any MSNcustomer. For more info, contact Microsoft at www.microsoft.com.-Ian G. Jacobs, ijacobs@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Hot Online Products -- Authoring tools to write home aboutBy:Krista OstertagInternet publishing tools can help VARs create Web sites andintranetworks for customers. With so many tools on the market,though, it's hard to decide which to use. Some products aremaking waves in the Internet community:HoTMetaL Pro. SoftQuad Inc.'s HoTMetaL Pro 2.0 Web authoringtool doesn't require prior knowledge of HTML. Users can pointand-click from the toolbar to insert the tags and hypertextlinks. HoTMetaL Pro imports and converts files created on Windowsand Unix platforms and has word processing capabilities suchas spell check, search and replace, macro support and stylecontrols. HoTMetaL Pro also lets users create customized templates.Contact SoftQuad, Toronto, (800) 387-2777, www.sq.com.Blackbird. This is the code name for Microsoft's Internet publishingsystem that creates and manages full multimedia titles. Blackbirdoriginally was designed for use with MSN, but it now can beused for the Internet and CD-ROM titles, too. Based on theOLE environment, Blackbird lets VARs integrate applicationsfor customized online design. It also has drag-and-drop capabilitiesand does not require HTML coding know-how. The Blackbird systemcomes with the Blackbird Designer, Server, Client and templatesfor use with Windows 95. Contact Microsoft, (206) 882-8080,www.microsoft.com.Emissary. You can point-and-click or drag-and-drop to createInternet or intranet files with Emissary from The WollongongGroup Inc. Emissary provides automatic interpretation of allInternet protocols and supports full multimedia capabilities.Emissary lets users surf the Web from a single interface andwindow, manage news, e-mail, access FTP sites and run telnetsessions. Emissary uses the Client Object Linking Technologyarchitecture, which lets VARs add custom features. ContactWollongong, Palo Alto, Calif., (800) 872-8649, www.twg.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1VARBusiness Online -- Join us on TechWeb and VIXVIX, the VARBusiness Interactive Exchange on CompuServe, isour online forum where you can meet VARs and the editors, andjoin in special events. From Jan. 15-19, jump into a discussionon document imaging led by Bell & Howell. "NOSs for the 1990s:A Network Vendor Shootout" runs from Jan. 22-26. To reachus, type "VIX" or "VARBusiness" at the CompuServe GO prompt.To get connected, call CompuServe at (800) 621-1258.For our latest articles, research and calendar items, checkout our home page, techweb.cmp.com/vb. A special feature onthis month's page is the 1996 VAR 500 entry form. If you'reamong the top 500 VARs and weren't in our VAR 500 issue (Nov.15, 1995), fill out the form online and click "send."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1What Price Technology? -- It's tough to measure the cost ofa satisfied customerWhen was the last time you heard anyone say-and mean-"Moneyis no object?" Most times price is a very important object.Our Product Report survey on hubs (page 31) indicates that priceis very important to VARs, all things being equal. Beta Test(page 37) offers VARs' first impressions of Sybase's new System11, a relational database management system upgrade that iscrucially important to Sybase. One pecuniary factor in itsfavor: Better performance can give fresh life to legacy systems.Editor's Choice (page 43) features HP's new network scanner,which combines swift scanning with built-in LAN connectivity."At $2,995 for the Ethernet version," writes Hillary Rettig,"the unit should sell like hotcakes to larger businesses, butcould be too expensive for smaller ones."True, unless you can convince small-business customers of itsvalue as part of a document imaging solution. The questionthen becomes how much money they'll save.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Product Report: Hub Verdict: Cost is King -- Standard Microsystems Corp. winsfirst place, but 3Com sells bestBy:Julie BortOnce a relatively simple device, today's hub is changing. Notjust repeaters anymore, hub vendors are loading their productswith intelligence, network management, integrated routing functions,support for switching devices, and on and on. In exchange forall this, top-tier vendors are charging top dollars. But insteadof reveling in increased functionality, some VARs are frustratedwith the "more features for more money" direction the marketis taking. Many VARs say that unmanaged hubs, at more affordableprices, are enough to do the trick.Those are among the findings of this month's Product Report,a VARBusiness research project that surveyed 218 hub resellerson the product features and performance of the hub vendorsthat sell to VARs.The survey turned up a number of surprises. First, StandardMicrosystems Corp. won the Product Report, followed by BayNetworks and Hewlett-Packard. But 3Com was named VARs' bestselling hub vendor by far, despite finishing fifth overall.VARs also made it clear they want vendors to support a widerange of technologies, but not at the expense of the bottomline. The range of technologies a vendor's hubs support andthe price per port were judged equally important criteria whensourcing a hub. Clearly, resellers don't want to pay high priceswhen a simple unmanaged hub will do the job.Moreover, VARs want hubs that are hubs, not hybrid routers:Integrated routing was one of the two least important productcriteria. Instead, VARs look for hubs that are scalable andhave network management features. Another surprise is thatsuch scalability and management shouldn't necessarily be inthe form of a stackable hub, an option vendors are promotingheavily. VARs graded the stackable chassis options as secondto last in importance. Rather, VARs prefer support for switchingand WAN technologies.SMC On TopStandard Microsystems finished first thanks to its top scoresin range of technologies and price per port."We wanted to deliver a managed, stackable hub at the same priceper port as an unmanaged one," explains Hugh Kelly, marketingprogram manager for SMC. Specifically, its entry-level memberof the TigerHub 100-Mbit family, the TigerHub 100, is an 8port Fast Ethernet repeater listed at about $200 per port-or$1,595. SMC's entry-level Ethernet TigerHub family is pricedas low as $225 for a 6-port, 10Base-T, 1 AUI port version.This is comparable with Bay Network's stackable solution-theBayStack family-which carries a price per port of about $200for a 10-Mbit/s Ethernet hub, and offers interconnection withswitching and routing products. The list price is $2,375 fora 12-port, 10Base-T Ethernet stackable hub, according to thecompany. VARs rated Bay Networks in the middle of the packon price per port, giving it a 6.2 rating compared with winnerSMC's 8.3 score. The last-place score in this criterion wasa 5.6, given to IBM."SMC lets you break a network into more segments but still manageit," says David Gloria, vice president of technology for DBAComputer Integrators, a Richardson, Texas-based Unix systemintegrator that resells hubs from 3Com, HP, SMC and others."HP has better name recognition and a lot of bigger shops outthere. So does IBM, but they're not the highest-performingmachines."The situation points to one of the biggest battles raging amongVARs in the hub market: managed top-tier products vs. unmanagedclones. Tellingly, scores were all over the map on price perport."Users are looking at the hub to take on more of the networkarchitecture and to be part of a bigger solution," says BrianLees, CEO of Concepts 2000, a NetWare VAR in Davenport, Iowa,that resells hubs from more than half a dozen vendors. "Aspart of an overall solution, many hubs are too expensive. Ahub is a hub.""Name brand hubs are too expensive," according to Gloria. "Idon't need management if I'm just doing a media conversionfrom 10Base-T to AUI. Of course, as with any clone product,it's cheaper. The technology is just not there, so there'llbe a performance difference and they won't have as long a lifecycle."Price-And a Whole Lot MoreSuch trade-offs mean that price alone is not the biggest reasonto recommend a product. The best-selling hubs turned out tobe 3Com's, with almost a third of the resellers selling orrecommending that company's products most often. That was almostdouble the number recommending or selling the next biggestseller, HP.3Com was also named as having most improved during the pastyear; HP closely followed. VARs claim that better support ofthe hub channel is why they like working with 3Com."3Com is easier to get, it's easier to install, and easier fora regional VAR to do an implementation for a national company,"says Howard Podgurski, executive vice president of DocuTech,a client-server systems integrator in Warminster, Pa. "If youare installing a WAN and the customer has locations in NewYork, Philadelphia and San Francisco, as a regional VAR youcould do New York and Philadelphia yourself, while 3Com woulddo the San Francisco installation. This kind of support oftheir VARs gives them a competitive advantage."Making the ChoiceBeyond price, exactly what technologies a particular installationrequires will determine which hub to source, since each vendorhas varying strengths and weaknesses.For example, while all vendors achieved fairly good scores fortheir support of a range of technologies, how a vendor implementeda specific technology ranged widely. Only one vendor, HP, hada particularly high rating for its scalability.Network management rankings were fairly close, with the highestscore awarded to SMC (7.9) and the lowest to Proteon (6.9).No vendor scored particularly high for its support of switchingtechnology-with scores ranging from 7.5, awarded to Bay Networks,to 6.7, achieved by HP and Digital. Finally, VARs found integratedrouting capabilities to be the most poorly implemented feature,with the lowest rating in the survey, a 5.8, earned by Proteon.The message is clear: VARs need hubs to be hubs, but must carefullyweigh how well a vendor supports specific technologies beforechoosing.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Beta Test: Is Sybase Back on Track? -- With SQL Server 11, our VAR betatesters say yesBy:Hillary RettigSome upgrades are evolutionary, some are revolutionary, andsome save the company. Database supplier Sybase Inc.'s System11 upgrade may belong in the last category. It is the successorto System 10, a product even the manufacturer considered flawed.System 10 suffered from poor performance, poor scalabilityand bugs. During its three-year release period, Sybase's earningsplunged, and its market share declined.Most analysts believe the System 11 upgrade has to be a homerun to salvage Sybase's reputation as a top-ranked RDBMS vendor.VAR reviewers and VARBusiness Advisory Board members GeorgeAnderson, vice president of Enterprise Engineering Inc., andPeter Storer, vice president of client-server consulting atAtre Associates Inc., tested SQL Server 11 and are enthusiasticabout what they've seen.They see quality as fundamental-especially since both were burnedby System 10. Anderson has been trying to find bugs in System11, but says he has not been successful.Still, SQL Server 11 isn't without flaws. Its lack of recordlevel locking and omission of parallel data query featuresare two widely discussed drawbacks. Moreover, Anderson saysthe product could benefit from better dynamic reconfigurationabilities.It's the Quality, Stupid!The core of Sybase System 11 is Sybase's RDBMS, Sybase SQL Server11. Improvements to the database can be summed up in threewords: quality, performance and scalability, says Daniel Lahl,director of Sybase's Server Products Management Group.Quality is reflected in the company's decision to pursue ISO9001 certification, a rigorous procedure that involves qualitycontrol processes and documentation. It is also reflected,Lahl says, in a $10 million investment in testing and revisedquality control procedures.As for performance and scalability, it's all in the numbers.The mood was jubilant when Sybase announced at a press conferencethat SQL Server 11 had achieved 5,621.07 transactions per minutetype C (tpmC) on a 12-processor HP9000 Model T500, and a record4,544.60 tpmC on a 16-processor Sun SPARCcenter 2000E. Equallyimportant, says Lahl, is Sybase's hardware cost per tpmC. At$380 on the HP and $396 on the Sun, it's significantly lessthan rivals Oracle and Informix.Our reviewers say those improvements are on target. They alsoare impressed with the decision to pursue ISO 9001 certification,and they note dramatic improvements in the performance andscalability of SQL Server 11. Anderson in particular applaudsits price/performance ratio. He ran comparative bulk data loadsof Version 10 on a fast SPARCstation 1000 and Version 11 ona slower SPARCstation 10. Version 11 beat Version 10 handsdown."If I can get equal or better performance on worse hardware,"he says, "that means this software is really performing."Unresolved QuestionsIf SQL Server 11's achievements have been well-publicized, sohave its flaws-in particular, its use of page-level, ratherthan record-level, locking.The most obvious problem with page-level locking is that SAPAmerica's popular R/2 and R/3 applications won't work withit. According to Ellen Brezniak, director of product managementat rival database vendor Progress Software Corp., however,the issue is broader. "It's about portability," she says. "Wehave many resellers who want to write applications againsta variety of back ends. They're fine with Progress and Oracle,but they have to rearchitect to work with Sybase."Page-level locking also limits the types of applications a VARcan develop. "It's best for applications with short transactiontimes, such as finance, but less appropriate for manufacturingor customer service," says Brezniak.Our VARs-many of whose customers are in finance-are ambivalent."I wish Sybase would do it [record-level locking], so I wouldn'thave to hear people talk about it," says Anderson. "At thesame time, I don't think it's a big deal to my customers."Sybase's Lahl sees it as a concern only for SAP shops. "Ifit were that crucial, we would have put it into 11." Sybasewill add the feature by late 1996, he says.Our reviewers were more concerned about SQL Server 11's othersignificant omission, parallel data query, which allows a databaseto break down complex queries into subroutines and assign eachto a separate processor. "The omission is a little disappointing,"bemoans Anderson. Says Storer, "We really need it for the big,decision-support type queries." Lahl promises the feature bymid-1996.SQL Server 11 represents just one part of Sybase's enterprisecomputing strategy, according to Lahl. The company's goal isto provide best-of-breed products not only for online transactionprocessing, but also for data warehousing and mass deployment.Sybase defines mass deployment as running an application acrossa wide range of hardware platforms, including desktops, laptops,PDAs and information kiosks. Some of those products includeSybase MPP, a data warehousing tool; Sybase IQ, an ad-hoc queryingtool; and SQL Anywhere, a repackaged version of Watcom SQLfrom Watcom International Corp., a Sybase company.Our beta reviewers didn't get the chance to review those products,although in some cases they were familiar with earlier versions.Storer is particularly enthusiastic about Sybase's data warehousingstrategy. "It's the right way for them to be going, particularlygiven their great interconnectivity. We are really rampingup our data warehousing business, and this is going to be oneof the leading platforms for us."He's less enthusiastic, though, about mass deployment. "We workedwith one client who could have used this," he says, "but thatwas only one." He also wants to wait and see how interoperableSQL Anywhere is with SQL Server.Anderson is enthusiastic about mass deployment. "I see a lotof potential for mobile users and others," he says, notingthat while his company and some clients could use it, othervendors have tried it and haven't done too well.The bottom line for our reviewers is that Sybase System 11'sbenefits far outweigh its deficiencies. "They've chosen exactlythe right things to focus on," says Storer, citing the quality,performance and scalability. As an independent consultant,he never stopped recommending Sybase to clients even duringthe heyday of System 10's troubles. Now he says because ofthe lack of bugs he can recommend System 11 more confidently.As a Sybase business partner, Anderson's fortunes are more directlylinked to System 11. He has plans to deploy it for at leastone customer as soon as it's released. His only wish, asidefrom the record-level locking and parallelism issues mentionedearlier, is for more dynamic reconfiguration abilities. "Werun in a lot of 24/7 environments," he says. "If I need toreconfigure the server, I have to pull it down. That's hardto do sometimes, particularly if you have a worldwide application."VARs interested in client-server development should get on boardnow, Lahl says. "The message is that we're back," he says,"and we're going to be very, very strong."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Editor's Choice: HP Scans the LAN -- New ScanJet brings more power to the networkBy:Hillary RettigMovie buffs may recall the scene in 9 To 5 in which Jane Fonda,playing a stressed secretary, does battle with a recalcitrantcopier. That character may be about to have her revenge. HewlettPackard has just upgraded its popular ScanJet scanner familywith several new products, and one of the new offerings-theScanJet 4Si-may take a big bite out of the $27 billion worldwidexerographic copier market. It also may help VARs in the documentimage processing market, where 43 percent of all VARs now sell,according to VARBusiness research.The 4Si, like its predecessors, is a flatbed unit offering 300dot-per-inch resolution. Scanning speed, however, has beenincreased to 15 pages per minute. That's considerably fasterthan comparably priced scanners, although still slower thanmost copiers. HP says the 4Si can scan, process and view a15-page document in 2.5 minutes. The 4Si comes with a 50-pageautomatic document feeder and the "light" version of OmniPage,optical character recognition software from Caere Corp., LosGatos, Calif.Two of the 4Si's features stand out. Its built-in network connectivitya first for any scanner-lets you plug the scanner directlyinto any Ethernet (10Base-T) or token ring NetWare 3.x or 4.xnetwork. HP bundles an SNMP-compliant utility to make net managementeasy.The other plus is a bundled 20-user version of PaperPort fromVisioneer Inc., Palo Alto, Calif. PaperPort is a document managementsystem that lets users easily view, sort, group, route andotherwise manipulate documents. It has been around for yearswith overall good reviews, but sales were never brisk. HP'sbundling may indicate that the market has caught up with it.The combination of network connectivity and document managementis powerful and may herald a new era for the concept of thepaperless office. If any company has the power to promote theconcept, it's HP. My only concern about the 4Si is its price.At $2,995 for the Ethernet version and $3,199 list for thetoken ring, the unit should sell like hotcakes to larger businessesbut could be too expensive for smaller ones.hrettig@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Editor's Choice: Doubleplay Delivers -- Dual drive is twice as nice, in function and in priceBy:Karen BalchA new version of ComByte Inc.'s dual-drive combo is gettingdouble takes from VARs with cost- and space-conscious customers.At 1994's Fall Comdex, ComByte made a big splash with Doubleplay,its combination QIC-80 tape drive and floppy drive in a single3.5-inch, half-height internal package. ComByte, then a relativelyunknown company, introduced the product, which benefited VARswith storage-hungry customers whose budgets and drive bayscouldn't satisfy their needs.Besides the obvious ergonomic advantages of putting two drivesin one bay, there are also hidden performance gains. For example,the higher performance motor required to drive the tape engineworks to double the spin rate of the floppy drive, making thedrive capable of reading and writing at 1 Mbit/s.Doubleplay's dual drives don't just share space, though; theyshare electronic components as well. It's not a "two-drivesin-one" package as much as it's a "two-in-one" solution thatappears as a single logical device to the host. But two thingswere missing from Doubleplay's initial release: portabilityof the drive and backup software that took full advantage ofthe drive's unique design.You might wonder why users would need to move the drive if theycould take out the media. If your customers want to avoid duplicatingdrive purchases and plan to move data between home and officeor between multiple office locations, they'll still have toread the tape or floppy they're toting. So now, ComByte isoffering an external version of the Doubleplay. This versionconnects to the computer through the printer port, yet allowsthe user to print. The ability to plug in the drive so easilymay entice users to take it with them, resulting in savingson other storage media.With either the internal or external version, users can downloadlarge files off the Internet or save multimedia or graphicsfiles to tape, and avoid loading their hard drives with thoseprojects in the process. As for the backup software, NovaStor,Simi Valley, Calif., developed a package specifically for ComBytethat's bundled with the internal and external versions of thedrive.Finally, even though the current version of Doubleplay can handleQIC-80, extended-length and QIC-Wide tapes as well as floppydisks, ComByte plans to make a TR-3 Travan-ready drive availableduring the first quarter of this year. Travan minicartridgeshave expanded, adding more tape and increasing their capacitiesinto the gigabyte range.With all these enhancements, Doubleplay's definitely worth adouble take.kbalch@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Editor's Choice: A Changing Worldgroup -- Galacticomm's groupware-BBS hybridis VAR-friendlyBy:Ian G. JacobsMost VARs who deal in groupware don't think much about bulletinboard systems (BBSs). Galacticomm Inc.'s new Worldgroup productmay change that. Worldgroup combines the electronic mail, discussionforums, file exchange and other communications tools of thestandard BBS with multiple methods of access-such as LAN andmodem-common to groupware packages.Worldgroup includes a Windows-based client application. Theclient installs with the same ease as most Windows applications.When customers dial into a Worldgroup server with a communicationspackage, they'll see a standard bulletin board system withan ANSI, ASCII or RIP interface. But if they use the Worldgroupclient to access the Worldgroup server, they'll encounter whatamounts to a Windows-based online service. The basic look fallsmuch closer to the WinCIM interface for CompuServe than itdoes to a standard BBS.This Worldgroup interface can be completely customized. If yourcustomers have a standard desktop look, you can modify Worldgroupto meet those standards. A municipal system could be builtto resemble a map of the city with icons for the library andcity hall leading to applications for checking on overdue finesand city taxes. With a Worldgroup Developer's Kit, Galacticommgives you the Visual Basic and C source code to Worldgroupso you can create completely new client applications.The Worldgroup server runs under DOS on your host computer,but most of the data that would slow communications is storedon the client. This speeds the information transfer betweenclient and server and allows you to use a less than state-ofthe-art PC as host.Galacticomm's Internet Connectivity Option for Worldgroup canturn your Worldgroup server into a World Wide Web server andsupport up to 60 simultaneous connections. Users will be ableto Telnet out from your system to anywhere on the Net.Galacticomm has an impressive list of ISVs who have createdadd-on products to work with Worldgroup. This can make customizationmuch easier, especially if you've got ambitious projects inmind-such as electronic commerce-that require a great dealof programming skill. Some of the more intriguing applications a system to process credit cards online; a classified advertisingmodule; an application that can integrate pagers into the Worldgroupsystem; and a faxing module.Those possibilities should excite resellers looking to broadenthe scope of their groupware offerings. One caveat: To accommodateall of the communications and specialized graphics, Galacticommhas allowed the client to bloat, sometimes to more than 10Mbytes. Users will need a good deal of free space to reap itsbenefits.ijacobs@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1One World, Many Systems -- Make your resolution to bring piecestogetherThe new year brings about thoughts of peace and prosperity.We hope for a world in which everyone works together in peace.But in your world, you can rejoice that all kinds of different,complex systems don't work well together.It shows in our Software story (page 57) on data warehousing.Those projects involve a bevy of systems from vendors thatreside all over the enterprise. Networking (page 51) illustratessimilar problems in network management: "Vendors have succeededin confusing customers with an avalanche of products that donot interoperate" writes Cassimir Medford, "and at best theyproduce reams of data that bewilder even trained engineers."Computer Telephony (page 65) has six strategies to bring joyto small business.In this new year, think of your role as a peacekeeper: You bringpeace to the systems world. Prosperity is your reward, andthat's a good thing any time of year.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Networking: `Productizing' Service -- New England VAR paves way into newnet management trendBy:Cassimir MedfordIt hardly seemed like a historic event. In fact, it looked likeany other analyst-vendor meeting. The suits at one end of thetable were attempting to doctor the spin on their new product.The analysts at the other end regarded them with little morethan the usual polite reserve.But this meeting was different. At the vendor end of the tablesat Peter Cowie and Michael Reagan of New England Systems (NES),a Boston VAR. Cowie and Reagan had taken on a challenging task They had to figure out a way to explain InfraMax, NES' remotenetwork management product that is not really a product. It'sa service made possible by the cobbling together of a numberof commercially available products. It's not based on a specificplatform. It includes some consulting but is not a consultingproduct. As with many things in the VAR channel, NES' productdoes not fit neatly into any mold.In essence, NES' mission that day was to define a new market the "productized" service.Realizing his was not an easy message to impart, Cowie searchedthe analysts' eyes for signs of glazing. He needn't have worried.By the time the tour was over, an unlikely star was born. NES,an 85-person VAR, wowed the normally tough-to-impress Bostonanalyst community."At first I did not know what to expect. I was used to a productorientation toward network management," says Sylvia Clark,senior research analyst with the Aberdeen Group Inc., Boston."Here was this service company with a customercentric message.And it wasn't about outsourcing. It met customers' needs whetherthose needs are narrow or broad. I was impressed."NES' approach is a timely one. After a decade of trying, vendorsare still unable to solve the enterprise management puzzle.They have succeeded in confusing customers with an avalancheof products that do not interoperate. And at best they producereams of data that bewilder even trained engineers.Cowie's tour of Boston's market makers was an attempt to explorethe possibilities of looking at network management in a newlight. To his way of thinking, VARs are structurally and culturallysuited to the task of network management."I thought the 'productized' service was a trend that analystsneeded to understand. They've been too focused on the latestproduct releases," says Cowie, CEO of NES. "We created a servicethat corporate America needs to know about, and analysts arewell-positioned to carry that message."Survey after survey indicates that corporate America is willingto outsource the responsibility for network management to servicecompanies such as systems integrators and VARs. Integratorssuch as EDS and Andersen Consulting continue to win lucrativemanagement contracts from the Fortune 500, but VARs have notshared in this multibillion-dollar windfall.Some question whether smaller resellers such as NES are credibleenough or financially stable enough to win the respect andthe projects of the Fortune 500, but James Greene, an analystat Summit Strategies Inc. in Boston, votes yea. "VARs are atthe point where they can be presented to the Fortune 500 asa service option," he says. "Of course, the case can be madethat they have certain geographic and technical limitationsthat may prove unattractive to the Fortune 500. But their strengthsare in their vendor-independence and wide-ranging distributedsystems expertise."Cowie and his NES brain trust know the limitations of a smallVAR, but they are hoping that their InfraMax service gets themsome recognition among larger companies. They see an openingand are trying to push their influence up the corporate ladder.This is a fairly bold move that analysts believe was almostunthinkable even a year ago.The New Wave"There is a change in attitude in the analyst community. Theyhave come to realize that VARs represent a force in the networkmanagement market," says Tom Nolle, president of Cimi Corp.,a Voorhees, N.J., technology assessment firm. "They know thatintegrated management has failed as a product, so they arewilling to entertain companies like NES that are able to provideit as a service."So far, NES has been able to snag four customers with another10 in the wings. The latest is a Boston-area network of sevenhospitals that tracks psychiatric patients who seek care atarea hospitals. The network, the Boston Emergency ServicesTeam (BEST) Crisis Management System, was built by NES. It'sa network through which the hospitals can share informationabout psychiatric patients, particularly homeless patientswho walk into any number of those hospitals for treatment.The network prevents "cocktail mixing" by patients-a potentiallylife-threatening situation caused by the mixing of drugs prescribedby multiple hospitals. The network helps not only with keepingtrack of the patients but also with research about the homeless.NES uses InfraMax, its remote management product, to monitorand manage the BEST wide area network. InfraMax is a mix ofagent technology that monitors and reports network information.Performance alerts are transmitted periodically from the InfraMaxagents at the customer site to a notification server at NES'Waltham, Mass., facility. The notification server applies customizedfilters that trap some predefined alerts and pass others upto the NES command center, where 65 engineers monitor and respondto the alerts.For Ed Budelmann, director of BEST, InfraMax frees his organizationto concentrate on providing medical information rather thandealing with system bugs or thresholds. "NES provided the interfacewith the vendors that we needed, and that saved us a greatdeal of time," he says.For NES, BEST represents what the channel can achieve. The companyhopes it's the start of a new chapter in its network managementsaga.Service Companies EmergeAlong with large organizations, the departmental/workgroup marketin small to midsize companies is a ripe arena for companiessuch as NES to target. This traditional VAR market has madea huge investment in technology and is facing many of the samemanagement problems of the Fortune 500, albeit on a smallerscale. Forrester Research Inc., Cambridge, Mass., estimatesthe market for LAN outsourcing at $782 million and growing.Dataquest Inc. in San Jose estimates the market's growth at100 percent annually.Attracting larger clients usually means adhering to strictercost-justifications. In exploring the market possibilitiesfor a network management service company, NES went on a huntfor a product that could assist the VAR in making coherentcost-justifications for its clients.The true cost of network management has become one of the moreperplexing X factors in corporate planning. Consultants haveestimated the average cost of network management at up to fourtimes the cost of the network per year. Strategic ResearchInc., Santa Barbara, Calif., recently estimated the cost ofstorage management at more than $7 per Mbyte per year. Thisis at a time when the cost to purchase and install 1 Mbyteof storage capacity stands at $1.Assessing the CostUnsurprisingly, a number of products have appeared on the scenedesigned to assess the true cost of managing the distributednetwork. Most have been too complex, too anemic or both.NES found its answer in software from Interpose Inc. The productC/S Solution Advisor-is a marriage of network discovery technologyand the expertise of consultancies such as Gartner Group. TheC/S Solution Advisor, which costs $495, locates the hardwareand software on a client's network through discovery. VARscan then apply unit costs (supplied by the end user) to thedata to assess the cost of the network. To come up with thereal-life-or close to real-life-projected cost of ownership,cost of management and return on investment calculations, marketmetrics from organizations such as Gartner Group, StrategicResearch and Infonetics Research are applied."Oftentimes our customers cannot answer all the questions wehave about their networks. For instance, they may not knowwhat downtime costs them," says Reagan, NES' marketing director."So we assign a couple of different figures and we can thendo a couple of different ROI analyses based on those figures."For many end users, that could be the first comprehensive assessmentdone on their networks. NES employs the product as a salestool, offering the customer cost-justifications for its services."It's not that easy for companies to keep track of what theyown, so they can't be expected to always know what they arespending on management," says Reagan. "The Interpose productgets them to focus on costs. We use it early in the sales cycle,and it has been very effective."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Networking: Your True VoiceBy:Cassimir MedfordThe opportunity for VARs to offer clients spectacular new technologythat could slash network costs by as much as 40 percent andpay for itself in less than a year is here. It's voice overFrame Relay.Customers who use Frame Relay service for data communicationscan now add voice communications at almost no extra cost. It'slike buying a gadget that allows your television set to reliablyheat your home.Motorola's VoiceRelay uses a voice compression algorithm thatlets voice share bandwidth with data and fax on a Frame Relayconnection. It supports analog and digital interfaces and issold with the company's 6520 MPRouter.Voice packets are less tolerant of delays, so they get priorityover data packets. Delay negatively affects voice intelligibility.An on-board canceller filters out echo, and an adaptive algorithmstabilizes delays and recovers packets. Per-port pricing forVoiceRelay starts at $750. (For a free demonstration of VoiceRelay,call [508] 261-5543 between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m.)In addition, Micom has integrated voice capabilities into itsNetRunner and Marathon products. Like VoiceRelay, Micom's FrameRelay software gives priority to voice packets. Voice is carriedat or below the committed information rate with other trafficon top. If a voice packet is dropped, the software will compensateby replaying the previous packet.Also, Micom introduced FrameRunner, a T-1 concentrator thatsupports up to eight T-1 links. It supports up to 250 nodeswith integrated voice, fax, data and LAN traffic. The eightport device is $8,500 and the four-port is $6,500.Voice over Frame Relay has potential gotchas. The first is voicequality. Delay compensation techniques have some impact onvoice quality. If the customer is used to 64-Kbit/s long-haulquality voice, then voice over Frame Relay will require someadjustment. If the customer is used to compressed voice communication,then voice over Frame Relay will be suitable. Voice over FrameRelay can put customers at the mercy of telephone service providers,however-pricing policies can be changed with the stroke ofa pen.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Networking -- What VARs Are Saying: Know Who's In ChargeBy:Cassimir MedfordCorporate politics exist in every organization. Do you try tostay aware of the political boundaries that prevail at yourclient sites? Do corporate politics work to your advantageor disadvantage?We absolutely stay abreast of the politics at our client sites.It is important that we know who is in charge of the company'sstrategic direction, who has purchasing power and who doesn't.You've got to know whether or not you're dealing with the rightpeople inside a company.You have to have a certain degree of sensitivity to the personalitiesthat make up a company. There are people within these organizationswho have their life's capital invested in the mainframe andthe glass house, and if you're not cognizant of that person'sneeds and basic insecurities, you're not going to be successfulin your effort to promote your favorite technology throughoutthat organization.It's a very delicate thing we do. You don't win the game ifevery time you go out you make one friend and one enemy. It'sa zero-sum game that way.It's imperative that you stay aware of the politics at a clientsite. I don't mean that we get involved in it. You've got toknow who the decision-makers are. That can make your job mucheasier. There is a lot of change happening in the businessworld. Companies are going through mergers, buyouts and partnerships,so you've got to know who is in charge.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Software: Building a Warehouse -- More data and more disparate systemsmake it a great VAR marketBy:Ian JacobsWhen IBM began pushing the idea of data warehouses in the late'80s, customers were justifiably wary. Many saw the new technology,which was touted as a way to move their decision support needsaway from their operational databases, as little more thana way for IBM to move more big iron and more copies of DB2.Times certainly have changed. Within the last year, there hasbeen an explosion in the number of data warehousing projects.Most of those have been undertaken by Fortune 500 companies.But not only the big guys are jumping into the fray. Changingmarket pressures and price/performance ratios make data warehousingmore affordable for smaller companies. All of those changesspell opportunity for VARs, as long as they don't rush blindlyinto the new field. Since the business is so young, pitfallsawait the unwary. But for those who learn the ropes, the profitpotential is huge.The list of vendors hawking wares for the data warehousing marketgrows almost daily. SAS Institute, Oracle, Sybase, Informix,Intersolv, IBM, AT&T and Red Brick Systems are among thoseselling data warehousing tools. That level of interest is nosurprise. According to Gartner Group in Stamford, Conn., themarket for data warehousing totaled $1.5 billion last year.By 1999, Gartner predicts the market will be just shy of $7billion.Data warehouses add up to more than the sum of their many parts.The goal of data warehouses is to ensure that companies getthe most information possible out of all their accumulateddata without interfering with the day-to-day operations oftheir businesses. To achieve that, VARs combine their databaseintegration expertise with front-end tools such as specializedquery tools; analytical engines built around multidimensionaldatabases; storage spaces in relational databases; transformationtools that extract the desired data from operational systems;and numerous other tools that tailor projects to customers'needs, such as security and backup software. The average sizeof one of those projects, according to the Meta Group in Westport,Conn., hovers near $3 million.Clearly, data warehousing has the potential to bring tidy profitsand high margins, especially if you can get in early. But notevery VAR has the skill set needed for those projects. Datawarehousing projects last an average of three years, accordingto the Meta Group. In addition, they use every ounce of energyyou can muster.Smaller data warehousing projects-commonly called data martsrequire at least two special skill sets, while full-sized projectsrequire at least three. For any data warehousing projects,VARs need to have outstanding database administration skillsbecause data warehouses are essentially enormous databases.The second crucial requirement is industry-specific knowledge,which gives you an enormous boost in your sales pitch. Youneed not only to be able to put the data together, but alsoto tell the customer which data to select in the first place.For the more traditional monstrous undertakings, a third skillis required. "You also need tremendous connectivity skills,"says Neal Hill, vice president of marketing at Cognos Inc.,which sells front-end query tools for data warehouses. "Whatyou're likely to be building is a platform that integratesdata from lots of different sources."Target Your MarketIf you lack the resources to organize and implement large projects,focus on the growing number of companies looking for data marts.Small companies often need the same access to information thattheir larger competitors enjoy, so they make prime candidatesfor smaller data warehousing projects. Another set of targetsyou can hone in on are departments within large organizationsthat want their own data marts separate from the larger corporatedatabases.The theory behind data marts is relatively simple. Hill saysdata warehouses are on too large a scale for the average businesscomputer user. "I don't get things from a warehouse in thereal world; I get them from the neighborhood convenience store,"Hill explains. "I don't want to deal with forklift loads; Iwant to deal with armloads at a time."One of the reasons data marts and data warehouses in generalare becoming more attractive to customers is the lowering costsof all of the pieces involved in data warehousing solutionsand the increasing returns they generate."The price points in the marketplace with some of the Intelhardware, Windows NT and the workgroup servers are very, veryattractive," says Steve Miller, senior director of the openclient-server practice at the Braun Technology Group. Braun,a Chicago-based integrator, creates data warehouses using databasesfrom Oracle and query and reporting tools from Business ObjectsInc. "It is a very inexpensive way to get some incredible information."Miller points to competitive advantage as the main driving forcebehind the boom in data warehouses. If you can get that advantageat a lower cost, so much the better for your profit/loss statement."Customers believe the market is saying, 'You need to do itbecause your competitors are doing it,' " Miller says. "Theyhave this wealth of legacy information and they're using itto get information about the market that they're going to useagainst you. If you don't do it, you're going to be left outin the cold."Partner For ProfitSo far, the data warehouse market has been dominated by a fewof the super integrators and the consulting businesses of thevendors that sell the tools. Making your way into this marketmay require cooperation with one of those more establishedplayers."I don't know of many integrators who can pull these thingstogether out of the box," says Robert Scheier, senior analystat the Hurwitz Consulting Group, Newton, Mass. "You have topartner with people who have been successful and protect yourselffrom going it on your own."Jeffrey Coombs, director of channels at query tool vendor BusinessObjects, agrees. He warns VARs that they aren't likely to getthe big deals right away. "It's the Ernst & Youngs and theAndersens that are going to do the million-dollar projects."A better way for VARs to approach the market is to join forceswith vendors and even big integrators. "The Big Six aren'tin the business of doing the coding themselves, so if a VARhas the expertise in doing that, he'll be able to build a business,"advises Coombs. "Develop the expertise in implementing toolslike ours and provide a service to the customer and to thelarge integrator who doesn't want to deal with that part ofthe project."Another factor you need to consider before rushing headlonginto data warehousing can be summed up in one word: Politics.Since the projects are multiyear deals with costs frequentlyrunning into seven figures, organizational politics becomea key factor in the success of these endeavors.You need a sponsor high up in the company who will support youthrough the entire development process. This can be one ofthe thorniest political issues you'll have to deal with. BillGannon Jr., vice president at Westboro, Mass.-based SentryMarket Research, sees two groups at cross-purposes in eachcustomer who commits to a data warehouse: the centralized ISgroup and the decentralized departmental users.When the political problems are really bad, nothing gets done.Sid Banerjee, MicroStrategy's director of western operations,tells of a customer that makes all of its technology decisionsthrough a corporate standards board. "They're so concernedthat they pick the best set of tools that they've been stuckin this analysis paralysis for nine months. They're lookingat every tool under the sun," Banerjee says. "They're not movingforward because they don't have a key user sponsor saying,'I want a solution to this specific problem right now'."Banerjee says that to ease such political hassles, you shouldseek out strong corporate sponsorship at the user level whilealso getting strong implementation sponsorship at the IS level.The notion that data warehouses are an ongoing process can alsotrip up some VARs. Don't expect to go in, set up the warehouseand get out. Once the warehouse is up and running, then thereal work begins."You shouldn't go in with the idea that you're going to getit 99.9 percent right, because that's not possible," says Miller."Take your best shot, build in the expectation that it's goingto change and build in the flexibility to allow that changeto happen."-oBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Software: PEN COMPUTING -- PENTt Up Demand?By:Ian G. JacobsTo paraphrase Mark Twain, the reports of the death of pen computingare greatly exaggerated. True, you no longer hear pundits predictinga Newton in every home. But VARs are making a tidy income creatingvertical applications.Bob Gressler, president of Computers At Work, a Parsippany,N.J., mobile computing VAR, predicted that millions of penbased computers would rush out of computer superstores. Still,he says the new realities don't bother him."Our real goal was to find markets where there wasn't lots ofcompetition," Gressler recalls. His company now sells mobilesolutions to public utilities, the compressed gas industryand law enforcement agencies.Although the public doesn't hear about pen-based applicationsanymore, that doesn't mean the market has dried up. Seth Rosenberg,consulting manager at Cone Software Inc. in Boothwyn, Pa.,says that although pen computing has a bad reputation for horizontal,consumer applications, "it doesn't have a nothing reputationfor the vertical markets."Portable devices haven't died either. Fremont, Calif.-basedPenRight! Corp. recently released PenRight! for Windows, anew Windows development environment.Gressler is unconvinced of the need for the Windows product.He says DOS applications are easier to use. "You can't givea truck driver Windows," he says."Our competition isn't other VARs. [It] comes from in-housegroups who want to write the systems themselves," he adds."We're integrators, and we're one-stop shopping. We sell thehardware, we stage it and we install it. The real key is integration."So, while pen-based applications have lost much of their glitzyappeal, don't count them out. Resellers willing to plumb thedepths of the wireless world may find an uncrowded niche withhigh demand and savvy customers-a VAR's dream.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Software: Software VAR -- Direct Marketing 101By:Ian G. JacobsIf you're like most software VARs, direct marketing probablyisn't the first method you use to garner new business. Butdirect mail pieces can help you increase sales.It isn't enough to just slap together a quick brochure in PageMakerand mail it out randomly. Targeted mailing lists, special languageand effective page design will all combine to give you a potentdirect marketing campaign.Start with the mailing list. If your software works with a vendor'sproduct, you probably already enjoy good relations with thatvendor, so exploit it."What software VARs should first do is call up their buddiesat the mothership and say, 'I want the list in my neighborhood,'"says Bill Mirbach, chairman of Mirbach & Co. Inc., a Westport,Conn., direct marketing agency. "Goal number one is to getthose names. Goal two is to mail to them on a regular basis."To make creating convincing easier, Mirbach & Co. offers a pamphletcalled 99 Tips for Software Direct Marketing that you can getby calling (203) 221-5200.Some of the tips in the pamphlet seem obvious, but others areless apparent. Mirbach says that whenever you mail anythingeven if it's not sales pitch material-always include an offer."If you're paying for the stamp, try and get some money back."Mirbach stresses that your pitch should read like a conversationalletter. To test your prose, read it to someone.If you need additional help, Mirbach counsels VARs to ensurethat mailings don't end up in the trash. His staff will writeyour copy, merge/purge your mailing list and even go to theprinter to make sure they are printing your job properly.The tip that business people often find the hardest to swallow,Mirbach says, is: "Direct marketing is a 'How' business, nota 'Why' business. Track results, then repeat your successes.Worry about why it worked later.""You have a choice. You either get over it or you just go intoan endless Do loop," Mirbach says. "It is a basic agreementthat you absolutely have to have about the nature of reality.If you don't have that, you're not going to do well with directmarketing."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Computer Telephony: Ringing Up Small Business -- Low-cost telephony products offer fast payback for VARsBy:Hillary RettigIf one of your New Year's resolutions is to start selling computertelephone integration solutions to your small business customers,congratulations. You're getting in ahead of the pack, and youstand to profit handsomely.Of course, you've got to do it right. CTI, like any new technology,can be tricky to sell to small business. It's unfamiliar, andit can also be expensive. And even those customers who areready and waiting for it may wonder why they should buy itfrom a VAR instead of their telephone company.Below, you'll find four CTI strategies that answer those arguments.They're familiar, nonthreatening and inexpensive, and theyoffer a relatively quick return-on-investment.Add a Screen PopScreen pop applications, in which software automatically displaysinformation about incoming calls, are one of the easier thingsin CTI to demo, says Dennis Dintelmann, CTI sales manager atEdwardsville, Ill.-based Scheffel & Co. Computer Services Inc.Most popular PIMs and contact managers are already telephonyenabled. If your customer is using one, add a telephony middlewareprogram to gain access to screen pops, call screening and aPC-based telephone.Aurora Systems Inc.'s FastCall stands out among the middlewarepackages in that it requires no programming. Once FastCallis installed, for example, you can configure it to ring yourtelephone when a customer calls, but route all other callsto voicemail. FastCall costs $300 to $600 per desktop, dependingon the functionality required.There are dozens of products that offer a PC-based telephoneand other telephony applications. Some offer prewritten programmodules, while others offer programming libraries and applicationgenerators. For a user-friendly dip into telephony, you probablywant one that requires as little programming as possible.Few of the canned telephony applications are as simple-and,at $79, as economical-as PhoneKits by AlgoRhythms Inc. Theprogram contains five modules: PC Phone, Call Log, AnsweringMachine, Address Book and Fax Machine. PC Phone is the heartof the package. You can create custom telephones by draggingand-dropping telephone buttons, keypads and other elementsonto a design grid. You can also change the appearance of buttonsand incorporate bitmapped images into the telephone's background.Integrate CommunicationsWhile true unified messaging remains a pie-in-the-sky kind ofsolution, you can easily set up your small business customerswith semiunified fax, electronic mail and voicemail. ThomasKing, president of PC Serv, a New York-based VAR, says thatjust about every small business he's dealt with could use thissolution. The productivity gains are apparent, especially inunderstaffed offices. It's also easy to implement in stages,so you can do it in cases where the budget is tight, says King.Delrina Corp.'s CommSuite may be the most comprehensive of themany software products that combine fax, e-mail and voicemailunder an integrated front end. Other features include pagersupport, MAPI support and, via the $15 TalkView add-on, voicesupport. The single-user version is $99; the two-user starternetwork pack is $549.95.Build On Top of NetWareIf you're a NetWare shop, check out CallWare Technologies Inc.'sCallWare NLM, the only CTI NLM on the market. CallWare sportsa character-based interface that is similar to NetWare's own."I can't tell you how many people see our screens and say,'Hey, that looks familiar!' " says Joseph Staples, CallWare'svice president of marketing. "It's very reassuring to them."CallWare provides auto-attendant, voice messaging and audiotextfeatures. The package also includes a five-user version ofCallWare ViewPoint, a product that allows users to graphicallyaccess messages from their desktop PCs. (Additional five-packscost $45.) The product is priced at $2,995 for a 25-user version.Create Demand For Fax-On-DemandFOD is a natural for retail businesses, customer service organizationsand others with a high call volume. It's also an easy sell,since most customers have used an FOD system and can easilysee the benefit. Best of all, if implemented properly, FODrequires almost no maintenance. "I get, 'how do I do it?',not 'it's broke' calls," says one VAR.Ibex Technologies Inc.'s FactsLine 2.0 for Windows combinesrobust fax capability with a document management system optimizedfor TIFF and other fax file formats. Many major vendors usein-house FactsLine, and a client is bundled with Windows 95.FactsLine retails for $4,790 plus $670 per inbound or outlinetelephone line. You need at least two lines, one inbound andone outbound. You'll also need a server and an industrial-strengthfax board such as the VFX-40 from Dialogic.Once you start working with CTI, it's to your advantage to boneup on the broader field of telecommunications. For one thing,some of the products mentioned above work best when combinedwith specific telecommunications services such as Caller ID.For example, without Caller ID, screen pop software won't knowwhich information to display. At the same time, it's importantto understand the limits of the technologies-Caller ID, forexample, does not work with incoming calls from most PBXs.Most of the products mentioned require that you hook up thePC to a TAPI-compliant telephone or voice-enabled modem. Fornew installations, purchase a new TAPI-compliant telephone,such as the AT&T Computer Telephone 8130. For preexisting ones,purchase an inexpensive TAPI interface box or card from themanufacturer.Comdial Corp. has an appealing solution for linking PCs to ordinaryanalog telephones. The $99 PC and Telephone Interface (PATI)3000 is a box that plugs into your computer's parallel porton one end and telephone line on the other. It includes a secondparallel port so you don't lose access to your printer or otherparallel-port peripheral. PATI ships with a suite of "light"CTI applications, including an on-screen telephone, minidialer,address book and call log.Most of the major modem manufacturers have released voice-enabledmodems. Connectware Inc. offers a card it says is optimizedfor voice applications. PhoneWorks 28.8 ($299) uses the Rockwellchipset, which offers the full duplex circuit necessary forquality sound reproduction, as well as Caller ID support.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Computer Telephony: Wireless Telecom -- How One VAR Makes the MOST of TelecomBy:Hillary RettigIf you're a small VAR who is starting to work with new technologies,it helps if you can approach them from a fresh perspective.Ask Andy Sjamsu, president of Ronkonkoma, N.Y.-based MobileOffice Solutions Technology (MOST) Inc. He started out in 1991as a reseller specializing in contact management solutionsusing Elan Software's GoldMine for Windows and has evolvedinto a supplier of wireless telecommunications products andservices.Sjamsu's new business line evolved out of his own company'sneeds and those of his customers. Like many resellers, he usedthe solution he sold in-house. It worked well, he says, exceptfor one problem: He and his colleagues, who spend more thanhalf of their time on the road, had trouble keeping their databasessynchronized. "It's tough getting to a telephone jack whenyou're in a car."To Sjamsu, the solution was obvious: wireless synchronization."We use wireless for e-mail, so it made sense that we shouldbe able to use it for this as well." Sjamsu developed GoldMineWireless Solution (GWS), an add-on that lets GoldMine userssynchronize their databases over the RAM Mobile Data two-waywireless network.Sjamsu has shifted his business focus from traditional resellingto selling GWS, both direct and through the channel. "We'regetting in on the ground floor of something big," he says."When you see an opportunity like this, you can't let it passyou by." He is excited not only at the prospect of sellingGWS, but also of collecting royalties from RAM Mobile basedon airtime usage related to his product.That's the real reason VARs should pay attention to telephonyand telecom, Sjamsu says. "Everything is evolving very fast,and there are always new and different profit opportunities."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1You Can Break Through Desktop Barriers -- Connect with highmargin remote computing marketsBy:T.C. DoyleSpace may indeed be the final frontier, but not just becausevast amounts of it remain to be explored. Rather, it is thelack of space that has computer scientists working late intothe night.Inventors including George Gerpheide, founder and presidentof Cirque Corp. in Salt Lake City, have produced a flurry ofspace-saving and feature-enhancing innovations that have transformedthe world of portable computing into the world of dream computing.When users leave their offices equipped with a notebook computerthat includes one of Gerpheide's GlidePoint pointing devices,more often than not they are taking with them a personal computerthat offers nearly as many features-and as fast a microprocessoras those found in the systems used by their deskbound colleagues.VARs looking for opportunities need look no further than theburgeoning $8 billion market for portable computers, whichis expected to expand to $10 billion by 1997, according toDataquest Inc., San Jose. This season alone boasts a bumpercrop of "no-compromise" notebook computers featuring spacesaving enhancements that have allowed vendors to cram theirwares with clear 12.1-inch, active-matrix thin-film transistor(TFT) screens, 1-Gbyte hard disk drives, fast 120-MHz microprocessors,reliable 28.8-baud PCMCIA modems and long-lasting lithium-ionbatteries-features that a short while ago were available onlyin exotic systems.Dataquest analyst Mark McGuire believes advanced features thathave become the norm in top-of-the-line notebooks from NECTechnologies, Texas Instruments, Toshiba America InformationSystems, AST Research and others will soon find their way intoproduct lines as early as mid-1996. And that's just the beginning.The near future will include notebook computers that feature150- and 180-MHz microprocessors, plus bigger screens thatboast a 1,024-x-1,280 resolution, says Ken Dulaney, vice presidentof mobile computing at market research firm Gartner Group,Stamford, Conn. More units will have removable CD-ROM drivesand wireless infrared docking capabilities."As mundane as it sounds, the biggest advances may come fromwork to improve bus speeds," Dulaney says. "In 1996, you willsee more PCI notebooks and machines that make the most of improvementsto individual components. Once that is accomplished, videoconferencingand other advances once considered exotic will become commonplaceon notebook computers, which have become true desktop replacements.They are not a specialty machine anymore."Gerpheide agrees. He convinced Apple that his space-saving GlidePointpointing device would not only free up real estate taken upby a mouse, but also offer better reliability. After all, hissolid-state device has no moving parts to wear out and takesup less than half the space of a standard mouse. Better yet,Gerpheide says his GlidePoint, found in Apple PowerBooks andother portable systems, will usher handwriting recognitiontechnology into standard portable systems. He and leading hardwaredevelopers are working on a next-generation GlidePoint, whichresembles a flat LCD panel and can read simple annotationsand even Kanji characters.Beyond that lie even greater advances. NEC, for example, isworking on prototype machines that have interchangeable screensand even projection display capabilities for delivering multimediapresentations. Canon USA, meanwhile, is working on smallerand lighter printers that a variety of third parties will integratewith their notebook units. Other vendors are experimentingwith collapsible screens, wireless communications solutionsand expanding keyboards that resemble IBM's now-famous TrackWrite"butterfly" design found in ThinkPad 701 C/CS units.One In Three PCsSo big has the notebook computer market become that 25 percentof the PCs sold nationwide today are portable devices, accordingto various industry reports. Gartner Group's Dulaney believesthat portable systems could account for more than one in threesystems sold if corporate IT executives stopped viewing notebookcomputers as specialty machines. A notebook carries a 50 percentto 100 percent price premium over a desktop computer. Lastyear, Gartner Group completed a study that showed the incrementalcost of a notebook can be paid back in 100 weeks if a mobileuser works one hour per week more than a deskbound user. Consideringhow feature-rich and convenient portables are today, expertsagree that's almost bound to happen.VARs, of course, would be wise to take note of this sellingpoint as well as other market dynamics. Notebook computersoffer VARs such as New York-based MFJ International, a LotusPremier Business partner and Notes developer, the perfect vehiclefor delivering custom sales automation solutions and othermobile applications. MFJ sells a custom-developed sales automationpackage called OverQuota to notebook customers nationwide.Other VARs, meanwhile, find notebooks to be the ideal replacementfor desktop computers at many of their customer sites. CentralTelecom, a Toshiba VAR in Overland Park, Kan., is upgradinga national hospital sales automation company's entire baseof desktop computers with portable systems so its workers canbe more productive."It's clients like those that convinced us to get out of thedesktop computer market altogether and concentrate on the portablemarketplace," says Rick Pack, Central Telecom sales manager.The gambit proved to be a smart one. Central Telecom's revenuewas expected to jump to $12 million in 1995, although the companyemploys only nine people. In addition, the company is expandingits operations to Denver at the prompting of Toshiba, whichwants a support center there on par with Central Telecom'soperations in Kansas.Given the number of VARs promoting notebook technology, theimproved usefulness of the machines and their falling pricepoints, it is no wonder that sales have picked up steadily.In 1994, the market-measured in the number of units sold-jumpedby 29.9 percent, according to BIS Strategic Decisions of Boston.The market will grow an estimated 21.8 percent to 4.7 millionunits by the time final 1995 results are tallied, BIS estimates.By the end of the decade, sales could reach 8.1 million units.Within the portable market, there are significant shifts underway. For example, color notebooks now account for the bulkof portable systems sold, outselling monochrome systems bynearly 4 to1 in 1995. In addition, notebook and subnotebookunits account for the majority of systems sold. Though growingat a healthy rate, subnotebooks are not expected to overtakenotebook sales this decade, according to BIS. If anything,the desire for bigger screens and full-size keyboards are keepingalive the market for bigger notebooks. "By adopting biggerscreens, vendors have gone international in scope, dumpingthe 8.5-inch-x-11.5-inch form factor in favor of the biggerA4 size," says Gartner Group's Dulaney. "Where units are gettingsmaller, however, is in thickness, thanks to GlidePoint andthings like 12-mm disk drives."It Keeps Growing And Growing...Technology aside, the market is also expanding as vendors approachit for the first time or with renewed vigor. For example, atthe Fall Comdex trade show, notebook newcomer Hitachi PC Corp.showed off its new line of Pentium-powered systems, while othersvowed to mount a comeback. That group included Unisys, EpsonAmerica, Everex Systems and Samsung Electronics America. Thoughbehind technically, Samsung hopes to catch up in July witha new 120-MHz-powered SENS 810 notebook. The unit will featureremovable hard drives plus Samsung's own 11.3-inch TFT screen.Back in early 1994, Toshiba climbed to the top of the marketand has remained the No. 1 supplier ever since, according toDataquest. Though year-end figures for 1995 are not yet available,the market has not shifted appreciably from year-end 1994 whenToshiba finished with a 19 percent share. IBM, thanks to itspopular ThinkPad family of products, ranked second with a 12percent market share. Compaq, Apple Computer and NEC roundout the rest of the top-tier vendors, which collectively accountedfor half the volume shipments in portable systems in 1994 and1995.The stranglehold the top-tier vendors have on the market maybe broken in 1996 as second-tier vendors rally. According toa recent Gartner Group report, tier-two vendors including AST,Hewlett-Packard, AT&T, Digital Equipment and others are "onpar with tier one in financial stability and are beginningto rival or in some cases exceed tier-one vendors in qualityassurance, technology innovation and breadth of product line."Not surprisingly, a price war among top players broke out lastfall. IBM, for example, initiated a price promotion that savedcustomers as much as $650 when they purchased a ThinkPad 755model. Among other things, IBM offered buyers a copy of LotusSmartSuite CD, a $399 value.Regardless of the savings, VARs considering adding another productline would do well to consider tier-two vendors, Gartner Groupconcludes. Central Telecom, for one, is adding Texas Instruments'TravelMate line to its product portfolio. Sales manager Packsays the company needs a second line because Toshiba systemsare often on allocation. "You have to drop the name of a bigcustomer to get Toshiba products," he says, "so we are hopingthat a full-featured line like the TI will fit the bill."Texas Instruments was one of several vendors that redefinedthe high end of portable computing this fall with the introductionof a 120-MHz, Pentium-based model. TI's $5,199 TravelMate 5200has 8 Mbytes of memory, a 1.2-Gbyte hard disk, a 10.4-inchactive-matrix super VGA screen and two lithium-ion batterypacks. A similarly equipped Versa unit from NEC sells for roughly$5,499, as does AST's new Ascentia 950N product, which startsat $5,249. So competitive has the high-end performance segmentbecome that Toshiba chose for the first time not to releasepricing when it unveiled its new Tecra 700 series in Octoberuntil it shipped the new products in late November.Toshiba wants the new high-end Tecra series to stand out becauseof its features, not necessarily its aggressive price, accordingto the company's senior product manager Steve Brehaut. "IBMgets a lot of attention for its butterfly-design ThinkPad,but we like to remind the competition that we are No. 1 forour technology," says Brehaut. "We were the first to marketwith a Pentium-based notebook, lithium-ion batteries and unitsthat use PCI in docking stations and other innovations. Weprovide flexibility and cutting-edge technology first. That'swhat keeps us on top." That and a loyal following among manyVARs in the channel.When Toshiba decided to authorize roughly 20 different companiesto perform service repairs, VARs including Computer Systems& Solutions of Bala Cynwyd, Pa., jumped into high gear. "WhenToshiba opened the door for us to do service, we changed ourbusiness model," says company chief executive Kimberly Crew.NEC is trying to cultivate deeper ties to VARs, too. Dale Fuller,vice president of portable systems at NEC in Mountain View,Calif., says the company is working with a number of VARs onvarious projects including trying to develop a custom joy stickthat will serve as a portable gaming device. Another is workingon adapting an 8-mm DAT drive to fit inside a Versa notebookcomputer."We have VARs that are making our products very 'verticalized,'"says Fuller. "Some are working with different operating systems,helping us take our 2000 and 4000 product lines into new customersegments."NEC introduced the 4000 series in July and added the 4080H tothe lineup in late October. It boasts "on-demand" modularitysimilar to that in Toshiba's Tecra line. The Versa 4080H hasa slot for a second battery or CD-ROM drive or additional harddisk. Like other top-of-the-line units, it features two stereospeakers, two infrared ports for cable-free file exchange anddocking, plus two stacked PC card slots for Type II or TypeIII adapters. That feature set is turning up in more than justTravelMates, ThinkPads, Ascentias and Tecras. Compaq's latestLTE 5000 family, which ranges in price from $3,999 to $6,699,also boasts a modular design and can accommodate a CD-ROM drive,a 1.35-Gbyte hard disk, a 3.5-inch diskette drive plus a Pentium120-MHz microprocessor. In addition, the Compaq LTEs featurestereo speakers, integrated Ethernet support and an infraredport for wireless printing, file transfer and drive synchronization.One selling point: Compaq LTE 5000s were selected by Microsoft'sfield sales force for demonstrating Windows 95 and Office 95to large customers.Not to be outdone, IBM is bouncing back with its new ThinkPad760 series. The units feature a 12.1-inch TFT screen, a 120MHz Pentium chip and a unique tilt-up keyboard and MPEG-2 videoplayback capabilities. With IBM's UltraBay design, users canswap-in and swap-out a variety of modules such as a CD-ROMdrive."Those new 12.1-inch units will be sold primarily as desktopreplacements, less as systems for sales force automation,"maintains Per Larsen, director of worldwide brand managementof mobile computing at IBM in Research Triangle Park, N.C.Larsen suggests that early adopters including mobile workerswho buy the first couple of hundred thousand full-featured760 units are not the target audience for the 760. "The mobileworkforce is very large, but desktop replacement is a muchbigger market," he concedes. "That's why we have paid so muchattention to multimedia and docking capabilities. For example,all ThinkPads have infrared technology, and 30 percent of oursystems sell with a docking station. When you buy an IBM, youdon't have to update the docking system every time you buya new machine. Not too many others can say that."Future ThinkPads, he says, may include chips other than Intelmicroprocessors because "the Pentium doesn't fit well intocertain market sweet-spots" such as the $2,200 to $2,400 marketsegment.IBM's new ThinkPad has the increasingly popular lithium-ionbatteries that have plagued at least one major vendor. WhenApple first introduced its PowerBook 5300 model, several unitscaught fire. Apple has resumed shipping the 5300 with nickelmetal-hydride batteries and promises customers that the productis safe. More than that, Apple is banking on its VAR partnersto embrace its new PowerPC-powered systems. To help spur sales,Apple reduced by $100 the price of the 5300, which is a wholepound lighter than Apple's previous top-of-line PowerBook 500series. The systems include 8 Mbytes of RAM and can accommodatea 10.4-inch color active-matrix screen and two slots that canaccommodate industry standard add-in cards. The removable floppydrive can be replaced with an additional hard drive or AC poweradapter among other devices."You read a lot about vendors that are known for their technologyleadership. But the real tale of the tape is how many theyship," says Charlie Tritschler, PowerBook product line manager."We have jumped into the top five, according to the most recentlyavailable data, because we are shipping innovations customerswant, not features that people think are just 'cool.'Another vendor trying to make a leap into the top five is SharpElectronics Corp. Though its products are competitive, Sharpadmits its ties to VARs are weak. Among other things, Sharpbrings to the market award-winning screen technology, and thecompany is one of the world's largest suppliers of TFT screens.Dataquest says Sharp could double or even triple its 12.1-inchactive-matrix screen output in 1996. The company is rollingout several Pentium-based systems, including the high-end Sharp9070 system that includes 16 Mbytes of RAM, a 28.8-baud voicedata/fax modem, a PCI motherboard, a lithium-ion battery anda removable quad-speed CD-ROM drive.The package resembles that of AST, which is trying to breakfrom the middle of the pack. Its recently unveiled Ascentia950N weighs only 6 pounds, but may be just the right amountto tip the scales back in AST's favor after a long malaise.Gartner Group's report on the notebook market sums it up: "Thereis now a significantly broader set of vendors to choose from."Just the thing for a channel that wants more options.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Ultimate Solution -- Connecting the Road WarriorBy:T.C. DoyleAs advanced as the technology inside one of today's top-of-theline notebook computers is, more often than not it is the technologyoutside the box that makes a solution complete. Per Larsen,director of worldwide brand management of mobile computingsolutions at IBM's PC Co. in Research Triangle Park, N.C.,says wireless infrared technology is the hidden jewel in ThinkPadtechnology. "Every one of our ThinkPads supports infrared,allowing them to take advantage of innovations such as ExtendedSystems wireless LAN adapters," he says. "They allow a userto connect to a network by simply lining up his computer withan outlet in a wall. That's great stuff."VARs familiar with the Extended Systems' JetEye products agree.Early last year, the company joined IBM's ThinkPad Proven Programwhen its JetEye family became one of the first infrared adaptersto let IBM ThinkPad owners use their notebook's built-in infraredcommunications port. In November, the company unveiled a $399option for connecting users to NetWare, TCP/IP and NetBIOSnetworks and printers by simply placing their infrared-equippedportable near the JetEye Net Plus access node.Wireless communications have made big leaps in reliability andusability. Last month Megahertz was slated to ship its newAllPoints Wireless PC Card ($499). Among other things, userscan receive electronic mail, transmit faxes, and access databasesand various online services.If wireless is too exotic for your customer, then consider aPCMCIA-based modem. Companies providing full-feature modemsinclude Microcom Inc., Ositech Communications Inc., Hayes MicrocomputerProducts Inc., Practical Peripherals, Motorola and MegahertzCorp. Remote software is also becoming a bigger part of mobilecomputing. MobileWare Corp. has an architecture for managingwireless communications. Its products include the MobileWareCommand Center for systems administration and management, plusthe MobileWare Transaction Management System that can guaranteedata integrity through authentication and encryption.Other solutions include applications for connecting mobile workersto wireless services. Motorola's AirApparent software connectsWindows NT users to their Motorola Tango pager-toting colleaguesin the field. Socket Communications Inc.'s PageCard WirelessMessaging Systems lets users plug pager cards directly intoPCMCIA slots on notebooks, allowing messages to be receivedin the field. Socket's new GPS Card lets users communicatewith orbiting Global Position System satellites that provideinstant geographic data.Proxima Corp.'s Projector 2810 accommodates both computer andvideo output, is Mac- and VGA-compatible and delivers 640-x480 resolution at 300 lumens. At $7,495, it could be just theticket for closing that deal for you and your client.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Availability Concerns -- Why Are Compaq Servers So Hard To Get?By:Tom FarreWhy Are Compaq Servers So Hard To Get?According to VARBusiness' Annual Report Card survey, Compaqhad availability problems in 1994-1995.Cooley: [In 3Q], there were more opportunities than we captured,which gets back to the availability issue, as voiced appropriatelyby VARs in your Annual Report Card issue.In servers, we grossly underestimated 2Q and 3Q demand. We'vebeen scrambling to recoup; we've radically increased our forecast,so we now have more components. We shipped a significant numberof servers, but our fourth quarter plans call for double thesupply vs. the second quarter.VB: Was availability a problem for VARs only?Cooley: No. Because VARs source these days from the likes ofTech Data, Merisel and Ingram and, frankly, from aggregatorssuch as MicroAge, that is not an issue.VB: Those are high-priority customers?Cooley: Sure. Because our server line's breadth is so wide,you get the channel having 75-MHz Pentium servers in stockwaiting for demand. The VAR is saying, "I want 100 MHz," andnow he'll say, "I want 133 MHz." That's how you get the wrongbalance to meet the demand. Then the VAR says, "I can't getCompaq servers," but there are lots of Compaq servers to sell,just the wrong damn ones.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Business Interview: Compaq Pushes Beyond the PC -- On top for now, Ross Cooley aims to keep Compaq there by moving agressively into the enterpriseBy:Tom FarreCompaq and Ross A. Cooley have come a long way together. Assenior vice president and general manager of North Americaat the biggest PC maker, Cooley oversees sales, service, support,pricing, distribution and customer satisfaction for the UnitedStates and Canada. That accounts for many customers and salesroughly half of Compaq's projected $14 billion revenue for1995.Sales is where Cooley got his start 29 years ago at IBM. In1984, Compaq's second year, he joined Compaq to manage theterritory east of the Mississippi, which had a team of foursalespeople. But with the June 1984 introduction of the Deskpro,he moved to headquarters in Houston and has been in executivemanagement ever since.Through the years, Cooley has ridden the wave of Compaq's technologyleadership, when it introduced the first 386 desktop PC in1986 and the first superserver, the Systempro, in 1989. AsCompaq's most visible channel executive, he also helped craftand promote Compaq's successful reseller-only distributionstrategy. That was until 1991, when-responding to its firstquarterly loss-Compaq broadened its distribution and startedworking directly with users.Known as a tough but fair competitor, Cooley is no strangerto controversy. He was instrumental in Compaq's famous deauthorizationof BusinessLand, and more recently in the disagreement withIntel regarding the "Intel Inside" campaign, which Cooley believesdevalues the Compaq brand.Today Cooley has his hands full as Compaq tries to stay on topby expanding on all fronts, from consumer electronics to theenterprise. Of special interest to VARs is Compaq's push intoglobal client-server computing. In addition to introducingan aggressive lineup of high-end Pentium systems, Compaq ispartnering with Digital Equipment as its worldwide serviceprovider. The company also has announced plans to acquire internetworkingvendors Thomas-Conrad and NetWorth. VARBusiness executive editorTom Farre caught up with Cooley in Houston during Compaq'sInnovate 95 convention.VARBusiness: When Compaq had reseller-only distribution, youwere known as an advocate for the channel. Is that still truetoday?Cooley: I've been beat up pretty good [laughs]. You bet. TheCompaq strategy encompasses strong relationships and partnershipswith those who represent us. Whatever they're called this weekthe retail channel, VAR, independent software vendor-we'restill very dependent on a highly motivated group of partnersto carry our message to the market and make our customers satisfied.Now, we've done a lot since 1991 to convince the customer thatour partners and our strategy are capable of meeting theirneeds, and at times the message gets confused, because it'schanged.I'll never forget this example, when we put in an 800 numberfor customers to call us for service...VB: Instead of their resellers.Cooley: You bet. So everybody said, "Cooley's gone native. Cooley'slost his marbles. What the hell is he doing? That's a profitcenter for us." Well, lo and behold, more customers becameconvinced that we were serious about them being satisfied.There are still reseller and service-provider hotlines andhelp desks in place, and they're making money at it. So wefigured out a way to complement one another that makes theoverall result a better solution, if you will, as it relatesto the Compaq brand.VB: In our Annual Report Card issue, Compaq received a relativelylow score in managing channel conflict.Cooley: It's a hell of a challenge for anybody that's got morethan one pipe into the market. And the more channels you have,the bigger the challenge is to try to keep them all separate.Although there's incremental opportunity associated with reachingspecific customer segments, there's clearly a frustration onbehalf of all of your partners when any overlapping occurs.And I can't-nobody can-keep it clean.Frequently, though, those surveys reveal a perception, not areality. As an example, a VAR answering that survey in Juneperceives that the guy who stole his customer with a 4500 Prolinearack mount has better access to our servers than he or shedoes, and, therefore, if we hadn't authorized that [reseller]and so on. So during times of great demand and limited supply,we hear more frequently about channel conflict than when we'reall in stock and can all compete on a level playing field.VB: Looking out into 1996, are you working on any initiativesto help your resellers sell Compaq?Cooley: I've been asked what worries me at night; one thingis our ability to reengineer Compaq for the size it is todayand will be tomorrow. And the reengineering effort is a longeffort. It requires changing our business process first andthen our information systems to support the new business process.A lot of frustrations that your readers have are affiliatedwith old business processes, old information management (IM)systems built for a far smaller business than we are today.We're converting Compaq from a build-to-forecast company toa build-to-order one. The ramifications of that, as it relatesto reducing the frustrations of the VAR community, are significant,because when we really have build-to-order in 1996, VARs won'thave to worry about where to source Compaq solutions. And,frankly, the entire pipeline can remove a lot of dead investmentin inventory waiting for demand. It will sit with Compaq. We'renot going to build it until they signal (see "AvailabilityConcerns")VB: You can move that quickly?Cooley: You bet. So the goal in 1996 will be, starting withservers, converting from a build-to-forecast company to a buildto-order one, and have the ability within 48 hours to configureand ship a product as the VAR wants it. Now, I'll grant youthere are still a number of third-party products that needto be configured with ours to meet the total needs of the customer,the total solution. The VAR's value, clearly, is in marryingup the Compaq pieces with complementary products, and thensuccessfully installing it all at the customer site.VB: Build-to-order should be good for margins.Cooley: That would be great for margins. The points associatedwith us parking our stuff in these warehouses all over theUnited States and Canada waiting on demand is mind-boggling.We tried to address it with programs like flooring the systems,but if you wring that out of there, we can use the savingsto generate more demand, we can take it to the shareholders,we can hire more systems engineers to support the VARs.VB: You mentioned the extra products beyond the PC that makeup the total solutions VARs are putting together. What's Compaq'srole in enterprisewide solutions?Cooley: When you walk into a glass house today and see all thebrand names required to meet the needs of the enterprise customer,you start to see, obviously, routers and hubs and much more.Compaq is being asked by our customers to have more accountabilityfor a greater number of the products needed to make this clientserver world work. So whether it's alliances or a Compaq brand,you'll see us reach out into the world of datacom to addressthe requirements of that kind of a customer.The traditional IM customer who used to buy from that verticallyintegrated model [such as IBM] is looking for as much of thatas he can find in this new world. It's never going to be likeit was, but the more of it we can do, the more likely it isthat the customer will accept the VAR's recommendation thatCompaq can do this piece, this piece and this piece.We don't intend ever to have a Compaq hardware platform, a Compaqoperating system, a Compaq application sitting on top of it.But we will take best-in-class companies who provide that andtry to expedite and, if you will, improve the security andreliability when they're configured with Compaq by the VAR.We're going to try to find all those opportunities we can.VB: Such as your CD-ROM that helps install an Oracle database?Cooley: Exactly.VB: You run ads saying, "With Compaq you can start up Oracleeasier," aimed at the MIS person. Should VARs be concernedthat this devalues them?Cooley: If that were the only thing the VAR was doing, boy,I'd be concerned. But that is not the only thing the VAR does.When you count the number of hours and the amount of manpowerVARs dedicate to installing something like Oracle, just gettingit on there and fixed, it's absolute dead time. We want toincrease the productivity of those systems engineers employedby the VARs to where they can get on the front end of thisthing and design new systems or plan the capacities of futureupgrades. Such activities have a higher ROI than the gruntwork of sitting there watching all these damn diskettes chugging.VB: So it's a utility for the VAR as well?Cooley: Yeah, it increases everybody's productivity. And thecustomer's confidence level increases because of the cooperationbetween the VAR and, in this case, Compaq.VB: You just announced that you're buying Thomas-Conrad, a networkingmanufacturer. What's the reasoning there?Cooley: Today's products aren't nearly as interesting as what'sgetting ready for the market. In the world of switches, they'vegot some differentiated technology. So you'll see us now doboth partnering as well as, selectively, some acquisitions.VB: Are you concerned that you're moving into a highly competitivefield that could dilute the focus of the company?Cooley: You bet. But it's a risk, and it goes with change. Asan example, there was a concern that we would not do well inthe consumer market. And we didn't have a core competency there.With growth, though, you can attract the talent necessary toadd a core competency along the way. So now Doug Pushard [vicepresident in the Internetworking Products Group] has the skillset necessary to manage the networking business. What Dougwill do, obviously, is add a group of people who currentlywork at Thomas-Conrad. So Compaq's core competency expands.VB: Could you envision authorizing Compaq internetworking-onlyVARs?Cooley: We are again on the verge of needing to really understandwhether or not hard product segmentation is required in orderto meet the needs of this technology. For example, [workingwith Tandem Computer] we are now looking at clustered solutions.And frankly, Tom, you and I both know that everybody authorizedto represent Compaq is not going to have an ability to beginto spell it, let alone sell it.So, yes, that level of solution will clearly motivate us in1996 to once again rethink whether a subset of authorized partnersshould represent us for those products. As difficult as thatis to administer, the capability and expertise required bythe customer with this level of product motivates you to wantto head down that path. I'm not there yet, or Compaq's notthere yet. But we probably have a couple of quarters to workthrough it. It is a high priority for us.VB: One stormy partnership that got a lot of press this pastyear was yours with Intel. I sense the relationship has warmedof late.Cooley: I guess the best way to say it is that we understandone another. And clearly we're their largest customer again.Therefore, it's-what did Noorda call it? The world of coopetition.They're doing some things we'd prefer they didn't, but we understandtheir strategy. And I'm sure that in the future we will againdo some things they'd wish we didn't. But they will understandour strategy.All of us still believe that if it's closed, it's bad; if it'sopen, it's good. If there are two, it's better than one froma choice standpoint. Inevitably, we find that technology evolvesquicker; prices are better; the value, if you will, is betterif there's competition. You bet we've got a strong relationshipwith AMD, Cyrix and NexGen, and you're darned right we're goingto test Alpha until it's blue in the face.VB: You recently announced Digital Equipment as your globalservice provider. How will this affect VARs?Cooley: This change, like so many others, is driven by customerrequest and requirement. The service capability of the VARcommunity, as well as many other Compaq-authorized partnersin the U.S. and Canada, has continued to improve, increaseand evolve, and to a great degree they have met all the needsof the customer. Where it continues to be a challenge is withcustomers considering multinational or global implementation.The more client-server they do, the more mission-critical theydo, then the larger this requirement becomes.We've provided an answer for VARs that have the chance to extendtheir Compaq solutions beyond the local area where they haveno service coverage. Frankly, we have lost large opportunitiesto the legacy companies because they have a worldwide infrastructure,and we've had white spots on the map where our authorized partnerhad no answer. Now, with Digital's multivendor service capability,they have a global presence. The VAR now has a product to recommendto that multinational customer that will satisfy the customer'srequirement, as opposed to just letting the sale go to a competitorwith the infrastructure.Now, it is on servers only, which is where the complexity is.We didn't hear this requirement when it was portables, desktopsor personal productivity tools. But when we started to getinto this mission-critical, client-server business enterprisewide,it became a big issue. This is a resolution to it.VB: Digital competes for the same customers, though. You'recomfortable with that?Cooley: Yes. It is obvious that was one of the larger issueswe considered. As [Digital CEO] John Palmer said three yearsago, they had to go find incremental revenue and profit opportunities,because their core business wasn't doing well. Digital hasconvinced us that they have built a firewall between the salesorganization and the multivendor service organization. Andwe tested this 40 times if we tested it once, with customersas well as with the channel.You'll find every now and then people make mistakes. But theyare very quick to rectify them, because they know that if theylose our trust and confidence, then they lose our business.This agreement has one-year renewal options. And if it becomesa huge conflict because the firewall has holes in it, thenthere's a lot to lose, and they know it. They are already providingservice for some of our competitors and they're already, frankly,providing service and support for some of the VARs who don'thave the capabilities. So we had a lot of good places to checkas to whether they can really separate church and state, andthey seem to be quite successful at it.I'm never one to feed the enemy, so to speak. But we buy Toshibascreens, we buy memory from Samsung, we buy drives from HPand IBM. I mean, this industry is worldwide; this is trulyone of a variety of different relationships that are necessaryto have the best-of-breed products.VB: What's your personal challenge for the year?Cooley: Regaining portable leadership is very important in 1996.The biggest challenge is recapturing the confidence and respectfrom the customer community with our portable lineup. We madea good step with the new LTE5000, because that thing is a homerun; it's in good shape. But the volume of the portable businessis done below that.The opportunity is to have a wireless, mobile client that trulymeets the requirements of the user-not a personal assistantdevice, but truly a full-function, wireless portable at theright price point, with the right feature set. I think we canget there before the rest of them, but we're not there yet,so it is the kind of thing I worry about.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Are you Ready for Some Teamwork? -- Everyone talks teams, butit takes more than an ad hoc group of people to make up a winningoneBy:Jeremy SchlosbergVARs are generally too busy running their businesses to stopand ponder how to run them. They're also notoriously disinclinedto engage in long-term planning. Since long-term planning isgenerally considered a good thing, not doing it is pretty mucha bad thing. A seat-of-the-pants operating style also keepsa VAR insulated from the business self-help crowd. In a dayand age when management theories tend to come and go like thelatest diets, remaining unaware of them may not always be soterrible. Every now and then, however, a fad appears with theearmarks of a PIC: that is, a Potentially Important Concept.The use of teams in business is just such a fad/trend/PIC.The idea is that a business can function more effectively andefficiently when some or all of the organization is arrangedinto collaborative groups of interdependent employees ratherthan given a rigid, hierarchical structure. Employees in teams,say the experts, feel a greater sense of control over theirjobs and a bigger stake in the company itself. Everybody wins.In truth, running a business with teams may sound like lessthan news for smaller businesses in general, and readers ofthis magazine in particular. "The teaming approach is muchcloser to what is normal in a smaller company than it is ina Fortune 500 company," says Gene Bledsoe, principal with TheCasal Group, a Dallas-based consulting firm. In large companies,employees can be widely scattered, and there can be power enclaves"fiefdoms," as Bledsoe calls them-that can make genuine teamworknearly impossible to come by.VARs and integrators often employ teams all but unconsciouslyfor instance, the way a systems integrator will create a projectteam to tackle a new client's solution needs, gathering adhoc the talent required for the job. Still, there's a differencebetween the informal teamwork that arises of necessity in asmall company and a conscious effort to foster a workplacethat relies on teamwork.Today's technology can assist the teaming process-and many VARsimplement such technology for their customers (i.e., groupware,or other workgroup-oriented, client-server applications). Sothe time seems especially ripe for VARs to stop and think abouthow they run their businesses long enough to wonder whethermanagement by teams might offer genuine potential for increasedproductivity and long-term growth.The team approach to business organization has a leg up on mostbusiness fads since it's based on an intuitive concept ratherthan contrived jargon. We already more or less know what ateam is."We're not trying to snow anyone here," says Thomas Koulopoulos,president and founder of the Delphi Consulting Group in Boston."Teams are not new. People work naturally as teams." Not onlydo organizational charts often have little to do with how peoplein a business actually work, but the best workers in a companyare typically those who work outside the formal chart, he says."It's not a question of, 'Should we have teams or shouldn'twe?' You should, and, at least informally, you already do,"says Koulopoulos. "The question to ask is, 'How do I put inplace systems, cultures and technologies to support the naturalcollaboration that exists within a company?' "Natural CollaborationA perfect illustration of how this sort of natural collaborationwith thoughtful support can enhance corporate performance canbe found in the case of Trellis Network Services Inc., a Princeton,N.J.-based systems integrator.Trellis officials have long been conscious of the importanceof teamwork in the context of day-to-day operations. "We'vegot dynamic teams springing up and falling down daily," saysBruce Bancroft, vice president of sales and marketing.Expertise requirements on any given project can be varied, giventhe complex nature of large networks. Not only might Trellisrequire four or five different experts on a given project,but those experts might also be located in four or five differentTrellis offices around the country. What's more, any singleTrellis systems engineer might be a member of as many as fourdifferent project teams simultaneously.After the success of an internal, Lotus Notes-based sales automationsystem implemented approximately four years ago, the Trellisbrain trust recognized a need for a complementary system thatwould support the project management process. The company developeda second Notes-based application for itself in response tothis need, which it called Project Tracker. It's been up andrunning for two years.Project Tracker, replicated in each of Trellis' five offices,automatically kicks in once a sale is complete, helping projectmanagers find the appropriate expertise, formulate their teamsand track progress every step of the way. Team members keepone another apprised of their actions and ideas via Notes."From a management standpoint, it's brought a lot of efficiencyto the organization," says Bancroft.Trellis will even set a Notes station up on the customer's siteif desired, allowing customers a first-hand view of a project'sstatus. While this can give a customer an unusually uncensoredview-"They see how we're progressing, warts and all," saysBancroft-Trellis has reaped the benefits of improved relationshipsand greater trust as a result. In this case, the technologyhas even brought the customer onto the team.Trellis was using teams before Project Tracker, but the teamsare much more efficient now, according to Bancroft. What'smore, management has been positively affected. Before ProjectTracker, managers fretted over project status and kept themselves"too intimately involved with managing specific projects."Now, he asserts, "We have our management people involved ingrowing our business, which is really where we want them tobe."Teams Are PeopleThe Trellis example is instructive, to a point. The type ofteam building the experts recommend goes beyond project-orientedwork and ideally extends into the core of a company's hierarchy.In the Trellis project, technology is valuable but is not thefirst step for a team-oriented organization."No technology makes people into teams," says Mike Lynch, managingpartner at Learning Resources Group, a Maplewood, N.J., consultingfirm. "People make people into teams." Lynch has developedand taught classes for the American Management Associationon team development specifically for technical professionals;he continually encounters people in his classes who come upto him and say, "Yeah, we have all this technology in placebut it's not working," or "We have these troublemakers whoaren't signing onto the system." Technologically savvy companiescan too easily fall into the trap of applying technology toa problem before the problem is completely understood."You have to determine what you're trying to accomplish first,"says Lynch. "And you've got to have the willingness to worktogether." Only then, he says, should you worry about the technologythat may or may not be needed.Approached this way, you may be surprised which technologiesif any-apply. Rocky Gunderson, vice president of marketingfor Baan Americas, an ISV that sells enterprise resource planningsoftware to Fortune 500 manufacturing companies, heads a sevenperson team spread throughout the United States and Canadacharged with spearheading a multifaceted marketing programfor a sophisticated software system. About half of Gunderson'steam uses Lotus Notes for communicating and sharing information.It's especially handy for dealing with European associates(Baan Americas is a division of the Baan Co., based in MenloPark, Calif., and the Netherlands)Notes is important to the team, says Gunderson, but the technologyhe stops to praise is the conference call. Gunderson has aweekly conference call Mondays at 9 a.m. with his boss; hethen has his own team's conference call Mondays at 1 p.m. Facilitatedby AT&T, the call couldn't be simpler, and it's so effectivethat Gunderson cannot remember the last time his team was togetherface-to-face."I know it's low-tech," he says, almost apologetically. "Butyou can really get a lot accomplished with a conference call."Much less, of course, would be accomplished if Gunderson's teamhadn't worked so well together in the first place and hadn'testablished a personal rapport before they became disembodiedvoices on the telephone.It's a simple point that's sometimes lost on technology companymanagers. "The biggest problem I've had people bring up inclass is the problem of having remote people on teams," saysconsultant Lynch. Teams comprising a far-ranging cast of charactersoften don't seem to work so well. Perhaps the ready availabilityof WANs and videoconferencing leads too many companies to forgetthe basic rules of human interaction. "People have to spendtime with other members of the team; they have to get to knowthem, get comfortable with them," says Lynch.And this must be done face-to-face, at least at first.Mutually InterdependentAnother basic point that is often overlooked is that not everygroup of employees who appear to be working together can beaccurately considered a team. There is, in particular, a strikingdifference between a team and that most traditional groupingof employees within an organization: a department."In a department, everybody does the same thing," explains Lynch.You put a bunch of programmers together and there's your programmingdepartment.They are not, however, a team. The key is interdependence. "Adepartment doesn't necessarily equal a team because departmentmembers are not always interdependent upon each other to getthe work done," notes Lynch. Often, they're running parallel.A team is a group of people who cannot do the job that needsdoing without each other.Clearly this depends upon the ability of that group of peoplenot only to get along but, if possible, to enjoy each other'scompany. What may be less obvious but of critical importanceare issues of communications style preference. This becomesan especially noticeable factor when cross-functional teamsare put together."The technical person may say, 'Fine, let's e-mail info backand forth.' The salesperson will say, 'You do that, but I'llcall you once a week so you can tell me how it's going,' "says Lynch. "The technical person wants to show you data; thesalesperson doesn't care about equipment and numbers-he wantsto know if you feel confident you'll meet the deadline. He'slooking for the personal side."Another hallmark differentiating a team from other types ofworkplace groups is how differently a successful team meetingis run from a traditional staff meeting. Traditional managershold meetings; team managers facilitate them."You have to structure meetings so that everybody can provideinput without feeling intimidated," says Al Schornberg, chairmanand CEO of Anatec, a Bingham Farms, Mich., systems integrator.For instance, if he's with a team that needs to determine nextyear's strategic goals, he will have each member write down10 ideas. The ideas are collected and each one is discussed;the list is consolidated to reach consensus. "You get a lotmore input that way than if you just asked the question outloud," Schornberg says.Good meetings don't happen by accident, and neither do goodteams. Of all the training that may be necessary within companiesserious about team orientation, experts agree that the mostimportant is communication training. People may seek naturallyto collaborate with each other at work, but that's an ad hocreality; a systematic conversion to teamwork is, on the otherhand, a most unnatural progression for many office environments.Standard U.S. office politics are too entrenched for companiesto go marching too easily down the road of collaboration.Escaping the Territorial Trap"In a lot of organizations, there are territorial issues," acknowledgesLynch. An 'us vs. them' mentality keeps different groups ofpeople in competition with each other and among themselves."The idea that 'We've got to protect our turf or else we won'thave any' still exists in a lot of organizations," he says.Gunderson has seen this while working for other companies-including14 years at Hewlett-Packard-sometimes finding himself in chargeof groups that have competed with other groups within the samecompany. At Baan last year, he had the opportunity to builda team-oriented organization from the ground up. He specificallydesigned his team to comprise functional managers with complementaryand mutually dependent skills and responsibilities, includingproduct marketing, program management, strategic partner managementand sales development. Those are all areas that directly contributeto a company's marketing effort, but are not functions oftenlocated in any traditional sort of marketing department.Today, Gunderson can say with pride, "You could take me outof the equation and my group would still work as a team becausethey need each other to get the job done."This is the essence of teamwork: a practically leaderless groupof motivated, well-informed employees doing their thing. Understandthis and you'll soon understand why the model remains lesscommon than it should be in companies that might otherwisebe fomenting teams right and left: smallish technology solutionproviders such as VARs and systems integrators.Stay Away From the HubThink about the typical successful VAR business-founded by aperson of some technological vision and often grown in a blurof entrepreneurial bluster and resourcefulness. A wonderfulenvironment, perhaps, for a fledgling company, but CEOs/founderswith too much Bill Gates on the mind do not reflexively cultivatean organization of sharing, caring equals. They instead tendto create what Lynch calls a hub structure: The founding chiefis in the middle, fingers in all the pies, entrenched as theconduit through which all expert information flows."What tends to happen over time is they become the roadblockrather than the conduit," says Lynch. Not only does such acompany run into the common problem of an entrepreneur needingto learn to delegate responsibility, but as the hub, the foundercan prevent necessary interaction among the minions. "Whencommunication between various experts has to go through theboss," says Lynch, "a lot just doesn't get communicated."Of course, not all companies grow this way; not all CEOs arehub-lovers. Anatec's Schornberg, for one, considers team buildingto be his "primary role.""What I bring to the table is the ability to put together andbuild teams that turn corporate vision into reality," he says."That's what my skill sets are. I've tried very hard and diligentlyto create a culture here that is team-oriented." Except forroutine functions such as finance and payroll, teams handleeverything Anatec does-from strategic planning to compensationplan design to social event coordination.Who, then, decides when a team is needed for a given job? "Actually,"Schornberg says, "that's a team decision." It's a little morecomplex to run day-to-day operations this way as opposed towhere one person makes decisions and that's that, he admits.But the trade-offs are worth it. "With one person making adecision, if you don't have buy-in, you get resistance," hesays.With resistance comes lack of commitment in implementation ofthe decision and the potential for morale difficulties anddecreased productivity. Say there's a new compensation planin the works. Which is likely to be better received: a decisionemerging from behind a manager's door and announced as a donedeal, or a decision arrived at through group discussion andconsensus?With teams, says Schornberg, "all the hard work gets workedout in advance. The implementation is usually the easy part."The Perpetual OrganizationIn the best of all possible worlds, team orientation will converta company into what Delphi Consulting's Koulopoulos calls the"perpetual organization"-an ever-shifting organization, everresponsive to its market, in which all individuals understandwhat their roles are in each process and who they are workingwith, even as the processes continually modulate and fluctuate.At least that's the theory, the trend, the Potentially ImportantConcept. Then again, such a goal might be a tad unrealisticfor seat-of-the-pants VAR, who will probably still see significantbusiness process improvement and even productivity gains witha far more limited, but highly strategic, use of the teamingapproach.If VARs are rarely prepared to undertake sweeping philosophicaloverhauls, Bledsoe lets the cat out of the bag on a dirty littlesecret: Very few companies are ever prepared for such things."Eighteen months ago, we didn't have e-mail," he says. "Finally,we put in a network e-mail system, and it has physically changedthe way we do work." Communication within his small firm hasimproved dramatically."It's those kinds of things that will change business," Bledsoesays. "They're simple. You don't have to make drastic changesto your company philosophy or business direction. Those arethe things that affect us as businesses far more than the latestphilosophical theory."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Your Mission In Storage -- RAID, flash and RAM are criticalto your customersBy:Karen BalchFor clients whose data truly is mission-critical, implementinga RAID solution may be the key to solidifying your relationship.What's important is to know when to sell RAID. Find out in"Know Your RAID? You've Got It Made" (page 105)Flash technology isn't new, but as with RAID, there are manynew applications for it cropping up. Particularly so with CompactFlash,a matchbook-sized flash card from SanDisk. In this roundtable,VARBusiness talked with SanDisk, AP Research and a VAR to fleshout the opportunities. For the scoop, see "Get It Done In aFlash" (page 115)Semiconductor memory of all kinds is in short supply these days.You need to know how long the shortages are expected to last,if prices will continue to drop and if a drought is on thehorizon. "RAM Realities" (page 131) will give you some answers.Savvy VARs are starting to network CD-ROMs for LAN users. Providingnetwork access to databases, manuals, software or images isbecoming big business for VARs. In "Net Gain From NetworkedCD-ROMs," (page 139) see how to do it.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Know Your Raid? You've Got It Made -- The explosion in networkstorage needs is driving business to VARs who understand RAIDtechnologyBy:Ron LevineThe dilemma for users running memory "killer" applications likeimaging, multimedia and online database searches has long beenone of storage space and safety. As networks continue to grow,so too do their appetites for larger, safer storage systems.RAID (redundant arrays of independent disks) addresses thoseconcerns and provides VARs with sales opportunities in clientserver, memory-intensive application sites at the same time.While optical and tape drives offer backup and archiving capacity,RAID sales add data protection, 100 percent availability andhard disk speed.RAID is not a new concept. In fact, RAID has already crossedthe chasm between early adopters and general market acceptance.Farid Neema, president of Peripheral Concepts Inc., a SantaBarbara, Calif., research company, says that two years ago,20 percent of administrators in the PC environment understoodthe significant role a RAID subsystem can play. Today he saysthat ratio is closer to two thirds in the PC world and 85 percentin the Unix/midrange environment.One reason for RAID's popularity is the trend toward largernetworks with more mission-critical data to store and access.Network storage needs are almost doubling every year, saysBob Katzive, vice president of DiskTrend Inc., a researcherin Mountain View, Calif. He notes that already more than 400,000RAID subsystems are operating in the field, including 375,000plus network-class server disk arrays. Other technologies popularizingRAID today include the Internet and video servers. Many companiesdownsizing from a mainframe to a client-server environmentare also turning to RAID. For all of those reasons, RAID salesand support offer opportunities for VARs.The Name of the Game Is Meeting Users' Needs"Meeting users' needs for high-speed access to gigabytes ofdata, data protection equal to that afforded mainframe files,and fault-tolerant hardware operation with RAID storage implementationscan be a very profitable business," notes Tony Prigmore, generalmanager at Berkshire Computer Products Inc., a Hopkinton, Mass.,VAR that resells Digital Equipment's StorageWorks products.Berkshire sold a StorageWorks 410 array to a Fortune 500 companyengaged in commercial transaction processing. The array contains12 Gbytes of storage capacity plus a write-back cache thatspeeds write operations and can accommodate up to 2,600 I/Otransfers per second. The customer is so pleased with the RAIDsolution that the 410 array has become the company's standardstorage device across all platforms.For Prigmore, RAID sales margins have been good both at thecomponent level and when purchasing complete subsystems forresale, but he believes the more integration work you do, themore you can charge: "Profit margins will be in direct proportionto the amount of system integration performed at the customer'ssite. This is the value-added component."To sell and implement a RAID subsystem is not a slam dunk; you'vegot to know what you're doing. You better not promise faulttolerance and not be able to deliver. But because the profitpotential is there, RAID is worth learning about.RAID is a large-scale storage technology that replaces one expensive,high-capacity magnetic disk drive with smaller, less expensivemagnetic drives. RAID provides data protection by either duplicating(mirroring) or striping data across multiple drives withinthe array. If data is lost or corrupted, the array automaticallyrebuilds the affected data portions and continues with uninterruptedoperation.RAID also provides high-data availability through fault-toleranthardware performance. By eliminating single points of failurewithin the subsystem through duplication of components, near100 percent uptime for the storage subsystem can be achieved.Some RAID implementations extend this fault tolerance to protectagainst failures in the host I/O access path. By adding dualcontrollers, I/O buses and host support for these features,host system access to the data is protected. A good RAID implementationcan provide data availability and reliability protection equalto that of a mainframe.The Six LevelsThere are six RAID levels officially recognized by the industry'sRAID Advisory Board: Levels 0 through 5. Levels 1, 3 and 5,however, are most commonly implemented. Each employs a differentmethod for recording data. The levels do not denote performanceper se, but do indicate how the data is stored within the array.RAID Level 1 mirrors all data onto a second disk. It featuresexcellent data protection and sound overall performance. However,it is more costly than other RAID levels to employ. Becauseof the duplication, only half of the storage space is actuallyusable. This makes mirroring the most expensive of the RAIDimplementations.RAID Level 3 stripes data across multiple drives, which enablesthe storage subsystem to recreate any lost data on one drivefrom the information recorded on the remaining drives. Storagecosts are less than with mirroring, and it is superb in environmentsthat require the transfer of large blocks of data.RAID Level 5 stripes the data and the parity across all thedrives. This offers customer sites the highest combinationof data availability and fault-tolerant operation, but resultsin a lower write operation performance level. It's best whenprocessing read requests for file transfers or transactiontype I/Os.RAID Levels 1 and 3 can perform only a single access (eitherread or write) at a time per array; Level 5 RAID can handlemultiple read/write operations. One RAID level is not necessarilyfaster than another although the specific implementation ofthe RAID level determines performance. The actual array speedwill be determined by the type of interface used, the systemand/or network acting as the host, and the application tasksbeing performed.Some RAID implementations automatically and dynamically adjustbetween Levels 3 and 5 as the load changes. With RAID storagedevices, users have faster access to gigabytes of data at alower cost than is possible with optical or tape peripherals.RAID is not a backup device, though, and it is not meant toreplace tape or optical in the backup process. However, itcan be used to replace these devices where online, faster accessto large amounts of data is the key application for the peripheral.Knowing the advantages RAID can bring to a customer isn't enoughin itself. You also have to know when RAID is the right choice."We've been selling RAID solutions for more than four yearsand find RAID implementations work best when we need 8 to 10Gbytes or better of online, fault-tolerant data storage onthe server," says Gentry Ganote, president of Gain SystemsInc., a Norcross, Ga.-based VAR specializing in high-end fileand application servers and workstations.Gain Systems sells RAID subsystems from a variety of vendorsand integrates them into existing networks. Gain has successfullyimplemented RAID subsystems in SQL servers running under WindowsNT, for NetWare servers and in DOS/Windows environments.A RAID On BottlenecksMany storage-related bottlenecks, particularly in imaging, multimedia,video or other memory-intensive networking environments, canbe solved by adding a RAID subsystem to the mix. Often, withoutRAID, these types of memory-hungry tasks are off-loaded tooptical storage devices or tape subsystems to improve networkperformance, which often takes data offline.No one knows this better than Jim Mendelbaum, president of LANSpecialist Inc., an integrator in Torrance, Calif., that specializesin large LAN storage solutions. Having sold Micropolis' RAIDIONLevel 5 RAID subsystem, Mendelbaum says, "RAIDION deliversthe high, sustained data transfer rates that imaging and multimediatasks require to quickly write and read large-sized files.And RAIDION can grow with the user; it's scalable between 6and 282 Gbytes."Foundation Imaging in Valencia, Calif., which produces graphicalvisual effects for broadcast television, is also using theRAIDION Level 5 array with 110 Gbytes of storage for its imagingapplications. "Our computers all write images to and pull imagesoff the array. It is a true use of file server capability,"says Paul Brian, director of operations at Foundation. TheRAID device is on a NetWare 3.12 LAN connected to 20 Pentiumand Alpha nodes running Windows NT and seven Macintosh stationscommunicating via Ethertalk. "We went with RAID both for itsredundancy and high sustained data transfer rate. Since allof our nodes are top of the line with a minimum of 64 Mbytesof RAM, we needed something that could keep up with their imagetransfers," Brian says.RAID is almost always the right choice when your customer'sLAN handles truly mission-critical data. "The primary reasonfor having a RAID system is to provide data protection anddata availability," says Joel Reich, director of marketingfor Conner Storage Systems, Lake Mary, Fla. "Increased storagecapacity and data access speed [achieved by striping] are onlysecondary reasons customers purchase RAID."Still, capacity can be a primary selling point when a companyis downsizing from a mainframe. The goal of switching froma mainframe to an enterprisewide network sometimes begins tofalter due to the lack of storage on the network. In this case,RAID's capacity can be a plus. Communication Technical SystemsInc. (CTS) is a VAR in Roswell, Ga., specializing in migrationsfrom mainframe to midrange environments. CTS provides clientserver solutions based on the HP9000 Series server and RaidtecCorp.'s FlexArray RAID subsystems. CTS is one-third of theway through a five-year mainframe conversion project for theGeneral Board of Pension and Health Benefits of the UnitedMethodist Church in Evanston, Ill.Throughout the transition period, the servers process an increasingpercentage of the Board's data. It is essential that the serversare equipped with the storage capacity and performance to efficientlyhandle the $6 billion worth of benefits the company managesannually for more than 70,000 ministers and employees nationwide.As a result, the storage system had to be suitable for applicationssuch as database management, network management and accounting."A RAID solution is the storage option of choice for this projectdue to its capacity and speed," says Michael Malone, vice presidentof sales and marketing at CTS. The VAR chose Raidtec's FlexArrayIX RAID subsystem because of its user-selectable RAID levels.Raising the Bar"Everybody wants a storage system that's easy to implement intotheir existing structure," says Gain's Ganote. "The MegaRAIDthree-channel RAID controller [from American Megatrends Inc.]used in our RAID implementations is compatible with most networksand operating systems. This enables us to handle all of ourcorporate clients' needs across a variety of platforms." AsGanote found, when you're choosing a RAID system, compatibilitywith a variety of computing environments can be a big issuewith the customer and a big selling point for you.RAID systems generally integrate well across most hardware platforms.RAID devices in general work with most major operating systemsoftware as well, including NetWare, Unix, OS/2, Windows NT,Macintosh and Solaris. As a result, VARs have a key technologywith which to close a storage sale and to gain an account foothold.Resellers can address user access and backup issues at the sametime by installing a combination of RAID and tape within asingle enclosure. This type of implementation provides reliableonline access to data as well as reliable data backup for highcapacity applications. It also offers the benefit of hot-pluggableRAID protection and the capacity of DLT tape. For example,Business Systems Solutions Inc. (BSSI), Buffalo Grove, Ill.,is one VAR that has implemented such a solution. "It's an idealstorage product for applications using large databases or extensivegraphics/imaging files," says Scott Bernstein, executive vicepresident at BSSI.BSSI has installed a single-enclosure combination RAID/tapestorage subsystem for a client that develops graphic imagesand has an exceptionally large data storage need as a result.The MegaFlex unit from Storage Dimensions includes 27 Gbytesof RAID capacity and 20 or 40 Gbytes of DLT capacity (dependingon the media chosen). It was the best solution due to the largeamount of data it could put online and the client's ongoingneed to back up 27 Gbytes of data in a limited time.Redundant arrays of independent tape drives (RAIT) provide analternate large-scale storage option. Like disk arrays, tapearrays offer data and availability protection, plus they offerdata backup and removable storage. According to GigaTrend Inc.,a Carlsbad, Calif., reseller specializing in storage backupsystems, RAIT can provide better margins than RAID sales. Infact, GigaTrend no longer sells hard disk RAID."Tape arrays offer the VAR a chance to make better margins thando disk arrays," says GigaTrend vice president Thomas Culver."There is less competition because most of the large hard diskplayers are not heavily marketing RAIT solutions; the knowledgeto sell this product is not as easy to master."GigaTrend offers a line of RAIT products that can be configuredwith DAT, 8-mm or DLT tapes to meet needs for large-capacity,fail-safe data storage. Notes Culver, "When users want storageto be removable, RAIT is the best solution. If a site is dealingwith large capacities that must be backed up within tight windows,multiple tape drives in a RAIT configuration yield the speedrequired."The Wait StateBut Rik Mussman, vice president of operations for LighthouseTechnology, a VAR specializing in high-end storage solutionsfor Unix and the client-server market, is not a big believerin RAIT. Mussman says most backup and archival applicationscannot drive a tape array fast enough to make it work. That'sbecause the RAIT device swallows a block of data (usually 32Kbytes) quickly, then waits for the backup or archival applicationto complete its processing before the device is sent anotherblock of data. The end result can be a storage device thatspends most of its time in a "wait state." Says Mussman, "Somepromote RAIT as a quick backup method for medium to large datasets, but we don't see any real advantage to using RAIT."Even RAIT's proponents will tell you that there is a catch:Culver says it's on the restore side. Since the data is writtento multiple tapes, risk of data loss increases with the numberof tapes used for the restore operation. In the restore cycle,the tapes must be readily available and in the correct sequence;otherwise, the restore will not be able to be completed.Of course, you have another option: software RAID. Whether asoftware or hardware array is best is determined by whetherthe user is adding to an existing system or installing a newone; the customer's I/O performance and data availability requirementswill dictate the answer.Software RAID is less expensive because it uses existing storagecomponents, says Paul Massiglia, a member of the industry'sRAID Advisory Board and marketing manager at Digital's ColoradoSprings, Colo., facility. It also provides exceptional dataavailability because the hardware array's member disks canbe spread across multiple storage devices or across multiplehost computers while the software array executes on a singlehost computer and is very economical.Still, a hardware RAID system's software management functionis contained within the firmware of the storage subsystem.This means that it will have little or no impact on host computingperformance. Therefore, hardware implementations generallyoffer better I/O performance than software versions.UNOCAL Accounting Information Systems in Sugarland, Texas, selectedAndataco Corp.'s GigaRAID/FT storage system over its systemvendor's array. UNOCAL systems administration team leader StevenClark says the company believed that a hardware RAID implementationwith its faster I/O speed would provide better performancethan software RAID. The 400-Gbyte array, which includes DataGeneral's CLARiiON hardware and Andataco's array managementsoftware, is running on two 2000E SPARC platforms. The arrayis shared between a production system using 240 Gbytes of itscapacity and a test system using the remaining 160 Gbytes.Your customers' specific needs will determine the form of RAIDthat is right for their companies. And your ability to masterthe technical intricacies of the different storage systemswill determine which RAID is right for your company to selland support. Each one presents its own rewards. All can helpremove your customer's risk and increase your profit margin.Quick ScanAmerican Megatrends Inc. Norcross, Ga. (800) 828-9264, www.megatrends.comAndataco Corp. San Diego, Calif. (800) 334-9191, www.andataco.comConner Storage Systems Group Lake Mary, Fla. (407) 263-3500,www.conner.comData General Corp. CLARiiON Business Unit, Westboro, Mass. (508)898-7600, www.dg.comMicropolis Corp. Chatsworth, Calif. (818) 709-3300, www.micropolis.comRaidtec Corp. Roswell, Ga. (404) 664-6066Storage Dimensions Inc. Milpitas, Calif. (408) 954-0710StorageWorks an independent business unit of Digital EquipmentCorp., Shrewsbury, Mass. (800) STORWORK, www.digital.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Roundtable: Get it Done In a Flash -- Flash memory is rugged,compact, and needs little power-benefits that are making itpop up in new applications every dayBy:Karen BalchCameras, cellular phones, pagers, audio recorders, handheldcomputers, palmtops, PDAs. Not your typical list of high-marginhardware for VARs. But the products all have one thing in commonthat makes them potential VAR moneymakers: They all have agrowing need for rugged, compact, digital data storage as youintegrate them into vertical solutions.Flash is solid state, rewritable, nonvolatile memory. It doesn'trequire a power source to maintain data, unlike RAM. Betteryet, it's fast. Flash memory isn't new, but some of the usesfor it are. Whether you're talking about embedded flash forruggedizing portable PCs or removable flash for gathering,transporting and sharing data in a mobile environment, applicationsfor flash technology are expanding. New versions of commonelectronic devices-i.e., the pager, audio recorder, palmtopand so on-are ready to put flash technology to the test.SanDisk Corp., Santa Clara, Calif., sells 1.8- and 1.3-inchembedded flash drives as replacements for disk drives wherecapacity needs are lowand requirements for ruggedness are high. It offers a FlashChipset for small form factor, low-capacity applications suchas PDAs and cellular phones. And it sells flash cards witha Type II or Type III PCMCIA interface, hitting capacity highsof 85 Mbytes and 175 Mbytes, respectively. But perhaps thecompany's most interesting flash product is CompactFlash, whichis about the size of a matchbook. An intended storage complementto electronic devices such as the digital camera, CompactFlashallows data sharing via a PCMCIA Type II adapter. Today, CompactFlashcapacities range from 2 Mbytes to 15 Mbytes, but by 1997, SanDiskaims to offer 100 Mbytes on the device.In the following roundtable discussion, VARBusiness talked withNelson Chan, vice president of marketing for SanDisk, abouthis company's plans for flash technology. Lending her expertiseto the discussion is Katherine Litchfield, vice president ofsales and marketing for Hampton-Royce, a VAR/ISV in Orange,Calif. Litchfield says that implementing flash technology ina bundled solution gives her 30 percent margins on the hardwarealone. Last but not least, Andy Prophet, president of marketresearch and consultancy AP Research in Cupertino, Calif.,brings his PCMCIA knowledge to the table.VARBusiness: How does flash technology differ from disk drives?Chan: You use flash technology in an environment where you needruggedness and reliability. CompactFlash cards can withstandan operating shock of more than 2,000 Gs; that's equivalentto about a 10-foot drop. Flash also offers extended temperatureranges and consumes less than 5 percent of the power of a diskdrive. As with a lot of consumer products that run on two AAbatteries, you can't even spin up a disk drive. But you canuse a flash card.Flash also offers a much higher performance-up to 30 percenthigher than a typical disk drive in a typical read-write application.Yet it's a smaller form factor than disk drives so we willbe able to go into applications where disk drives are justtoo big, such as pagers, audio recorders, cell phones or medicaldevices.Litchfield: All of those reasons are exactly what lets us bea VAR in this arena. Flash lets us come into a market witha piece of software that's vertical and sort of niche and bevery successful. Some of the biggest roadblocks to mobile computingwere the weight, the cost, the batteries and the lack of ruggedness.A lot of that goes back to spinning drives, and when you moveaway from that, a lot of obstacles to the marketplace go away.[Flash technology] is a real lifesaver.VB: Even though flash and hard drives have different markets,people tend to compare them. Hard drive proponents say there'snot enough capacity in a flash card to make it worthwhile,particularly at flash technology's higher cost.Litchfield: Because we're selling this handheld product bundledwith a card, a case and software, all our users want to knowis that they can load onto here whatever they need, gathertheir data and bring it back to the office. There's no realconcern that it's not 120 Mbytes or 250 Mbytes because we'redoing a very vertical approach.Chan: Today 2 Mbytes allows you to store 20 to 24 images fordigital cameras. It allows you to store 1,200 to 1,400 pagesof double-spaced text. That amount also allows you to store30 to 60 minutes of voice for audio devices. It's a lot ofcapacity.Clearly if you're in an environment where you need gigabytes,or even hundreds of megabytes, you're going to use a disk drive.Take a look at a typical computer on a desktop. There usersdon't care about ruggedness and reliability because the computersare stationary. They don't care about power because they'rehooked up to an A/C outlet. They need lots of capacity becausethey're running Windows and they've got all of these applications,so in that environment, you will always use disk drives.Disk drives also have a very low per-megabyte cost. They areinexpensive because they can absorb that cost over so muchstorage. Flash technology's disadvantage is cost-per-megabyte.But we look at it from a unit cost standpoint. In any of theseapplications, if all you need is 2 Mbytes, guess what? We'recheaper than any disk drive and we give you all the benefits.[For handheld applications], there isn't another solution.We're cheaper than disk drives because the capacity isn't required.If you look at [cell phones, pagers, audio recorders, PDAsand so on], disk drives are not going to be used in any ofthose other devices, but flash will be. And if you want toopen it up to other storage technologies such as CD-ROMs, floppiesor magneto-optical, they're not going to be used in all thesedevices either. We think only flash will.VB: Because the other storage devices are too big?Chan: They're too big and they can be too expensive dependingon the capacity you need. Plus, flash will allow you to moveinformation between all those different devices, whether thatinformation is data, voice, audio or images. An ideal applicationis a digital camera where you go out and take pictures. Whenyou come back, you take the CompactFlash card out-it's yourdigital film of the future. You plug it into an adapter andnow you can plug it into any notebook or desktop and enhancethe photos, cut and paste them, do whatever you want. So movinginformation between different devices is also a very importantconsideration.Prophet: The real potential for flash memory, particularly underits current pricing structure, is for value-added applicationsvertical markets where the margins are higher or wider andyou have more latitude.VB: What are VARs going to do with flash drives?Chan: Let's say you want to ruggedize a computer. Take J.B.Hunt Transport, one of the largest trucking companies in theUnited States. IBM has designed a ruggedized computer [forthe cabs of Hunt's trucks] with our solid state solution insteadof a disk drive, because when a truck goes over a speed bumpor hits a pothole you don't want the system to come down. Inthat computer is also a global positioning system. For a VARto be able to go to a company and say that you've got a completesolution-all the software, all the infrastructure, everythingput in-that's a unique solution.VB: What's the capacity on the flash drive?Chan: It depends on the form factor. In terms of the 1.8-inchform factor, we go up to 80 Mbytes. In terms of the 1.3-inch,we go up to 60 Mbytes, and these are uncompressed numbers.We can effectively double those capacities with compression.The nice thing about this is that VARs can take out the diskdrives and plug this in and away they go; there's no softwarechanges required or anything else.VB: There are a lot of VARs who are going to see flash and CompactFlashcards as off-the-shelf products. What's the VAR applicationthere?Litchfield: We bundle the handheld computer, software and CompactFlashall together. For example, the software that we have on thishandheld unit is inspection software, and what better to goalong with an inspection than a picture? We're integratinga digital camera into this application so when someone saysthat there was a crack in their wall, the inspector can takea picture of it. Then, they not only have a picture they caninclude in a report, but they have a picture that they canstore on a PC someplace and keep for six months or a year.So it's an absolutely perfect adjunct to the sale, and theCompactFlash allows us to do exactly what Nelson's talkingabout-moving and sharing data.VB: And this adds enough profit to your sale to be worth bundlingit?Litchfield: Sure. Customers want a low-cost solution, but lowcost doesn't always mean buying at absolutely the lowest dollar.They will pay slightly more for every one of these items [digitalcamera, cellular phone, pager, PDA, etc.] if they are all marriedtogether in a nice little box that's brought out and droppedoff on the doorstep.VB: What is the percentage of margin you can add to a sale involvingthose types of products?Litchfield: We are probably running at 30 percent at least onthe [bundled] hardware items [i.e., the handheld computers,PDAs, cameras, CompactFlash disks, etc.] alone, which is highin hardware. Of course, when we add the software, the marginsgo up. Users get a single product and they have a single personto go back to if something doesn't work. And it's worth theextra amount that they pay for that.VB: Then flash cards and CompactFlash aren't really retail productsjust yet, are they?Chan: The demand isn't out there yet. To put it into a store,you've got to have people coming in and asking for it and itisn't there yet. This is still primarily an OEM and VAR typeof business.VB: Clearly, there are a number of emerging uses for flash cards.But how does a VAR know which brand to buy? Your primary competitorsare Intel and AMD. How do your cards differ from theirs?Chan: Mostly, it has to do with intelligence. We offer an ATAcard and they offer a non-ATA card. But the ATA card is theindustry standard. The key advantage to having an ATA solutionis that it's plug-and-playable with any devices that conformto ATA. And ATA is supported in every major operating systemtoday. So you really have true plug-and-play instead of plugand-pray.The second big advantage has to do with the guarantee of forwardand backward compatibility. I guarantee that, if you buy thiscamera and you buy [CompactFlash as film], it'll work. Twoyears from now, let's say you need to buy additional film,but it's based on different generations of memory because twoyears from now we'll have advanced from where we are today.I guarantee you, when you buy that, you can plug it in andit will work.The Intel solution cannot guarantee that, nor can it guaranteethat they have true plug-and-play because they require a flashfile system. The problem with flash file systems today is thatthere are so many different versions.VB: Why would they make that choice then?Chan: They'll say that they're lower in cost because they don'thave to have an intelligent controller. We disagree with thatbecause, as you get to higher flash capacities-probably 2 Mbytesand above-that controller cost is amortized over the memoryso the controller cost becomes insignificant, yet you get allthose advantages. At very, very low capacities, they may havea cost advantage. But look at all the problems you have whenyou have an incompatibility and when you don't have guaranteedbackward compatibility.VB: With such disparate ideas, why did SanDisk sign a crosslicensing agreement with Intel?Chan: Intel has a large flash patent portfolio, we have a largeflash patent portfolio, so we've licensed each other. Thisallows each of us complete freedom in terms of developing productswithout worrying about infringing on each other's patents.Prophet: The issue the industry is wrestling with now is morein respect to CompactFlash. SanDisk has formed an associationto establish CompactFlash as a standard. Of course, some ofthe other suppliers in the industry-Intel and AMD-are doingtheir own standards. So we're going to have a proliferationof standards here for awhile. But within a few years' time,that will all be resolved because it's just too large a marketto have disparate standards.Chan: Just because we sign a cross-licensing agreement doesn'tmean that we're not going to compete with each other in themarketplace. We will still compete with Intel, and fundamentally,it will be our ATA solution vs. their non-ATA solution. That'swhere the battle lines will be drawn.Prophet: You have to be careful about standards, though. Todo something like a camera, you don't need ATAs. You coulddo something much simpler because you don't need all the overheadthat's required in software to be able to support it; justmemory. You don't need socket services, and card services andall these functions because it's not a computer.VB: But to take the information and load it into a personalcomputer...Prophet: Yes, then you need the ATA interface.Litchfield: That's what's nice about the SanDisk product.VB: Let's go back to some of the other emerging applicationsfor CompactFlash. What are some of the VAR applications foraudio recorders and pagers, for example?Litchfield: You might begin to see voice integration into picturesand information that's been gathered in the field. As voicerecognition comes along, the user can walk around and, insteadof having to write or mark or enter something on a handheldcomputer, he could talk to it. Think about the ability to buildin communication and to pick up voice and pictures and to sendthat information elsewhere.Those are the things VARs can look at doing. As each of thoseparts begins to be economically feasible for a vertical marketand they are economically feasible for business long beforethey are for consumer products-the user would be able to dothis all in one place at one time.Prophet: Just to give you a dramatic example, we've been doingsome research into flash and its applications. The insuranceindustry buys more file cabinets than any industry in the world.What's the problem? What they're doing is capturing images.A claims adjuster sees an automobile accident. He takes a pictureof the car. That has to be put into the file so that they haveevidence that this really happened. Then they have the billfrom the guy that did the repairs. All those things have tobe kept on file. That's a huge, huge imaging problem. Digitizingthat and capturing it in some electronic media is crucial.Controlling it and accessing it is the other part. The criticalelement is that camera and the flash memory. That is the key.VB: But that's what document imaging is all about. People cantake all that information now, scan it into their computersand store it on whatever it is they want to store it on-tapes,CD-ROMs, whatever.Litchfield: We were in imaging 10 years ago, and that was amarket that never quite came to where it should have. Partof the problem is the size of those files. It's the manualeffort that has to go into scanning that photo or documentand identifying it. But you can take a digitized picture, putit onto flash and move it off someplace else. It doesn't haveto be scanned, it's already there. No manual operation.VB: So what can CompactFlash do for the pager?Chan: With the pager, you have a really unique application.A regular flash card is too big for the pager. It's biggerthan the pager. But CompactFlash is an ideal size.The problem with pagers today is that if I want to reach you,I dial your pager number, enter the number that I'm at andsit by the phone until you call me. The nice thing about thisis that I'll be able to leave you a voicemail on the CompactFlashdisk. Then I can go about my business. When you get out ofyour meeting or whatever, you can listen to it. You can saveit or delete it. That will make pagers a lot more useful thanthey are today.Prophet: The other implication here is for the VAR. If resellersadd services and value to paging technology, they're openingup markets that traditionally haven't been touched.Litchfield: From a VAR's standpoint, that is what's key aboutall of this. All of a sudden, this technology has opened upan immense potential market that has never been touched.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Memory: RAM Realities For Resellers -- Rising prices, tightsupplies and shortages promise to make the memory market unstablefor the next several years, but there are ways to protect yourselfand your customersBy:Rick Cookn the 1930s, it became popular among a certain fashionable setto say, "A woman can never be too rich or too thin." In the'90s, it has become fashionable among computer users to say,"You can never have too much memory." Getting caught withoutenough RAM has caused VARs to say much less quotable things.That's because another industry saying-"chips always get faster,better and cheaper"-doesn't hold true for memory anymore."Memory prices are the same as they were a couple of years ago,"says Manouch Moshayedi, CEO of memory vendor Simple TechnologyInc. "Traditionally, the price has gone down." As a result,a 4-Mbyte memory chip that cost $14 a few years ago still costs$14, instead of dropping into the $4 to $5 range as it wouldhave if normal historical models had held.This situation probably won't change until the end of the decade,if then. No one expects a panic in the RAM market, but risingmemory prices, tight supplies and sporadic shortages are goingto be facts of life for the future."There's definitely more demand than supply," says Cheri KaplanSmith, director of technical products for Merisel. "There'sa delta [excess demand] of about 20 percent."Like everyone else, VARs have to adapt and plan ahead. Sue Telerico,product manager at Entex Information Systems, a Rye Brook,N.Y.-based systems integrator, says Entex is preparing fortight supplies.Part of the concern is Windows 95. The current RAM situationis strongly influenced by the release of Microsoft's new operatingsystem and the need to put at least 8 Mbytes of RAM in evena minimally equipped Win95 machine. Microsoft says you canrun Win95 with only 4 Mbytes of memory, but people who areusing the new OS say 8 Mbytes is about the practical minimumand that 16 Mbytes is much better.Because the Pentium processor is said to be the perfect platformfor Win95, the market for RAM used in Pentium systems, notablyEDO RAM (Extended-Out DRAM) for main memory and SRAM (staticRAM) used for cache, is especially affected. But that's notthe whole story. DRAM has been on allocation for nearly sixyears. Even when the Win95-induced bulge of DRAM moves throughthe pipeline, demand will still exceed supply."As we move to the end of 1996, we'll see the supply-demandratio change to something like 10 percent below demand," saysGary MacDonald, vice president of marketing for Kingston, amanufacturer of RAM modules. "That's probably what the marketwill declare typical or normal."As a practical matter, 10 percent to 20 percent shortages don'tmean a DRAM drought. They do mean you'll have to make RAM supplypart of your planning. You'll usually be able to find the RAMyou need, although you may have to call around to get it andthe prices might change quickly. The underlying problem issupply (See sidebar, "Supply-Side 'Dis'Economies"). Manufacturingof advanced chips of all kinds is in short supply and willprobably stay in short supply for at least the rest of thedecade.Another part of the problem is the proliferation of RAM types.It used to be that DRAM was DRAM, and that's all a VAR hadto worry about. Now there is DRAM for main memory, SRAM forcache, Video RAM for video subsystems and so on. Even DRAMis getting specialized, with EDO RAM, plus the different kindsof memory modules such as SIMMs and DIMMs, used to pack RAMtighter into systems. This means memory manufacturers haveto further subdivide memory capacity and suppliers have toput it in the right kinds of packages."The makers of PCs, laptops and workstations have thrown somany different things on the motherboard that you need a specifictype of memory applied to each machine," says Moshayedi. "Becauseof that, even if standard types of parts are not in short supply,you may still have a major problem."So what's a VAR to do? The first thing is to understand that,like it or not, you're a RAM player. You will be supplyingRAM as part of a solution sale. According to Dataquest Inc.,a researcher in San Jose, the average system shipped by vendorsin 1995 had slightly more than 7 Mbytes of RAM installed. Bythe time it reached the desktop, the average system had roughly15 Mbytes of RAM on board. By 1997, Dataquest predicts theaverage business PC will have approximately 24 Mbytes of RAMand will be shipped from the factory with 12."The PC OEMs have been shipping base unit configurations becausethey're so price-sensitive and because of memory allocations,"says Kingston's MacDonald. "Then they let the distributionchannel actually complete the fulfillment." The result is the"instant upgrade," where the VAR or dealer adds RAM beforethe system reaches the customer. "For the corporate accountreseller, the value-add is going to be building in the additionalDRAM and static RAM."You can't afford to burden your customers with sluggish systems.After all, less memory means slower computers. Plan your saleto include the extra RAM your customers will need and priceaccordingly. Depending on the economies of the situation (natureof the sale, market conditions and prices, kind of memory needed,time frame, availability of memory from the OEM, etc.), youmay want to order systems from the manufacturer with additionalRAM already installed, or add third-party RAM yourself. Thedecision will depend on the relative costs, product availabilityand the customer's requirements.One of the rather peculiar results of the RAM shortage is thatsystem makers can be cheaper than third-party suppliers forRAM. Manufacturers, especially big players such as Compaq andIBM, often get the best prices because they buy on long-termcontracts and in large quantities. Sometimes they pass thesavings on to VARs who order machines with extra memory.Then again, sometimes not. The manufacturers may want to usethat memory to pump out more basic systems and price theirmemory upgrades accordingly. Moshayedi advises checking price,supply and availability of a RAM part before writing a bidthat includes it. Usually a quick phone call to your suppliercan give you the information you need.Beyond supply, there are other considerations. First, make sureyou have the right kind of memory. This means not only theright kind of chips, but also the right modules. SIMMS (SingleIn-line Memory Modules) are still common, but they're beingreplaced by double-sided DIMMs (Dual In-line Memory Modules)in newer systems. This is a common source of confusion in orderingmemory. Make sure you know all the relevant specs (module type,bus width, kind of memory, speed) when you order memory. Don'tassume two products are equivalent.One way to be sure is to order by make and model of computerrather than by memory specification. Some companies make iteasy by providing extensive cross-referenced lists showingwhat memory products go with what computers. Companies suchas Kingston and Simple take this a step further by supplyingtheir customers with electronic catalogs that cross-referencetheir product lines with machines. If a part is especiallyhard to get, it can be worthwhile dealing with a vendor thatmakes its own memory modules. Often those companies can fabricatehard-to-find modules on short notice.Another caution: Be sure you can easily upgrade the memory inthe machines you sell. Having 16 Mbytes may be enough now,but in another couple of years your customer may want 32 oreven 64 Mbytes. Can you add the extra RAM to the existing motherboardsor will you have to do an expensive RAM swap or an even moreexpensive motherboard replacement?Long Memorieslearly, now is the time to build relationships with vendorsor distributors to make sure you can get the RAM you need."The key in this market is your relationships," Telerico says."You need to develop long-term relationships with memory providers.When these problems become extensive, it's your relationshipswith your suppliers that will carry you through."One way to do this is to leverage your business. "A VAR whois talking to a supplier on a daily basis can always get stablepricing," says Moshayedi. "When you're spreading yourself toothin and your numbers are down, no one thinks you're very important."At the same time, it's important to have more than one source."Having a sole supplier is not a good strategic position tobe in now," says Telerico. "I work with three or four primarysuppliers and a couple of secondaries."Besides Kingston, Simple Technology and PNY Electronics Inc.,VARs buy memory products from distributors such as Meriselor Ingram Micro. Wherever you get your memory, though, continuingrelationships are important.Tell your customers what you're up against in the RAM market.Although allocations have existed in the memory business forfive years, many customers are unaware of it. "We've set theexpectations with our customers based on the fact that theindustry is experiencing supply challenges," Telerico says."We either provide them with an alternative or inform themthere's an extended lead time. Generally, they stick with us."Don't promise more than you can supply. If you don't have thememory, or if it will be back-ordered, say so. Specify memoryprecisely in your bids and help your customers interpret thesignificance of those specifications. If the specificationsaren't complete, the customer could end up with slower, lesssatisfactory memory dragging down the performance of the system.Balance is the key to getting the best performance out of moderncomputers. This means you have to understand what each systemwill be used for and how it fits into your customer's overallarchitecture. Obviously, more is more when it comes to memory.But there is such a thing as too much memory, especially toomuch DRAM or expensive cache SRAM.Similarly, you must balance video memory against requirements.A graphics workstation needs a lot of video memory, while aserver can usually get by with minimal video memory and a desktopPC may only need 1 Mbyte on the video card.If you fully understand your customer's requirements, it's notdifficult to strike the right memory balance. The shortagewon't go away anytime soon, but it's only a problem if youlet it be one. If you maintain a good relationship with yoursuppliers and communicate with your customers, you'll minimizeyour memory problems.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Chip Storage: Supply-Side `Dis'EconomiesBy:Rick CookMemory products have been in short supply for some time. Theunderlying problem is that supplies of advanced semiconductorsof all sorts are tight, and there's no relief in sight. Demand,driven by an explosion of memory use in both computer and noncomputerproducts, is just too high for chip makers to keep up with.According to industry experts, it will take more than a dozenadvanced semiconductor factories opening every year for thenext decade just to keep up with the demand. "That's probablya minimum," says Brian Matas, an analyst with ICE, a Scottsdale,Ariz., semiconductor market research company.Intel's response to such industry forecasts was the buzz atthe last SEMICon/West show in San Francisco in July 1995: "Therearen't that many cement trucks in the world," an Intel spokesmansaid. Enough cement trucks, maybe. But the supplies of chipmaking equipment, designers, engineers, skilled constructionworkers and trained operators are definitely going to be stretchedto the limit to meet the demand.There is also the cost. In 1990, new chip factories cost anaverage of $1 billion each. Today the average is closer to$1.5 billion each, and by the end of the decade those fabswill be closer to $2 billion. No one can afford excess capacity,so fabs are planned to come on-line when needed.Finally, the semiconductor industry is becoming more highlyintegrated and problems anywhere in the world affect the marketquickly. When the power went off on the Malaysian island ofPenang earlier this year it had a nearly immediate effect onthe spot market where RAM is freely traded. A fire in a Japaneseplastics factory, an earthquake in Kobe all have trickle-downeffects on you.Experts predict a combination of steady-to-gently-rising pricesand spot shortages. At press time, DRAM supplies were good,but SRAM-used as cache memory-was in short supply. By the timeyou read this, SRAM should have caught up to the demand, butsomething else may likely be tight.Planning critical memory needs as far ahead as you can willsave you loads of frustration. Forecasting demand and balancingthat with the advantages of just-in-time purchasing isn't easy,but if having memory on hand is crucial to your customer relations,it may be necessary for a while longer.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Net Gain from Networked CD-ROMs -- The growing need to accesscorporaate data on CD-ROMs opens doors for network-savvy VARsBy:Rick CookCD-ROMs are going corporate. The need to network them meanssales for you-if you can do the job. "It's a booming market,"says Richard Krueger, vice president of marketing for MeridianData Inc., a maker of networkable CD-ROM products. "It's anarea that's really starting to take off."The main reason networking CD-ROMs is becoming such big businessis the proliferation of data that is stored on and read fromdisks. Databases, manuals, new application software, images,regulations, legal decisions and other business-critical informationare being published on CD-ROMs. Increasingly, more organizationsneed to make that data available to more of their employees.CD-ROM-savvy VARs installing these optical systems on theirclients' networks are getting in on a growing market. "We'reseeing quite a bit of it," says Ed Amash, director of imagingsystems at Accudata Systems Inc., a VAR in Houston. Marketsize is relative, of course. Networked CD-ROMs will probablyalways be small potatoes compared with desktop CD-ROMs. "Thereare probably 53 million CD-ROM drives installed [to date],"Meridian's Krueger says. "But only a small proportion of thoseare going into corporate LANs."Still, a small proportion of a 53-million unit business thatdoubled in the past year alone is quite a bit of business.Network installations are especially attractive to VARs becausethere is more chance to add value. A desktop CD-ROM drive canbe bought from a superstore retailer for $200 or less and installationis relatively straightforward. Networking CD-ROM drives takesfar more expertise and is much more likely to be VAR territory.Fundamentally, companies put CD-ROM drives on their networksfor two reasons: to reduce costs and/or to increase security.The security issue is simple: CD-ROMs are easy to slip intoa pocket or purse. Given the cost of the information, it isworth safeguarding the disks by keeping them in a central locationwhere they can be shared, but not so easily removed.The cost-savings issue is a bit more intricate. Some companiessave money by networking CD-ROMs the same way they save moneyby networking printers. Hardware costs can be kept lower whenusers share resources. But with CD-ROM drives so inexpensive,it's hard to justify the expense of a jukebox or bank of CDROM drives just on hardware savings alone.Software savings are usually more important because they canbe much larger. Many commercial databases are very expensive.Something as simple as a year's worth of newspaper back issuescan cost $800 annually. And many of the more specialized databases,such as court decisions, can run thousands or tens of thousandsof dollars per year per copy. As a result, sharing those databasesis the only logical way to go.Either Way, It's a WinnerRegardless of which features convince your customers to signon the dotted line, networking CD-ROMs is a classic value-addsale. To be successful, a VAR has to know the technology thoroughlyand understand what the customer needs. "You can't simply callup your distributor and say, 'I want Toshiba drives,'" saysMichael Raab, president of Optical Laser Inc., a HuntingtonBeach, Calif., distributor of optical storage products. "NetworkedCD-ROMs are still a solution sale. The important thing is toselect the right solution."Networking a CD-ROM system can be done a number of differentways. Raab reels off the possibilities: "You can hook up tothe network file server, use a dedicated PC as a CD-ROM serveror you can do a direct LAN attachment." Some systems use Terminateand Stay Residents (TSRs), some use NetWare Loadable Modules(NLMs), while others use LAN attachment units. "Those methodsmay seem like small differences to the salesperson, but tothe user they can make a big difference."Finding Your Marketlthough networked CD-ROMs are usually thought of as a verticalmarket product, they are used in so many vertical markets thatthey are becoming almost universal. Every market that needsto access a lot of information is increasing its use of CDROMs. They're familiar, affordable and accessible. Users inlaw offices, medical offices, imaging businesses, libraries,publishing, wholesale and retailers with catalogs are hot onthe CD-ROM trail. The question isn't so much which marketsuse CD-ROMs as it is which ones don't. Unlike some kinds ofhardware, selling networked CD-ROMs usually doesn't involvedemonstrating the need to the customer. "The sale usually isn'tdriven by you," says Amash, "It's driven by their understandingof the availability of published data."One of the most important decisions a VAR has to make is thekind of CD-ROM reader the client's network needs. A singleCD-ROM drive is by far the least expensive solution-if it willwork. The problem is that the client is either limited to usinga single disk or someone has to change disks manually. Thismay be acceptable if the primary use of CD-ROMs is an occasionalsoftware upgrade or the like, but most network installationsneed more than one drive.Jukeboxes provide access to many different disks, but not allat once. A stack of drives is generally more expensive, butit keeps more of the data available all the time. "A jukeboxgives you access to a large number of disks for relativelyfew readers," says David Butler, manager of sales and marketingfor Plextor, a maker of CD-ROM drives in Santa Clara, Calif."That's a good solution if you have a range of [CD-ROM disks]that need to be accessed, but it's not for a whole lot of peoplewho need access to the information at once."Applications for jukeboxes might include historical information,blueprints and financial records. A CD-ROM stacker, or "tower,"is better suited to applications where many people need thesame information on a recurring basis. It boils down to needingto access information online vs. near-line."If data availability is critical, then you need a tower," saysAmash. "But if data availability is random and not always missioncritical, then a jukebox would be the way to go."Butler points out that the choice is not either/or. "Both needsexist and both can exist in the same organization at the sametime. It makes sense for the VAR to work with the IS managerto identify what the organization is trying to accomplish andto mix and match the right products to do the job."Whether you choose a jukebox or tower, reliability and availabilityare important factors for networked CD-ROM systems. NetworkCD-ROM drives typically work much harder than their desktopcounterparts. That makes it worth paying extra for higher-qualityand more reliable drives. If a desktop CD-ROM drive fails,one user is inconvenienced. If it's a networked CD-ROM drive,everyone may be locked out from critical information. Punditssay the speed of the drive doesn't seem to affect the reliabilityand there are a range of prices in every speed category.Like RAID systems, some companies, including Plextor, now offerCD-ROM towers with hot-swappable drives and power supplies.A network sale should probably include at least one shelf spareso the customer can get the system back on track quickly.VARs also can add value by selling a CD-Recordable (CD-R) systemas part of their packages. Customers who need jukeboxes canoften benefit from keeping data produced in-house on CD-ROMsas well. With the dropping cost of CD-R drives and the growingease of use of the software, this option makes sense for manycompanies today. As the VAR implementing such a solution, youmust be sensitive to more than just the hardware and softwareneeds of your clients, though. Another important considerationis the corporate culture-specifically the degree of centralizationrequired. Some companies prefer to have their CD-ROM drivescentralized under the MIS department. Others want the drives,and the control, in the individual departments or even theworkgroups that are actually using the information.One reason MIS needs to stay involved is the drive letter dilemma Multiple CD-ROMs on a network can "eat" drive letters. "It'sunfortunate that the Novell and Windows paradigms require aone-to-one correspondence between a drive letter and a peripheraldevice like a CD-ROM drive," says Meridian's Krueger. "If you'rein a small- to medium-sized company, your users almost immediatelyrun out of drive letters."Often, NetWare and Windows NT associate a drive letter witha device; in a networked environment, that means you're likelyto run out of drive letters long before you run out of devices.There are several ways around this problem, all of varyingexpense and degree of difficulty. Most of them involve softwareadd-ons that let the system treat multiple CD-ROM drives asa single device.Two examples: Meridian Data offers versions of its CD-Net productsas standalone software, as a subsystem to attach to a PC onthe network or as a complete CD-ROM server built into a tower.Stac Inc.'s new CD-QuickShare compresses the contents of theCD-ROMs onto hard disks for quicker access. In both cases,many CD-ROMs appear to the network as a single virtual CD-ROMdrive.Despite those considerations, networking CD-ROMs is not rocketscience. "It's not a no-brainer, but it doesn't require a systemsdesign engineer," says Amash. "It's just a matter of understandingthe needs, the growth direction of the customer and a coupleof cultural issues to get a feel for what is required."Quick ScanMeridian Data Inc. Scotts Valley, Calif. (800) 767-2537, www.meridiandata.comOptical Laser Inc. Huntington Beach, Calif. (800) 795-2381,arseniob@opticallaser.comPlextor Corp. Santa Clara, Calif. (800) 475-3986Stac Inc. San Diego, Calif. (619) 794-4300, www.stac.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Case Study: Driving CD-ROM Sales -- VAR's slick system helps oil companiesaccess information onlineBy:Rick CookOne of the good things about selling networked CD-ROM solutionsis that the customer often comes looking for you. Take Ed Amashof Accudata Systems Inc., a VAR in Houston who cites his company'sexperience with a large oil company it first made contact withat a seminar Accudata hosted on CD-ROMs on the network. "Theycame up to us afterward and said IBM was publishing all themanuals for their mainframes on CD-ROMs and they wanted theirtechnical people to have access to all those CDs online," Amashrecalls.The initial contact quickly led to the qualifying session thatnarrowed down the oil company's exact needs. Although therewere only 11 CD-ROMs in the set, the company wanted room forexpansion. After discussing the company's requirements, Accudataproposed a two-unit tower system with 14 drives in each towerusing Meridian Data's Model 314 CD-ROM servers. By using twoservers, the customer got slightly better performance and,more importantly, redundancy.Installing the CD-ROMs and associated software was handled byIBM after Accudata had integrated the servers. Accudata peoplestood by during the installation to iron out any problems thatmight have arisen. The sale took roughly six months to complete,but Amash says some are done in as little as two weeks so theclient can try out the software within the publisher's freetrial period. In general, he says, sales cycles for networkedCD-ROMs run three to six months.One of the differences in CD-ROM sales is that the real productis information, not hardware or software. "Generally, yourcustomer is someone who's looking for something to run theCD-ROM titles," Amash says. "That's what drives the sale."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Tomorrow's CD-ROM -- High-density formats will open up new usesBy:Rick CookDespite its greatness today, tomorrow's CD-ROM will be better.Two separate camps, which had independently been developinga new high-density CD-ROM format, have reached an agreementfor a new standard called Micro UDF, more commonly known asdigital video disk, or DVD. The DVD standard is comprised offour subsets-one for the entertainment industry and three forcomputers. Although the first introductions in 1996 will probablybe for home video players, the technology and format will besimilar for the data storage products that follow.The first computer DVD phase will be a read-only version thatoffers roughly 4.7 Gbytes on a single layer of the disk. "Thesize of software is going up dramatically, and the sizes ofthe databases distributed on CDs are growing," says Ray Freeman,facilitator for the Optical Storage Technology Associationand president of Freeman Associates, a market researcher inSanta Barbara, Calif. "Multimedia presentations will take upa tremendous amount of space." Future versions of the CD-ROMdisk will have multiple layers, and the disks will eventuallybe double-sided and multilayered.The second phase will allow users to record their own CDs andread them on the same drive. The third phase will offer recordableand erasable technologies in one, ultimately reaching a capacityof 17 Gbytes. All three phases will be backward-read compatibleto allow them to read disks recorded today.Ease of use and the addition of recording and erasing operationswill open new doors for CD-ROM usage. The easier a technologyis to use, the more commonplace it tends to become. And themore commonplace, the more likely DVD will be to appear onnetworks.CDs are going to be a fact of network life for a long time tocome. If you're equipped to network CDs effectively, you'llhave an advantage with your clients over VARs who don't holdthat expertise-no matter how the technology evolves.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Real-World Challenges -- From dealing with substance abuse topaying taxes, it's all part of the manager's jobJanuary is an important time in a business. It's when you putdirectives in place in preparation for the new year's challenges.A critical time because your groundwork affects your standingat year's end.In our first installment of Executive Challenge (page 149),an enlightened VAR says it best: "Prepare now because it canbe devastating when you don't know what to do." He's talkingabout firing an employee for drug abuse. The ordeal took atremendous toll on his company. It could have been much easierhad he been prepared.Evaluating vendors' channel programs is also important. ProgramProfiles (page 152) highlights Computer Associates, Attachmateand Maxoptix Corp.'s programs. In Distribution (page 156),there's important information about sales tax. Many distributorsare getting tough on VARs who aren't collecting tax on interstatesales. And just in time for tax season, we're putting you tothe test with our VARBiz Quiz (page 152) on income tax returns.With the challenges also comes great promise. In the end itwill be your foundation that determines your outcome.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Executive Challenge: The Hidden Problem -- Develop a policy to fight substance abuseBy:Deidra-Ann ParrishWe don't tolerate it in our politics, in our schools or evenin athletics, so why tolerate substance abuse in the workplace?In a Gallup Organization study, employers say they considerdrug abuse a "very serious" problem. Yet nearly 75 percentof that group have no specific policy for dealing with substanceabuse in their own companies.The reason? "It's one of those things that you cross your fingersand close your eyes to, hoping it won't come back to hauntyou," says John (not his real name), president and founderof a multimillion-dollar software development company. RecentlyJohn had to tackle his biggest challenge yet: firing a longtimecolleague-we'll call him Dave-with a substance abuse problem."Dave was a heavy drinker at trade shows and after hours," saysJohn. "But no one made a big deal about it because we all hada drink or two at events like that."Dave, however, drank to excess. Politely ignoring his slurredspeech and off-handed remarks became routine for his colleagues.After late nights at out-of-town events, his absence at morningmeetings wasn't unexpected nor reprimanded.In retrospect, John says, "We felt what he did during off-hourswas none of our business as long as he got his work done."But the company's tolerance may have been the worst solution.Dave's drinking got worse. Monday morning hangovers lastedmost of the week. Some suspected that his habit may have graduatedto cocaine use. And eventually, Dave's work suffered.The president finally confronted Dave about his declining performance,and he confessed his problem with drugs and alcohol. That waslucky for everyone because John had no idea how to handle theproblem had Dave denied it.John should have had a companywide policy on drug use from thestart. But his dilemma was now past that, so he did what mostsmall to midsize companies do: He counseled Dave himself, gavehim several leaves of absence and 101 chances to save his job.John's reaction was typical of managers at smaller companieswith no official policy for employee substance abuse, saysBruce Wilkinson, president of Workplace Consultants Inc., NewOrleans. But, he adds, it's a mistake for any company to getdirectly involved. "It's the employer's responsibility to supportand document the condition, not to diagnose or treat it."Dave's drug habit was costing him $100 a day by the time heconfessed. After a difficult year, he was finally let go. Johnand his staff immediately began discussing options for implementinga company substance abuse program.In tackling this prickly subject, first determine what yourposition will be on substance abuse. Consider what measuresyou'll use to ensure a drug-free workplace and what penaltiesyou'll impose for offenders.Since the laws on employee drug testing vary by state-it's legalin all states and a few have made it mandatory-you'll generallyhave the freedom to decide what action jibes with your corporateculture. There are serious considerations on both sides ofthe issue.In a survey of drug users who called the (800) COCAINE hotlineat Fair Oaks Hospital, Summit, N.J., 75 percent used drugsat work; of that group, 64 percent said drugs adversely affectedjob performance and 44 percent sold drugs to other employees.Further, a Gallup survey of more than 1,000 U.S. employees shows97 percent of respondents consider workplace drug testing appropriateunder certain circumstances, i.e., when sufficient evidencewarrants suspicion of drug use.A comparison of substance abusers vs. nonabusers revealed abuserswere absent from work two and a half times more than nonusers;productivity of abusers was 25 percent to 33 percent lower;abusers' off-the-job accidents were four to six times greater;and their claims for worker compensation were three times greater.The cost of substance abuse to the collective business communityis estimated to be between $60 billion and $100 billion a year.But with drug testing comes some problems. Certain methods areintrusive and physically uncomfortable. Furthermore, some ofthe most common methods of testing have been known to producefalse positives: The most reliable drug tests are typicallyexpensive, ranging from $75 to $200 per test.In addition, a policy of random or unfair drug testing can createdissension among employees. In such instances, there's riskof legal battles. In John's company, applicants are now requiredto take a drug test, but testing is not ongoing. "The initialtest would send a strong enough message to our employees."Develop A Plan of ActionOnce you've handled the drug testing issue, determine what actionyour company will take if employees violate the drug policy.Employers are becoming more enlightened about addiction, thereforemany institute supportive programs that allow employees toseek professional counseling. Be clear on the conditions withthis option: set a time limit; indicate the level of pay youwill provide during the counseling period; and stipulate whatongoing procedures you will use to monitor compliance withpolicies. You also need to research health insurance options.Be careful to design policies that will stand up in the faceof legal scrutiny. Joseph Ortego, a commercial litigator withRivkin, Radler & Kremer, Uniondale, N.Y., says your policyshould state that "action will be sought only after there isevidence of reasonable probability of drug abuse." For example excessive absenteeism, erratic behavior, decline in performanceand independently corroborated reports from reliable sources.The policies must apply to everyone equally-including yourself.In John's company, a group of 10 employees formed a task forceto monitor adherence to the new policies, plan drug awarenessprograms and resolve conflicts. Some employees were put offby the new focus on drug abuse prevention."I had to explain that this isn't about singling anyone outto punish them," John says. "It's about maintaining standardsand protecting our workplace. In the long run, this allowsus to be more focused and more profitable."It wasn't an easy transition. As in many reseller companies,his employees are close-knit. Many were on board when he foundedthe company. John didn't want to upset that dynamic.For more than two years, Dave's personal battle was affectingthe entire company, John says. It had become a destructivepresence: "It was the single toughest thing my company hasbeen through." Now that the dust is settling, he feels it wasbest that it happened."We were closing our eyes to real-world issues, and it bit usright in the butts. For people who have never experienced thissort of thing, I'd advise them to prepare now, because it canbe devastating if you don't know what to do."Contact Deidra-Ann Parrish at (516) 733-8531; Internet, dparrish@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1VAR Deals: Trio's In the ArmyBy:Krista OstertagWhen word's out that the U.S. Army is looking for a solution,the bids come marching in. This time TRW, a Midwest City, Okla.,VAR, Target Technologies Inc. and AT&T joined efforts on whatwill be a $11.4 million, five-year contract providing desktopvideoconferencing for all U.S. defense departments. TRW demonstratedseven basic configurations, including three point-to-pointsystems; POTS, the LAN and ISDN versions; as well as multipointsystems. TRW offered the Army a range of technology, includingTarget's C-Phone technology and components from AT&T, Inteland PictureTel.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1VAR Deals: COLD Cola ComingBy:Krista OstertagWhat more appropriate document imaging solution for Coca ColaEnterprises than a COLD system? Combined Computer ResourcesInc. (CCR), Dallas, won the $1 million-plus contract for theComputer Output to Laser Disk system. CCR will perform batchprocessing of invoices, moving them from AS/400s to COLD systems,to be installed in 38 locations. Coca Cola estimates its internalreturn on investment during a five-year period will be morethan 250 percent.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Customer Speak: What I Want In a VARBy:Karen BalchOdwalla Inc., a juice maker in Half Moon Bay, Calif., knowshow to squeeze out a profit. But Dennis Barr, office systemsmanager, says that with only a modest group of MIS people inhouse, Odwalla relies on its VAR relationships. Here's whatmakes them work.VARBusiness: How do you choose a VAR?Barr: First, I have several companies respond to RFPs. Thatway, I can make an apples-to-apples comparison. Then I relyon the word of someone who has used another company, becausethat's a firsthand account of how they've performed. That'sthe end product-their performance.VB: What makes a good VAR?Barr: Responsiveness in support issues would be number one.When I call, are they there, or do they get back to me in areasonable time? I need to have someone I can talk to in lessthan half an hour. Support, though, is slightly different.[It's important that the person] can answer my questions. Ananswer to a problem might be good in one environment but notanother.I need to know I can call 24 hours a day, seven days a weekand get someone who can give me answers. I don't want themcalling me all the time. That can be overbearing. But I'd likethem to check in periodically. I've requested that my two engineersat Edge [Information Systems, Odwalla's VAR in San Jose] openan account on my e-mail so I can send them messages, and theycheck it daily. That does a lot for me. If I'm having a problem,they'll know it. Finally, I like information from VARs thattheir companies are stable. If one of my engineers gives notice,I'd like the VAR to not only call me and let me know that I'mlosing one of my support engineers, but also to assure me thatI have another one being brought up to speed.If you have questions to ask end users, contact Karen Balch,(714) 223-3614; Internet, kbalch@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Program Profiles: CA's Varsity Program Gives Each Player a Fair TurnBy:Mara LenuzzaComputer Associates' new VARsity program allows VARs from anyof its existing channel programs to obtain support and expertiseon any of its client-server software products.The channel programs are segmented by product function: systemsmanagement, database and application development and financialmanagement. For the most part, the programs had operated independentlyfrom each other and offered varied services. Now VARs can applymarket development funds across the different programs, participatein trade shows free of charge and access CA's nine testingand demo centers nationwide.The program makes it affordable for VARs to cross over intonew or unfamiliar product categories; the cost of enrollmentfor any one product-specific program is $2,500. VARsity letsyou join a second program at a 50 percent discount. For subsequentprograms, the fee is waived altogether.Another change the software giant implemented is the additionof the Premier program status. The new level supersedes theexisting silver, gold and platinum levels. "Premier partnerswill most likely be platinum VARs who are willing to make asignificant financial commitment to us," says Mark Marron,senior vice president of channel sales.Premier VARs have exclusive access to CA's video productionstudio, marketing team and database. In addition, they receiveperks such as product rebates, VARsity jackets and chancesto win tickets to NBA, NFL and baseball events.The company, in Islandia, N.Y., is recruiting VARs for the newprogram. Existing resellers will automatically be signed onas VARsity players.For more information, contact Marron at (516) 342-5224.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Program Profiles: Attachmate Ramps Up BusinessBy:Mara LenuzzaAttachmate Corp. is launching the Remote Access Medallion ProgramRAMP-which it hopes will attract VARs currently reselling remoteaccess products who want to add the Remote LAN Node (RLN) softwaresuite to their software lineups.This is an overhaul of what was Digital Communications AssociatesInc.'s VAR program before the company's January 1995 mergerwith Attachmate. Now under the Attachmate name, the $390 millionsoftware vendor has made some noteworthy changes. The vendornow gives a free 8-port product to VARs who complete its $900training course. Previously, VARs received free training butwere given only two-port products.In addition, to maintain the integrity of its VAR channel, Attachmatewill more strictly enforce the $40,000 annual volume commitment.Attachmate has assigned territory sales engineers to answerquestions solely about the RLN suite. Product executives providejoint sales calls and lead dissemination, and channel accountexecutives are available via phone to take literature requestsand to assist with the market development funds program.Attachmate's efforts for the RLN division mostly focus on theVAR channel. "We sell direct only if it will provide pure convenienceto the end user," says Ana Quintana, channel marketing managerfor RLN, Alpharetta, Ga. Roughly 80 percent of RLN sales gothrough the channel.Quintana says she's looking for VARs that have annual salesupward of $5 million, have 10 or more employees, are Novellcertified and sell into Fortune 1000 companies. For additionalinformation, contact her at (770) 442-4220.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Program Profiles: Maxoptix Pops the Question To Optical Storage VARsBy:Mara LenuzzaAfter a 10-year courtship with VARs, Maxoptix Corp., Fremont,Calif., now has its first reseller program for network VARsand systems integrators, the Maxoptix Valued Partner (MVP)Program. The vendor wants to sign 1,000 U.S. VARs to sell itsAX and PX storage solutions.MVP members will get vendor support through a sales program,a marketing program and an authorized service center. The salesprogram gives partners exclusive access to the AX and PX linesand provides on-site sales training, a sales lead program andan assigned account manager to help with joint sales calls.The marketing program gives members a 50 percent discount ondemo equipment. They also get development funds, access toevaluation products and a dedicated in-house marketing teamto help with seminars, trade shows and other efforts. Partnerswho invest in certification will benefit from Maxoptix's authorizedservice center.For more information, call Mitch Cipriano at (510) 353-9700,ext. 221.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Distribution: Financial Planning -- Taxing duties and coping with mergersBy:Karen BalchUnpaid Taxes, Increased Margin?Having distributors drop ship directly to your customers' locationscan save on shipping costs. But if you're not collecting taxeson those sales, you may be incurring a liability.Even if you are collecting the taxes, some of your competitorsother VARs and mail-order houses-may not be. As a result, youmay be losing sales based on a perceived cost delta. But theComputing Technology Industry Association (CompTIA), Lombard,Ill., is lobbying for fairness.In early 1994, CompTIA supported a bill called the Tax Fairnessfor Main Street Business Act. The bill called for any mailorder business doing more than $3 million in annual sales orwith sales into any given state that exceed $100,000 to remitsales taxes to the state of the products' final destinations.Passage of the bill would have narrowed the price gap somemail-order houses currently thrive on. Plus, it would haveprovided a standard for collecting those taxes.The bill failed. But CompTIA plans to support a reintroductionof the bill soon. Meanwhile, if you don't have a valid resellercertificate for the state of destinations, distributors suchas Hall-Mark are passing the taxes on to you. As a nationaldistributor, that's a necessity; as a VAR, it's good business.Subsidiary Sales: Good and Bad NewsWhat is it with distributors selling off their subsidiarieslately? MicroAge recently sold Kelly Micro Systems, its memorysubsidiary, to Simple Technology, a memory manufacturer. LastJuly, Western Micro Technology sold its semiconductor businessto Reptron Electronics. The sales beg the question: Why buysubsidiaries such as those in the first place?The distributors likely perceived a synergy between their businessesand the subsidiaries they purchased, says Allan Adler, chairmanand CEO of MSI Channel Research & Consulting, Seattle. KellyMicro is a memory company and MicroAge sells many computers.Memory is often in short supply, so the purchase seemed logical.But, in the memory market, MicroAge couldn't compete with biggerplayers such as Kingston and Simple. It just wasn't MicroAge'score competency to be a memory maker. As a result, MicroAgehas refocused its efforts on doing what it does best.The industry trend toward selling off such subsidiaries, then,may be due to two factors: competition and economics. Distributorsand aggregators can't afford to neglect their core competencies.Given that "distributors haven't been busting the profit envelopelately," as Adler says, selling businesses that aren't coreis an ideal way to generate capital.That proved true for Western Micro. The sale of Western Micro'ssemiconductor business helped pave the way for its own expansionand distributor acquisitions. But money was not the drivingfactor in the sale of Kelly Micro, according to Wes Richards,president of MicroAge Channel Services. MicroAge wants to continueto grow its VAR base, and Richards says that requires a refocusingof efforts and a shift to a new training and education-orientedparadigm that will come about this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Heads Up: Sales Cycle Is As Sales Cycle DoesBy:Deidra-Ann ParishIn VARBusiness' State of the VAR Market survey, VARs definedthe length of their sales cycles. Contrary to popular theorythat shorter sales cycles are best, profiles of VARs with cyclesof one month or less and those with cycles of six months ormore show each can be successful.despite the difference in selling prices and revenue, both groupsrealize profits. It's apparent that the two business models'sales strategies complement their sales cycles so each attainshealthy profits.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Industry Watch: Revenge of the Nerds -- Despite bad press, CTOs have becomethe darlings of our industryBy:T.C. DoyleWhich industry terms make your skin crawl? That's one questionwe asked in our annual State of the VAR Market survey. Whilemost of that data was published in our Dec. 15 issue, the answerto this provocative question was not. "MIPS" is an unpopularterm, which one VAR defined as "Meaningless Indicator of ProcessorSpeed." Others said they dislike "GUI." Sounds too much likethe stuff that sticks to the floor of the local cinema, theysaid.But we've found that what really peeves VARs is the term "computergeek." The legendary success of nerd icons Bill Gates, SteveCase and Marc Andreessen has given rise to the stereotypicalcomputer nerd. But not without good reason.Though they might pay less attention to Donna Karan's latestready-to-wear collection and log fewer aerobic hours on StairMasters,the bonafide computer geeks working at VAR businesses havebecome the darlings of an industry. Whereas vendors once spentvast sums courting VAR business owners and sales personnel,many are now making a direct appeal to the VAR's chief technologist,more often than not the "computer geek" in residence."Within a VAR organization, you can generally identify threeconstituents: the VAR business owner, the national sales managerand the chief technologist," explains John Neilson, vice presidentof the organizational business unit at Microsoft. "In pastyears, everyone thought the best way to get a VAR behind yourproducts was by convincing the business owner that you hadthe solutions he or she needed," he says. "Or you might havetried to appeal to the sales manager with a variety of financialincentives that speak his or her language. But because solutionshave become more complex, the need to rethink this approachhas become apparent."What Neilson and others have identified is a phenomenon thatis influencing how vendors and distributors recruit, trainand provide financial assistance to VARs. Business owners are,at heart, pragmatists who will drive their organizations asbusiness trends and opportunities dictate, while sales managerswill follow money trails and sell whatever makes those cashregisters ring. Increasingly, they both are guided by chieftechnologists who introduce their colleagues to new technologiesand products while shielding them from the potential harm ofothers."We're not out there training the owners [of those resellers],"says Sun Microsystems chief executive Scott McNealy. "We'reout there training the technologists, the people who are onthe streets in front of the customer. Those are the ones we'vegot to get excited about and competent on our technology."The sales engineers, the field engineers and the technologistsare even more important than the sales reps, he adds. "Thesalespeople who are out there making the sale are always lookingto their engineers, their technical support people, saying'This is right? We can handle this, right?' They need someonewith credibility who can walk in and say 'Yes, we can solvethat problem.'Ian Bonner, vice president of global channels marketing forIBM Software, is another channel executive who is spendingmore time trying to appeal to chief technology officers. Withoutthe CTOs' support, IBM's BESTeam VAR program "would not befiring on all cylinders," Bonner says.Bonner offers advice on how to woo the individual who can makea difference. "Step one [in recruiting] is getting the businessowner to say, 'I'm prepared to look at the IBM BESTeam andsoftware products.' Step two is to get the director of salesto understand the potential that IBM software products offerhim in making his numbers and achieving his revenue targets,"he says. "None of those steps can happen, however, until thetechnical person within the organization feels comfortableabout making that sales call, about installing the product,about being able to generate service revenue from the installationof the products, about supporting the products and about thecombination of the products to provide a solution."Because vendors are catching on to the influence chief technologistsnow wield, more CTOs are turning up at restaurants across theUnited States-the pampered guests of those with products topush. Vendors are keenly aware of whose bread they're buttering.Ironically, if there is one thing the stereotypical computertechnologist craves less than lunch with strangers, it is probablya business title that glorifies what he or she does for a living.Most technologists are known for the long hours they spendtroubleshooting systems or testing software, not the time theyspend trying to glamorize their titles. Hence, vendors arealready lamenting that they are having trouble identifyingwho within a VAR organization is the resident chief technologist.Is it the head service technician? Is it the labs' generalmanager or the vice president of systems? It can be all three.Regardless of their titles, those individuals have become the"go-to" people for 1996.Contact T.C. Doyle with your opinions at (801) 649-0979; Internet,tcdoyle@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Taking Care Of Business: Apart From the Crowd -- To stand out you need a unique selling propositionBy:George ColomboThe Question:How can my company really distinguish itself?The Answer:I've been working with resellers of all types for almost 12years. In that time, literally every reseller with whom I'veconsulted-and there have been thousands-has claimed to be aprovider of superior service and support. Not only is it impossiblefor everyone in the business to provide superior service andsupport, but also, as far as your customers are concerned,this claim is meaningless.Saying you offer superior service makes no significant impressionon customers. "Superiority" in this context does nothing todifferentiate your business from any other.If you want to make an impression, formulate what marketingpeople refer to as a unique selling proposition (USP). Createa concise statement detailing why a customer should buy fromyou instead of your competitors.First, your USP should focus on a single aspect of your businessthat is unique in your marketplace. Second, it should targeta theme that's important to your customer. Finally, your USPshould be as specific as possible.Perhaps the classic example of a USP is the one upon which TomMonaghan built the Domino's Pizza empire: "Fresh, hot pizzadelivered in 30 minutes or less, guaranteed." It satisfieseach USP criterion. A simple, concise statement that focuseson a single element of the business to the exclusion of allothers.While there is clearly a vast difference between deliveringhigh-tech solutions and delivering hot pizza, the principleis the same. So are the benefits. Spend some time evaluatingyour company's function, and you'll be able to devise yourown USP.In 50 words or less, (1) highlight one unique characteristicof your business; (2) address an issue important to your customers;and (3) do this in a way that is specific. If your USP meetsthose criteria, you will find that the rest of your marketingefforts will flow from it easily.I'd love to see what you come up with. Send me your USP. Perhapswe will feature some of the best examples in this column. Goodluck.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Monitor MiningCTX International has introduced The DiamondTron 17XA, a highperformance monitor, as part of its Expert Series line. TheDiamondTron 17XA is a 17-inch monitor that combines a flat,square-cornered display screen with a shorter tube neck. Themonitor is designed to create a compact enclosure without distortion.An electron gun and 0.25-mm aperture grill mask deliver thefocus from center to corner. The DiamondTron supports Macintoshresolutions of up to 1,152 x 780 at 75 Hz and PC resolutionsmaxing at 1,600 x 1,200 with refresh rates up to 160 Hz.Highlights: The DiamondTron is compatible with SUN and SPARC workstations. The CTX On-Screen-Display lets the user manipulate image andcolor characteristics with the touch of a button. Thirty digitalcontrols allow the user to work with the entire screen areawhile using color-matching capabilities. The Super Star CTX Power Management System reduces power consumptionto less than 5 watts when idle. That complies with EPA EnergyStar guidelines and ISO 9241-3 requirements.Available: Immediately, through authorized distributorsList Price: $1,199Vendor: CTX International, Walnut, Calif. (800) 888-2012Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Doc Management With the Greatest of EasePrimax Electronics' PaperEASE is a document management systemincorporating a user interface that closely resembles a standardoffice setting. Users can fax, photocopy and e-mail by scanningdocuments in black-and-white or grayscale (resolution of 100dpi to 400 dpi) between 2 inches x 3 inches and 8.5 inchesx 24 inches through the sheetfeeder and into the managementsystem. PaperEASE supports drag-and-drop capabilities, andcomes packaged with Xerox's Textbridge OCR software. Requirementsinclude an IBM-compatible PC with a 386 or higher microprocessor,4 Mbytes of RAM (8 Mbytes or more is recommended), MicrosoftWindows 3.1 or Windows 95 operating system and a parallel printerport.Highlights: PaperEASE has a document archiving and retrieval system. The system supports Microsoft's Word, Excel and Access; Lotus'WordPro, cc:Mail and 1,2,3; and Aldus' Pagemaker programs. Users can enlarge, reduce, crop, lighten and darken scannedimages from within the document manager.Available: Immediately, through authorized distributorsList Price: $249Vendor: Primax Electronics, Sunnyvale, Calif. (408) 522-1200Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1It's Time For An UpdateProject Updater by Time Line Solutions Corp. is a Windows 95compatible client-server workgroup application that acts asa storage vault for data within Time Line 6 (and higher) forWindows and Microsoft Project 4. The Project Updater serveris designed to automate project updating and status reportingin a multiuser environment with a team manager in control ofproject updates and information. An updating section allowsusers to track effort or costs for specific assignments andcommunicates updates directly to the project manager's system.E-mail can be sent directly to any user and attachments madein various screen views can be included elsewhere.Highlights: Project information resides in a database with other companydata to allow multiproject summary and detail reporting. A single interface with a calendar format displays each user'sassigned tasks. The transaction-based system stores user updates with timephased history.Available: ImmediatelyList Price: $9,995 for database server with three-user licenseVendor: Time Line Solutions Corp., Novato, Calif. (800) 222TLSCBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1PentiumPower From A to Z-NoteBy:Wendy SisselmanThe Z-NOTE family of Pentium notebooks from Zenith Data Systemsincludes a high-end Z-NOTE GT and a midrange Z-NOTE MX. TheZ-NOTE GT supports full-motion, full-screen video, Sound Blastercompatible audio and an optional battery-powered MPEG videoplayback card. It's configured with an 11.3-inch SVGA TFT display,a 64-bit Mobile Pentium 75-MHz or 90-MHz processor, an 810Mbyte or a 1.3-Gbyte EIDE hard disk drive and 8 Mbytes of RAMthat is expandable to 40 Mbytes. The product also featuresPCI local bus architecture, 256-Kbyte secondary cache, 1-Mbytevideo DRAM and a built-in video graphics accelerator.The Z-NOTE MX, also with Sound Blaster compatability, uses anAccuPad control functioning as mouse and pointer and offersan optional ReadyDesk port replicator to bridge stationaryoffice peripherals and the notebook.Highlights: Z-NOTE GT's modular SmartBay design lets users drop in a secondhard drive, swap the CD-ROM drive for a 3.5-inch, 1.44-Mbytefloppy drive, or use an optional NiMH or Li-Ion battery. Z-NOTE MX's integrated AC adaptor module is designed to swapwith the floppy disk drive module and can also be traded fora second battery module or operated externally with the floppydrive in place.Available: Immediately, through authorized resellersList Price: Starts at $3,999 for the Z-NOTE GT; $5,699 with11.3-inch SVGA TFT display. The Z-NOTE MX starts at $2,799Vendor: Zenith Data Systems, Buffalo Creek, Ill. (800) 533-0331,www.zds.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1End Accounting NightmaresBy:Wendy SisselmanVisual AccountMate is a Windows 95/NT-based accounting and inventorymanagement software package written in Microsoft's 32-bit VisualFoxPro 3.0. The System Manager controls system log on/off,password setup and selection of companies, modules and functions.General ledger, accounts payable/receivable, sales order, purchaseorder and inventory control functions can be customized throughExpress Icon hot buttons in the System Manager and accessedat various remote locations based on network hookup. A builtin internal electronic mail system is designed to let manyusers communicate without exiting the system. Various levelsof security protect AccountMate system access.Highlights: The source code version lets users customize reports, screensand colors; the developer version allows users to develop verticalapplications and link them to Visual AccountMate. The general ledger function lets users define up to 52 periodsof financial data and maintain years of data on file. Photo imaging capabilities store full color photographs ofemployees and product inventory.Available: Immediately, direct from vendor and authorized distributorsList Price: Starts at $995 for a compiled version; $1,295 forthe source code version; and $1,795 for the developer version.Vendor: SourceMate Information Systems Inc., Mill Valley, Calif.(415) 381-1011Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Dedicated to Network FaxingBy:Wendy SisselmanCastelle Inc.'s FaxPress NLM is a software-only, NetWare-loadablemodule with client-server architecture that lets users sendand receive faxes without a dedicated file server. The softwareruns independently of front-end operating systems, applicationsoftware and fax hardware, and supports ISDN boards, fax/modemsand intelligent fax boards. Faxes can be composed in Windowsor DOS with multilanguage text capability, and the server-basedfax processing returns full use of the workstation when faxtransmission is complete. Designed for networks of two to 50users, FaxPress NLM is expandable up to 1,000 users (independentof network size), 64 lines per server and 32 servers per LAN.System requirements include NetWare 3.11 or higher and a 32bit processor.Highlights: Compatible with other file server-based communications productsincluding NetWare Connect. Modems do not need to be located on the main file server. System configurations can be changed without the server comingdown or software being reloaded.Available: Immediately, through authorized distributorsList Price: $595 for a five-user versionVendor: Castelle Inc., Santa Clara, Calif. (800) 289-7555Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1A WebScan a Day Keeps Viruses AwayBy:Wendy SisselmanMcAfee Associates Inc.'s WebScan antivirus software integratesa full-featured browser and electronic mail package and usesa two-step process that holds and scans downloaded files andattachments prior to opening. This process detects traditionaland boot, file, multipartite, stealth, encrypted and polymorphicmacro viruses. Infected files are identified and destroyedat the user's request. WebScan can be used with most Web browsersbased on the Mosaic browser engine and can scan Microsoft WordDOC files and Zip, self-extracting EXE-, ARC- and ARJ-compressedfile formats.Highlights: WebScan supports Windows 3.x, Windows 95 and Windows NT. E-mail module supports MIME-compliant file attachments andhas a built-in spelling check, address book supporting aliasing,distribution lists and sorting. An automated installation routine allows users to choose anInternet access account with CompuServe's Interserve divisionor configure the product for use with any other Internet provider.Available: Immediately through vendor and authorized distributorsList Price: $65Vendor: McAfee Associates Inc., Santa Clara, Calif. (408) 9883832, www.mcafee.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Fargo's Colorful New PersonaBy:Wendy SisselmanFargo Electronics Inc.'s Persona II ID card printer allows PCor Mac users to print text, photo images, graphics, bar codesand digital information in a range of 16.7 million colors at300 dots per inch. A Windows print driver is included for PCusers with Windows-based imaging and printing software anduses full-color and monochrome dye sublimation technology toprint on dual-side PVC or polyester synthetics. Print speedranges from 20 seconds to two minutes per card.Highlights: An in-line print mechanism in one sweep laminates both sidesof the card with thermal transfer film (2-6 microns thick)or polyester chip (1-2 mm thick) with a clear or holographictype overlay. An optional magnetic stripe encoding module and smart cardencoder can encode or program IDs as part of the print process.Available: Immediately, through authorized distributorsList Price: $6,995; the magnetic stripe and smart card encodingoptions are priced at $495 each.Vendor: Fargo Electronics Inc., Eden Prairie, Minn. (612) 941 9470, www.fargo.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Comtrol Launches RocketPortBy:Wendy SisselmanThe RocketPort PCI from Comtrol Corp. uses a PCI bus interfaceand is designed to provide a 32-bit access path. Capable ofsustaining ISDN terminal adapters at bonded or compressed speeds,users can tie into ISDN by joining an Internet service andconnecting an ISDN terminal adapter, such as an external modem,to the RocketPort. Application-specific integrated circuits(ASICs) are designed to optimize serial I/O functions by dedicatingone 36-MHz processor to every eight ports (from 8 to 128 ports)while eliminating the need for the processor, bus interfaceand other logic.Highlights: The ASICs designate I/O as their sole task, focusing full processorresources on handling and moving data at maximum speed. The unit is designed to support bi-directional communicationspeeds up to 230.4 Kbytes/s (RS-232) or 460.8 Kbytes/s (Octable)with little-to-no performance loss as more serial ports areused or as RocketPort controller boards are added. For users of Pentium-platform processors, the RocketPort PCIenables the use of the PCI slot.Available: ImmediatelyList Price: $696 for the 8-port model; $886 for the 16-portmodelVendor: Comtrol Corp., St. Paul, Minn. (612) 631-7654, www.comtrol.comBack to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1ATM Access Gets a BoostBy:Wendy SisselmanThe CS600 ATM Access Concentrator from OnStream Networks deliversstructured T-1 circuit emulation, native LAN extention andintegrated Web-server capabilities. The product's T-1 interfacemodule can transfer structured T-1 data and voice traffic fromexisting data service unit/channel service units, T-1 multiplexersand PBXs, allowing users to establish individual Digital Signal0 virtual connections to multiple user sites prior to aggregatingtraffic for ATM WAN transport.Highlights: Works across LAN/WAN environments while all six Ethernet interfacesare in use. With the direct Ethernet 10Base-T interface module, users canachieve 10-Mbyte/s Ethernet speeds and throughput across theirATM WANs. A management module equipped with onboard SNMP capabilitiesand OnStream Network's enterprise-specific Management InformationBase allows configuration, monitoring and performance management.Available: Immediately, through vendor and authorized distributorsList Price: Starts at $15,450Vendor: OnStream Networks Inc., Santa Clara, Calif. (408) 7275151Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Look, No DriverBy:Wendy SisselmanDynatex Inc.'s Regency SCSI controller is a plug-and-play massstorage system designed to work without specified drivers.It connects to any server with a SCSI Bus and supports RAIDlevels 0, 1, 3, 4 and 5. It has a dual-host system that automaticallyactivates the secondary host in case of primary host failure.Highlights: Compatibility with RISC 6000, HP 3000, Sun, Digital and SiliconGraphics operating systems. Microprocessors deliver a transfer rate of 40 Mbytes and 3,000I/Os per second.Available: ImmediatelyList Price: $3,200Vendor: Dynatex Inc., Lakewood, N.J. (908) 886-1400Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Up & Comer: Sky to Earth: You're CoveredBy:T.C. Doyle, Tom Farre and Richard MarchRecognize this man? Think he looks a bit like a young Bill Gates?Well, 24-year-old Sky Dayton is hoping, and his company, Internetaccess provider EarthLink Network Inc., is making a run atour hottest market. Based in Los Angeles and previously targetingthe Left Coast only, EarthLink now has 150 points of presencefor local access around the United States and is reportedlygrowing 10 percent a week. Subscribers to Dayton's serviceget a free Netscape browser and a free home page-not bad consideringmonthly charges as low as $19.95 for unlimited access. Askedfor a quotable company mission statement, something like Gates'"information at your fingertips," Dayton said, "The Internetis the most incredible communication medium the world has everseen. EarthLink aims to be the dominant Internet access company."A little wordy, but his heart's in the right place...Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1VARNews: Now, Let's Talk ProfitsWhy are these men smiling? The man in the middle, Michael Leavitt,is the governor of Utah. And the men flanking him, Eugene Loveridge(l) and Dan Masterson, were recently honored by Leavitt andthe Mountain West Venture Capital Group. Their company, EruditeSoftware, a VAR in South Jordan, Utah, was just named the state'sfastest-growing company. In the past five years it has grownfrom three to 120 employees, while sales rose an astounding18,000 percent! Great job!Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Hot Stuff: The 'Universal Client'It's not Oracle CEO Larry Ellison's $500 Internet box, but maybeyou could call it the enterprise version. The $995 Explorafrom X-terminal manufacturer NCD Systems, Mountain View, Calif.,does a lot of what a low-cost, small footprint PC replacementshould do. Running with NCD's WinCenter Pro multiuser NT softwareon a Pentium server, the Explora promises Pentium-like performancefor graphical Windows apps at terminal prices. Plus, NCD'sstrong Unix heritage gives the PowerPC-based Explora strongcredentials in the Internet and Unix applications arena. Youcan add a floppy drive, CD-ROM and other peripherals to Explora,which NCD calls the "universal client," but then you're movingcloser to the PCs it could be replacing, so what's the point?Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Riding the CTI Technology Explosion -- Maturing, standards-driventechnology sets off a computer telephony boomBy:Peter JordanHoward Lubert almost salivates when he thinks about the numbers:"Ten million companies in the United States have phone systems,"says the Philadelphia-area VAR. "The revenue opportunity forCTI [computer telephone integration] is an even bigger opportunitythan the LAN market back in the '80s, when we started doingnetworks." With 1.7 million servers in the United States, Lubertnotes, there are already 1.7 million prospects for CTI, andthe rest of the 10 million could be prospects for both."I just can't think of any other market that has this revenuepotential for VARs," adds Lubert, president of HEL Inc., asystems integration business specializing in turnkey LANs andnetwork connectivity services.Recently certified as a CTI engineer, Lubert is spreading thegood news about the huge market potential wherever he can.As national education chairman of the Business Technology Association,Kansas City, Mo., he has even prepared two half-day videotapeson the business of CTI and on implementing CTI.One VAR he doesn't have to convince is David Condra, presidentof Nashville, Tenn.'s Dalcon Computers."If you're a solution provider in almost any industry, you'regoing to bump into a telephone," says Condra. "We don't seeCTI as an option. It's just a matter of a right opportunity."Like many VARs, Condra is still waiting to jump in, but he'skeeping his eyes open for the right chance and may considerpartnering with a vendor to get into the market.Market researchers bear out the optimism of VARs like Lubertand Condra. "The components needed to fuel exciting CTI growthare finally in place," says Gary L. Andresen, an analyst atDataquest Inc., San Jose, Calif. Andresen expects the totalU.S. market for CTI to grow from $1.48 billion in 1995 to $7.91billion in 1999, an annual rate of about 50 percent.An exclusive CRN/VARBusiness survey of 300 managers in midsizecompanies in a mix of industries confirms CTI's promise. Thoughonly 9.3 percent are already invested in CTI technology, 49applications percent more plan to invest over the next twoyears. Although fax solutions like fax broadcast and fax ondemand are the most popular computer telephony today, the technologyfor far more complex CTI solutions has ripened.CTI Saves Time and MoneyComputer telephone integration is just what the name suggeststechnology integrating the two most important information systemsof most businesses: telephone systems and computers. It rangesfrom a stand-alone desktop system enabling a user to dial byclicking on an on-screen phone number, to voice-processingsubsystems that automate customer service, to complex callcenter operations integrating the functions of a client/servernetwork and a multiline PBX switch.Anyone who does a lot of business over the telephone is a potentialCTI customer. The most obvious competitive benefit of CTI isthat it saves time-and time, as the clich says, is money.If you simply click on a name or number rather than dial it,you save several seconds-especially if a sequence of long-distancecarrier-access and credit-card numbers is involved."When I'm dialing from my home office, I use my Sprint card,"says Buz Brooks, director of CTI for Norstan Integration Services,a $300 million VAR in Maple Grove, Minn., that started as atelephone interconnect company but has evolved into systemsintegration. "It takes 30-some-odd digits to do it manually,but if I'm using my desktop PC and ACT! [contact managementsoftware], I bring up the name, hit alternative access, click,and it's dialing."Users can save a lot more time with inbound calls, especiallyif their computer tells who's calling them and retrieves thecaller's record before they even answer the phone.How much time and money a business can save depends on the kindof calls it handles. "If you take a lot of short calls, andCTI saves you 15 percent on a 1-minute call, that's a big savings,especially if you have 800 lines," Brooks says. "But saving15 seconds on a 40-minute call obviously isn't a big percentage."Far more important than the cost of the 800 service, of course,is the cost of an employee's time. If you can help a registerednurse handling insurance inquiries to work 25 percent moreefficiently, you've created a major reason to install a CTIsystem.Servicing the CustomerBeyond the efficiency improvements CTI enables are the re-engineeringpossibilities of tying a phone system to a computer system.CTI enables phone-intensive businesses to give customers individualattention and boost employee productivity.Brooks is working with a customer that has a wide mix of clientele,from elderly to quite young. Callers can set up their accountsso they do all their business automatically with an interactivevoice response (IVR) system, or so that they always talk toa customer-service representative (CSR), as is generally preferredby older customers.Caller ID or Automatic Number Identification (ANI) can be animportant part of a CTI system that handles inbound calls,letting the computer system identify a caller and retrievehis or her record before the phone is even answered. CallerID is an embedded analog signal available from the local phonecompany that arrives between the first and second ring, whereasANI arrives on a separate digital channel with 800 serviceand some other long-distance calls."If you get a hit on the caller ID or ANI, you go to the computerand say, 'Here's Jane Doe's record. What's our strategy forJane Doe?' You can get down to individual marketing," Brooksexplains."The customer-contact strategy might be that if I call on the800 line for delivery information, I might want to be sentto a voice response system, where I can key in a number andget an instant status report," says Brooks.When CTI systems can do such intelligent routing, sales andmarketing executives tend to get excited.The time is ripe for VARs and integrators to get into telephony.For starters, standards are emerging-including TAPI for thedesktop, TSAPI for the LAN, and SCSA for multivendor hardwaresoftware integration. And the once-proprietary world of PBXswitches is opening up, in a development similar to what happenedto mainframe computer vendors when they were forced to moveto open systems.Change Is Coming"Proprietary technologies have provided a measure of securityand safeguards to the vendors in that industry," says MikeMunsch, executive vice president of R.W. Bennett Corp., a VARin Raleigh, N.C. "They felt that as long as they had proprietarytechnology, they didn't have to be price-competitive, but changeis going to happen.""This technology has been in use for quite a while, but it'sbeen very convoluted," explains Chuck Smith, executive vicepresident of Dialogic Communications Corp. of Franklin, Tenn.,a VAR specializing in voice processing systems. "Now our computercan talk directly to the computer inside the PBX. This makesthings much more efficient, and manufacturers are making pricesmuch more reasonable."Beyond the emerging plug-and-play TAPI products for the individualdesktop, CTI is an attractive VAR opportunity because it usuallyinvolves consultative selling and long-term relationships.Many CTI solutions are scalable, enabling a VAR to start outproviding a customer with a CTI solution for a single telephoneintensive department, then move out into the corporation andimplement CTI on virtually every desktop that has a workstationand a telephone."An installation can be from as small as a half-dozen agentson up to thousands," says Ron Charnock, president and CEO ofNPRI Inc. of Fairfax, Va., a call-center solution providerthat has been doing CTI installations since 1986. "The technologyis very scalable today, but that wasn't the case five or sixyears ago. It's a good time for people to get into CTI, becausethe initial market education has been done, and stable productsare out there."Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1The Customer for Computer Telephony - The profile is broad,since telephon productivity is mission-control for most businessesBy:Peter JordanEarly CTI adopters were companies like airlines, with massivecall-center operations based on mainframes and proprietarylinks to PBX switches. Today, though, since the technologyis becoming more affordable and scalable, thousands of potentialcustomers exist.Even though only 9.3 percent of the users surveyed by CRN/VARBusinessresearch are already invested in CTI, a large majority considerCTI's desktop productivity features useful. More than 80 percentconsider fax functions useful, while 75 percent would enjoyintegrated messaging-the ability to access phone, voice-mailand fax messages from a PC.More than half say retrieving E-mail by phone, sending E-mailto remote locations, and using graphical software to operatetheir phones would be useful.On the networked CTI side, most managers consider a varietyof computer telephony functions very useful in improving customerservice- things like automatic faxing after phone conversations,screen pops of all customer records as a call comes in, andthe ability to gather information from customers while theyare on hold. More than a third of managers believe the abilityto record personalized greetings for customers would be veryuseful, as would the ability to record customer service orsales conversations.As promising as this sounds, there is no single market for CTI,according to VARs who have been selling it. CTI is a land ofa thousand niches, says Ron Charnock of solution provider NPRIInc., Fairfax, Va."There's not going to be just one CTI market," he says. "It'sa thousand niches defined by the specific solution you bring."The more mission-critical a company's telephone activity is,the more value the user can realize from CTI.The most obvious target, explains Charnock, is the typical callcenter operation, such as QVC Home Shopping Network or thecall centers of Louisville, Ky.-based health-care giant Humana,which have about 600 or 700 employees handling customer service.Charnock's firm did the Humana installation. "They handle HMOwork, customer service, and new subscribers, so they're backending a lot of the 800-number activity they do for advertising,setting appointments for their field people, and doing a varietyof different things for their customer service centers," hesays.For most call centers, CTI technology is now a must-have item.Ripe targets include financial services and telecommunicationsproviders. "It's at the point where people in almost any midsizecompany recognize the concept and understand the value proposition,"says Charnock.The debt collection agency of France-based COFIDIS-the financialsubsidiary of 3 Suisses International, a leading French mailorder company-has 100 agents averaging 5,000 outbound callsa day. Using predictive dialing technology, the system launchescalls and monitors their progress so only the connected callsare routed to the CSRs.As soon as the system gets a "hit," it pops the client's accounton the CSR's screen and connects the phone call. Gone are thedays when CSRs wasted their time on manual dialing, no answers,disconnected phones and answering machines.A pay-per-view cable-TV supplier is an obvious target for CTI,says Bart Stanco, vice president of the Gartner Group marketresearch firm, Stamford, Conn. "A customer calls to order apay-per-view heavyweight fight. We automatically check yourbalance, and if you're overdue, we transfer you to accountspayable instead," he says.Chuck Smith, executive vice president of Dialogic CommunicationsCorp., Franklin, Tenn., says his company installs systems innuclear power plants that automatically dial employees andemergency personnel in the event of an emergency, then screeninbound calls so harried managers can know whether someoneimportant is calling in the midst of the emergency.In the classic John Naisbitt phrase, CTI technology allows a"high tech, high touch" approach that uses automation to treatcustomers individually. An airline might move a million- milefrequent flier ahead in the phone queue past someone whoseonly contact with the airline has been a $59 super-saver ticket,Stanco suggests.In environments like help desks, customers who call back a fewminutes after a previous call should probably be automaticallyrouted to the technician they talked with before, because theyprobably have additional questions about the same problem.CTI would enable such routing.Almost all catalog houses route customers differently basedon age, says Stanco, automatically sending over-40 customersto live CSRs and the under-40 crowd to an IVR system.ANI and caller ID are of most use today in a home-to-businessenvironment like QVC rather than business to business. In mostcases, when someone calls from a large business PBX, ANI cannotidentify the individual caller and may not even be able toidentify the business.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1The High-Tech Way to "Hold the AnchovieBy:Peter JordanWhen you call a Domino's store and order a pizza, the employeemay ask your name and address, but in most cases, it's alreadyon a computer screen. Between the first and second rings, aninterface unit detects an embedded analog caller ID signaland feeds it into a 486 PC. Using your phone number as itsprimary key, the database in the 486 retrieves your recordand pops it onto the screen before the order taker can evensay, "Domino's Pizza. Can you hold?"It doesn't take a genius to figure out the value of automatingthe retrieval of that kind of information and placing it infront of employees before they answer the call. For starters,in addition to saving time, you've got a lot better chanceof getting that sausage pizza topped with peppers and mushroomsto the right door if the driver is reading from a clearly legibleprintout rather than a hand-scribbled or manually typed ordersheet."It cuts way down on mistakes like typing errors," says TimMonteith, vice president, information services, at Domino'scorporate headquarters in Ann Arbor, Mich. "But it also allowsus to store special instructions like 'Go to the side doorand honk,'" Monteith says."It also helps in situations like high school kids ordering10 anchovy pizzas delivered to their principal and giving mean address different from what's on the screen," Monteith adds.Beginning in 1993 and finishing last year, Domino's installedthe system in all 700 corporate-owned stores. Many of its 3,500independently owned franchises also use the system."The new system saves time, increases accuracy and allows muchmore complete management information," says Monteith. "It'sa lot easier to train new employees, and the calculations aredone correctly, including taxes."Because the system stores a customer's previous orders, "Weget some college kids who think it's cool to simply say 'theusual' and hang up," Monteith chuckles. "But we're not supposedto do it that way."Although employees could actually greet customers by name beforethey identify themselves, Monteith says it would appear "invasive"to do so, so employees are instructed to ask who you are whenyou call, even though they already know.While the order-taking system is the most visible aspect ofthe automation of a Domino's store, "Many other things arehappening behind the scenes," says Monteith. "The system iscalculating the time it takes to make the pizza, it's servingas a time clock for employees, it's running the payroll, it'stracking food costs, and it's transmitting all that informationto the home office."Your neighborhood pizza parlor may seem an unlikely locationfor state-of-the-art automation, but Domino's has figured outhow to use computer telephone integration and a plain old pointof-sale system running on a 486 PC with multiple terminalsto achieve the kind of MIS controls and efficiencies much largeroperations are still dreaming about.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1How to Make The Computer Telephony Sale -- VARs who have beenthere suggest finding a champion and layering solutions fromthe desktopBy:Peter JordanDespite the obvious theoretical advantages of CTI for most telephoneintensive businesses, it's still not an easy sale.As with any new technology, VARs face potential end-user skepticism 89 percent of the users queried in the CRN/VARBusiness surveysaid high reliability was a very important technical attribute,meaning the first challenge is to convince customers the technologywill work as promised.Customers also want to be sure any CTI installation is upgradable,uses industry standards, requires low maintenance, is expandable,and is compatible with existing telephone systems. If thisseems like a tall order, one bright spot is that less thanhalf of users expect a CTI solution to use components fromleading vendors. In other words, VARs can resell products fromnew and emerging companies, so long as they meet other customerrequirements.When NPRI Inc., Fairfax, Va., made its first CTI sale to healthcare giant Humana, Louisville, Ky., the telecommunicationsstaff did not believe the system really worked, says NPRI presidentand CEO Ron Charnock. "They literally traced the cables betweenthe computers and the telephone system," he recalls. "A personwith 30 years of telecommunications experience didn't believeyou could hook up a computer and a phone."St. Louis Novell integrator Bill Barry of MJB Associates, justnow getting into networked CTI, says his first step is to installa system in his own business and work out the bugs. "You'veabsolutely got to do this," he says. "I don't know anythingin this business where you can fake your way through it."Once he gets an in-house system up and running, it will be astarting point for sales demonstrations to potential customers.The fact that users in the CRN/ VARBusiness survey also placea high value on user friendliness and on excellent supportand maintenance is further indication that they want a lotof hand-holding as they move into the unexplored territoryof CTI.Another obstacle to a CTI sale is that it requires bridginga major gap between two separate technological cultures, telephonyand MIS.The consensus seems to be that misunderstandings are rampantbetween computer and telephony user cultures, and that VARsneed the skills of a multilingual diplomat to go between them.Take a term like "terminal equipment." To a computer professional,that means a screen and a keyboard, but to a telephone expertit's anything that plugs into the public network. "If you plugthe world's biggest supercomputer into the network, it's justa terminal to the phone guy," says one industry watcher.The term "reliability" is another chance for misunderstanding While the computer side might brag about 99 percent availability,a telephone pro whose system was up only 99 percent of thetime would get fired very quickly."I don't see it as 'us against them,'" says Susan Mills, principalof Technology Marketing Partners, a CTI consultancy in Berkeley,Calif. "The one who has the advantage is the one who can mostcompletely satisfy the needs of the customer and think broadestand most long-term about those needs. I don't see a technologybias driving that: I see that as a business-practices bias."But the gap isn't just cultural; it can be technological aswell. Gartner Group research finds that systems-managementcomplexity and costs increase 9 to 28 percent with a CTI installation."The problem centers around a dual database for configuration,administration, and management," says Bart Stanco, vice presi dent at Gartner.To help bridge the gap between the two cultures and technologies,computer VARs and integrators that are serious about makinga major play for the CTI market should consider either hiringtelephony expertise or partnering with firms with mastery ofthe field.Randall Bennett of R.W. Bennett Co., Raleigh, N.C., recruitedMike Munsch, who used to own a telephone interconnect companyand serves on the board of the North American TelecommunicationsAssociation, to add telephony expertise to his traditionalNovell Platinum business.Bennett's first CTI sale was automation of a support centerfor a company that does independent software support for Fortune500 companies. The major reason the sale went through was thatR.W. Bennett teamed with the local AT&T office to develop thesolution."At this point, no one can go in and offer an all-encompassingsolution," Munsch says. "Companies need to learn how to partner.In the computer industry, VARs have done that for a long time,but I know from personal experience that the telecommunicationsindustry never has done that. Not only did they not partner,but they saw everyone as competitors."But the alternatives for AT&T with the Raleigh help desk operationwere either partnering or no sale, says Bennett: "We were talkingabout a half-million-dollar system. The local rep wanted thesale. It worked great-both of us got business we wouldn't havegotten."MJB's Barry suggests two groups of customers are particularlyripe for a CTI sale: Customers who still have no voice-mailsystem at all, so they'll soon be making a major investmentin telephone equipment, and customers "who are so annoyed attheir interconnect provider they want to throw their wholephone system out."Return on investment in a call-center operation is relativelyeasy to demonstrate: It's obvious, for example, that if a screenof information reaches CSRs at the same time as a call, CSRswill be able to process significantly more calls than if theyhave to first figure out who's calling and then manually retrievea record.Demonstrating such ROI is important to making the CTI sale:More than 60 percent of users expect a fast payback on CTI,according to CRN/VARBusiness research.Find Your ChampionBut with management and knowledge workers, the benefits of CTIcan be more subtle, requiring a long sales cycle and a thoroughunderstanding of the way the user does business."In my mind, you should sell to the person in the organizationwho's going to use it," says Munsch, who for years went tothe MIS or telecommunications department and sold them whatthey thought they needed. But the problem with CTI, he says,is that it's not an essential service and it's not universal.It benefits only a certain portion of the company."The guy in the warehouse doesn't need it," Munsch says, "soyou're going to have to sell it to the manager of the departmentthat will use it, and that manager has to feel so stronglythat it's going to benefit their department that they're willingto champion it, go to the telecommunications manager and MISmanager, and say, 'I need you guys to work together.' You haveto involve people who will be the champions."CRN/VARBusiness research suggests that one way to find yourchampions is to convince them of your excellent customer support More than 80 percent of users expect that from a CTI supplier.A majority also need you to understand their business model,and to offer local support and the ability to customize thesystem you sell. Only 16 percent demand a supplier they haveworked with before, indicating opportunities for VARs reachingout to new CTI customers.Overcoming technological inertia is a problem, though, sincetelecommunications managers typically like the status quo.Begin with the user, not the technology center, advises consultantMills. "The whole point is to become a strategic ally withend users." A CTI implementation will become an expensive boondoggleif you don't have buy-in from whomever will actually benefitfrom the technology right from the beginning.The Layered LookOne way to create an appetite for a full-blown, network-basedCTI solution is to try to get customers to use simple plugand-play desktop solutions like autodialing, suggests Buz Brooksof Norstan Integration Services, Maple Grove, Minn. "It's importantto get something up and running quickly that people can use,"he says. "Then it's kind of like an onion skin. You start layeringmore capabilities."The next step might be software that lets users control allcommunications functions from a single graphical interface.Integrated messaging, where the screen shows all voice, faxand E-mail messages on a single screen, allows the users tochoose which ones to read first.Also possible are several types of fax and voice processingsystems, which either improve customer service or increaseemployee productivity by automating information and accountfunctions when customers or suppliers call in.A full-blown CTI implementation is a consultative solution salethat often involves business re-engineering, warns the GartnerGroup's Stanco. "It's not all plug-and-play. It's more likebuild-and-sweat," he says. But the payoffs in value-added salesand long-term customer relationships will be worth the sweatfor VARs who build their way into the explosive CTI marketat the right time, with the right resources and the right partners.Back to Headline List CopyrightVAR BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 12 No.1Personalized Marketing for Every CustomerBy:Peter JordanComputer telephone integration (CTI) allows businesses to micromarket to each individual customer, says Barnett Bezme, directorof sales and marketing for New York-based Amarex TechnologyInc., which has been integrating midsize to large call centersfor the past 10 years.With a typical Amarex customer like New York's Chemical Bank,Amarex's first sale is an interactive voice response (IVR)system, the application that allows customers to punch numberson a phone in response to a recorded menu tree to find outsuch information as their account balance."At Chemical Bank, 80 percent of the calls go through an IVRsystem, and the customers are totally satisfied," Bezme says."The other 20 percent go to an agent."The installation of an IVR system for an end user like ChemicalBank "is a no-brainer in terms of return on investment," saysBezme. "When you can handle 80 percent of 3 million calls amonth without human intervention, it will pay back within amonth."Once he installs an IVR system, Bezme is in a prime positionto get the end user to consider CTI for the calls the automatedattendant can't handle. It's when you add the CTI on top ofIVR that you begin to realize the micro-marketing potentialof a marriage between the phone system and the customer database,Bezme explains. Once the system identifies a customer-eitherthrough caller ID or an identification number-you can senda picture of the customer's relationship with the bank to theagent.The system does a security check, then puts a history of thecall on the customer service representative's screen.Once you match an inbound call to a customer record, "a lotof sophistication is possible," Bezme points out. "If you'reSpanish-speaking, I might have a key on the host database recordrouting you to a Spanish-speaking representative, or you mightbe a Gold Card member."The best kind of customer for CTI-based micro-marketing is arepeat customer, says Bezme. Every time the customer contactsyour business, you can build more details into the record.Although Amarex works at the implementation level rather thanthe strategic level, the technology enables business re-engineering,so Amarex often partners with SHL System House, a nationwidesystems integrator.Reference selling is important within each vertical, says Bezme:A bank wants to see an IVR system working in another bank,even though it may be the same technology an insurance company'scustomer service department uses.His advice for VARs entering the CTI marketplace? "Find a partnerand go slow. When you go into a mainframe, it's a lot morecomplicated than it looks, and when you talk to a switch, everyswitch has a different protocol."Back to Headline List WT03-B34-3IA059-000323-B028-342http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec29.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225352 text/html 476619HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:49:46 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:43 GMTContent-length: 476431Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ec29.html Sample Issue Copyright WINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNet January 1, 1996 Vol. 7 No. SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ANALYSIS Start: Okay, okay. Lemme don my asbestos underwear and explain myself. (742 words) LETTERS Letters: Does Microsoft Play Monopoly? (297 words) Letters: Designer Windows (245 words) Letters: The Exon Word Spill (249 words) Letters: Long Live the Floppy (123 words) Letters: This Headline..er, Stinks (87 words) Letters: A Key Concern (94 words) Letters: Correction (50 words) We want to hear from you! Please send your letter and phone (40 words) NEWSTRENDS Newstrends: DirectX APIs Mean Business (282 words) Newstrends: Another Crack at the Hand-Held Market (177 words) Newstrends: Micro Multimedia (198 words) Newstrends: A CD-R In Every Home? (117 words) Newstrends: And Now, It's the Virtual Teller (310 words) Newstrends: Inside the Corporate Web (272 words) Newstrends: A Taxing Situation (222 words) Windows Top Ten: Windows' Top Ten Software (82 words) Recap (285 words) Newstrends: Smart Warning (85 words) Newstrends: No Applications Here (74 words) Newstrends: Money: Good News and Bad (64 words) Newstrends: Alliances Online (100 words) Technology Watch: And the Oscar Goes to ... Trinity (232 words) Technology Watch: Acrobat: Gunning for HTML (119 words) Technology Watch: Dialing Up Savings (165 words) Notes From The Lab: From Winmag Central -- We Could Use a Utility (246 words) Notes From The Lab: Netwotking Nuggets (142 words) Notes From The Lab: Update -- Monitoring Cuts (108 words) Notes From The Lab: Heads Up (240 words) WINTIPS WinTips: Win95 Tips of the Month (698 words) ANALYSIS Explorer: Why are mighty banks afraid of little software companies? (1099 words) ReadMe File: Coming Soon to a computer screen near you: MPEG (1114 words) Windows at Work: Quit smoking. Lose weight. Give to charity. Sound familiar? (1099 words) ANAALYSIS Dialog box: I'm sitting at my Mac, pondering the most overhyped product in history. (1126 words) NEW PRODUCTS Multimedia: A Rich Mixture of Sight and Sound (705 words) In Brief: Notebook Computers (70 words) In Brief: Desktop Projectors (56 words) In Brief: Speakers (70 words) In Brief: Personal Organizers (74 words) Digital Input: HP OmniGo 100 -- Hold a World of Info in Your Hands (201 words) Digital Input: TV One DeltaScan and TV One DeltaScan-PRO -- Images Go from PC to TV (129 words) Digital Input: Connectix QuickCam -- Plug and Picture (82 words) In Brief: Videoconferencing (70 words) In Brief: Tape Backup (84 words) In Brief: Fax Modems (62 words) Notebook Computers: AST Ascentia 950N/90 -- Speed and Video to Go (148 words) Notebook Computers: Kiwi OpenNote -- A Kiwi That Can Take Flight (161 words) Notebook Computers: Epson ActionNote 890 Series -- Take Action Notebooks (97 words) In Brief: Notebooks (193 words) Internet Access: Instant Internet 3.0 -- Fast and Wide Connections (134 words) Internet Access: CyberJunction -- NT: A New Internet Frontier (107 words) Internet Access: iCAT Electronic Commerce -- Purr-fect Catalogs (69 words) In Brief: Internet (210 words) Database: Prospero -- Safety Through a Tempest of Apps (134 words) Database: BMDP/Diamond -- Color Your Statistical World (121 words) Database: Optimas Library -- When Image Is Everything (66 words) In Brief: E-Mail (53 words) In Brief: Help Authoring (168 words) Graphics: Gryphon Batch It -- Convert a New Batch of Images (144 words) Graphics: SolidWorks 95 -- Solid Work for a CAD (123 words) Graphics: Instant 3D for Windows 95 -- Eye-Popping Words (79 words) In Brief: Imaging/Graphics (223 words) Business Software: Visual AccountMate -- Hold Win95 and NT Accountable (150 words) Business Software: Crush -- Crush the Competition or Crash (144 words) Business Software: WinMerge 2.1 -- Point-and-Shoot Merging (91 words) In Brief: Bar Coding (181 words) Input Devices: Mitsumi Wireless Mouse -- Let Your Mouse Run Free (152 words) Input Devices: Interlink DeskStick -- Joystick Makes Its Point (123 words) Input Devices: P.I. Engineering WhyKeyKey -- WhyKeyKey? Why Not? (80 words) In Brief: Input Devices (181 words) Mapping Software: Maps and Data for Microsoft Office 95 -- See the World from Your Desktop (122 words) Mapping Software: FirstMap -- Map a Smart Business Course (116 words) Mapping Software: Select Street Atlas -- Become Streetwise (91 words) In Brief: Utilities (189 words) Networking: Rumba Office 95/NT -- Keep Your Network Data in Step (136 words) Networking: Remote Access -- FMI PC Card family -- This Deck's Stacked with Cards (98 words) Networking: Remote Access -- Eicon Diva -- Make Beautiful Music (77 words) In Brief: UPS (205 words) Programming: StarTeam -- Get Your Project Together (155 words) Programming: Wise Installation System 4.0 -- Use Self-Installing Executables (128 words) Programming: VanGui -- An Original VanGui (82 words) In Brief: Programming (171 words) WINLAB FIRST IMPRESSIONS Winlab First Impressions: Paradox 7 -- Easy Way from Data Maze to Database (951 words) Winlab First Impressions: Toshiba Tecra 700CT -- 120MHz Book's a Burner (738 words) Winlab First Impressions: Harvard Graphics 4.0 for Windows 95 -- Smooth Delivery for Your Pitch (630 words) Winlab First Impressions: NEC Versa 4000C and 4050C -- The Complete Notebook (758 words) Winlab First Impressions: NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542 -- Twin Towers for Home, Office (759 words) Winlab First Impressions: FileMaker Pro 3.0 -- Old Friend with New Relations (667 words) Winlab First Impressions: Windows Draw 4.0 -- Palatable Price for Paint App (660 words) Winlab First Impressions: CA-SuperProject 4.0 -- The Best Laid Plans (640 words) Winlab First Impressions: voysAccess for Visual Basic -- Dialing for Data (595 words) Winlab First Impressions: ClarisDraw 1.0 -- Drawing on Mac App-titude (695 words) Winlab First Impressions: Dabbler 2 and Wacom ArtZ II Tablet -- Take One Tablet and Paint (674 words) Winlab First Impressions: miroConnect 34 wave -- New Board Surfs Comm Waters (318 words) Winlab First Impressions: CleanSweep 95 -- Snappier App Zapper (427 words) Winlab First Impressions: d-Time 95 -- Cache In for a Speedy CD (269 words) Winlab First Impressions: Art-Scan Professional 3.95 -- Scant Effort for Swift Scans (339 words) Winlab First Impressions: Canon BJC-210 -- Bubbling with Color (240 words) Winlab First Impressions: PaperMaster 2.0 -- Master the Paper Monster (375 words) Winlab First Impressions: askSam 3.0 -- Play It Again, Sam (239 words) Winlab First Impressions: MyAdvancedBrochures 95 -- Biz Docs Made Simple (361 words) Winlab First Impressions: Sejin Wireless Keyboard Model SPR-8630WP -- Look, Ma, No Wires (234 words) Winlab First Impressions: First Aid 95 -- Snafu Sniffer Suggests Solutions (389 words) Winlab First Impressions: Hewlett-Packard LaserJet 5Si MX -- Workhorse Laser for Workgroup Printing (256 words) Winlab First Impressions: PowerDesk 1.0 -- Roll Your Own Desktop (356 words) Winlab First Impressions: Dr. Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows 95 -- This Doctor Makes House Calls (284 words) Winlab First Impressions: Mosaic in a Box for Windows 95 -- Sleek Intro to the Net Set (251 words) Winlab First Impressions: Virtus WalkThrough 2.5 -- The Shape of Things to Come (366 words) Winlab First Impressions: EasyPhoto 2.0 -- Dress Up Docs with Digital Pics (203 words) Winlab First Impressions: ArtMedia Monitors TC1864 and TG1882 -- Practically Perfect Pictures (345 words) Winlab First Impressions: AcerNote Light -- Bantamweight Book Won't Break Your Budget (254 words) Winlab First Impressions: Visioneer PaperPort Vx -- Port in a Paper Storm (376 words) Winlab First Impressions: Sharp PC-8800 -- Easy on the Eyes (and Ears) (259 words) Winlab First Impressions: Texas Instruments Extensa 455T -- Book Brings Value, Saves Bucks (373 words) Winlab First Impressions: Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PS -- Appetizing Apple Offers Crisp, Colorful Pages (263 words) Winlab First Impressions: AppleVision 1710AV -- Multimedia MacMonitor (244 words) Winlab First Impressions: Robotech Cobra XLT P133 Multimedia System -- Jazzy 133 for After-5 Fun (373 words) Winlab First Impressions: Packard Bell Multimedia Corner Computer -- Angular PC Is a Niche Product (263 words) Winlab First Impressions: Zenith Z-Station GT 590MM -- Lots of Vroom, Little Room (363 words) Winlab First Impressions: Maximus P-133 -- Mini Tower of Power (262 words) Connectivity: Collabra Share 2.0 -- Enterprise Wise (629 words) Connectivity: OnTime Enterprise for NetWare 3.0 -- Well-Appointed Scheduler (634 words) FEATURES Cover Story: The Worst and Best of Win95 -- You've read interviews, experimented with previews and seen a million overviews. Now you're ready to use Windows 95 in the real world. And we're here to help you. (123 words) Cover Story: Eight Ways to Work in Windows 95 -- After studying the work habits of dozens of Win95 users, we identified eight basic PC personalities. Which best suits your computing style? (4675 words) Cover Story: Lock Your Windows -- Here's how to plug seven common Windows security holes. (1027 words) Cover Story: The Win95 Top 10 List -- Explorer, folders, drag and drop: Here's a list of our 10 favorite Windows 95 features, and tips on how to take advantage of them. (795 words) Cover Story: The Win95 Bottom 10 List -- Nothing is perfect, and that includes Windows 95. So, we compiled a Bottom 10 List as a counterpoint to our Top 10 List. But instead of just griping, we came up with a few solutions that you can work into Win95 on your own. (1089 words) Cover Story: In a Word, "Wow!" (380 words) Kill Your Fax Machine -- Dump the office fax machine for the superior combination of your fax modem and Microsoft Exchange. (1992 words) The Right Way to Set Up Microsoft's Fax (435 words) The Fax on the Competition (653 words) Features We'd Like to See (208 words) PULLOUT How To Buy a ... Pointing Device (452 words) Tracking Input Trends (234 words) WINLAB PRODUCT COMPARISONS Winlab Product Comparisons: The Sound & the Fury: Multimedia Upgrades -- Is Installation Easier with Win95? It Can Be-If You Get the Right Hardware (560 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Aztech Labs Stellar 6X (349 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4x (395 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance 4x (370 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Diamond Multimedia Kit 4400 (346 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Kiss Technology Super Edition (382 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad Elite XL (399 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad Ultra (523 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Speed Demon -- Fast is great, but easy is better. (376 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Installation Tips -- First, you have to make it work. (646 words) How We Tested: The Multimedia Microscope -- It's a question of installation ease, sound quality and drive speed. (415 words) Report Card: Recommendations (183 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: A Gaggle of Gigs That Won't Break the Bank -- Add Big Storage for Only a Few Bucks (483 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Fujitsu M1614 (224 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Quantum Fireball 1080 (268 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Seagate Medalist 1080sl (221 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Western Digital Caviar AC21000 (333 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: The Easy Way to Install a Hard Drive -- A step-by-step approach to upgrading (529 words) Winlab Product Comparisons: Enhancing Your Hard Drive -- You may need more stuff to make it all work. (418 words) Report Card: Recommendations (190 words) HOW TO Optimizing Windows: Explorer Gives You the Big Picture (1727 words) Getting Started: Whither Goeth, Oh Nobel File? (1171 words) Power Windows: Data Backups to Make Mom Proud (1516 words) Power Windows: The Best of Both Worlds -- Have your old software and long filenames, too. (351 words) Power Windows: Build a Tunnel to Long Filenames (408 words) Networking Windows: System Policies Keep Users in Line (1469 words) Networking Windows: So You Wanna Be A Systems Programmer (161 words) Windows NT: NT's Future Looks Bright (1707 words) Windows NT: The Big SUR -- Here are some of the features you should see in Microsoft's Shell Update Release and companion products. (452 words) Programming Windows: Better the Devil You Know (1697 words) Programming Windows: A Glossary of Common Controls -- New MFC classes for the Windows 95 common controls. (297 words) R&R: RESOURCES AND RECREATION Hot Picks: Stormy Weather (95 words) Hot Picks: Drive Time (101 words) Hot Picks: Job Lists You Can Bank On (100 words) Game of the Month: Ready, Set, Go! (161 words) Hot Picks: Tickle the Ivories (72 words) Hot Picks: Picture This (83 words) Hot Picks: Compelling Rappelling (123 words) Book of the Month: Inside Windows 95 (139 words) Snapshots (283 words) WINDOWS ONLINE Here's How: Hire a Web-Building Team (203 words) New on the Net: Go on a Virtual Job Hunt (175 words) Windows Online: Online News (103 words) Windows Watch: Know What Works with Win95 (81 words) Winmag Online: Have We Ever Covered ? (56 words) Recommended Downloads -- Superior Shareware (698 words) RECYCLE BIN Recycle Bin: Screen Saver O' the Month (89 words) Recycle Bin: This Means War! (34 words) Recycle Bin: When is a CD-ROM Not a CD-ROM? (22 words) Recycle Bin: A Miscreant Monitor (21 words) Recycle Bin: Easter Egg O' the Month (74 words) Recycle Bin: EXPRESS ROUTE TO REDUCED PRODUCTIVITY (31 words) Give us a sign! We're looking for road signs or any signs that (64 words) CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Start: Okay, okay. Lemme don my asbestos underwear and explain myself.By:Fred LangaMany of you wrote to me about my October 1995 editorial discussingthe enhanced DriveSpace 3 that's part of Microsoft Plus forWindows 95 (a.k.a. Plus Pack). Some of the calmer letters tooka decided "Are you nuts?" tone. Others were out-and-out flamessuggesting I was worse than nuts and that the only good wayto increase disk space was the good old-fashioned method ofbuying more platters.Hang up those flamethrowers! In the early days, some disk compressorswere indeed bad news. They were exotic add-ons that diddledwith your system at a very fundamental level down in the gutsof DOS, making the system do things it wasn't designed to do.If anything went wrong, it was often catastrophic. The earliestadopters of disk compression technology all too frequentlylost the entire contents of their hard disks.That was then. In recent years, disk compressors have becomerobust and reliable. And with Win95, Microsoft has built basicdisk compression right into the operating system. Now, youcan roughly double your effective disk space with little addedrisk. (With a good backup system, which you should be usinganyway, the risk can be literally zero.)The Plus Pack's DriveSpace 3 goes a step further than Win95'sstandard compression. DriveSpace 3 is capable of standard DriveSpacecompression plus two higher levels of compacting, HiPack andUltraPack.HiPacked files take a bit longer to write to the disk but arefaster to read. This type of compression is ideal for .EXE, .DLL and similar files that are normally written once (at installation)and then only read from the disk. With HiPack, you can savespace and time.UltraPack squeezes files even tighter. It's best for dense archivalstorage of little-used files that you still want handy. UltraPackedfiles occupy minimal space but do take a bit longer both toread and write.Like its predecessors, DriveSpace 3 works invisibly in the background.It's normally quite conservative: It doesn't automaticallyapply the CPU-intensive highest levels of compression unlessand until you tell it to. A companion program called CompressionAgent helps that process.Out of the box, the Compression Agent assumes any file you haven'taccessed in a month is ripe for dense archival storage, andautomatically flags those files for UltraPack compression.(You can set the interval to be whatever you want.) You alsocan specify which levels of compression (none, normal, HiPackor UltraPack) to apply to each file, file type or directory.When you run Compression Agent, it dutifully trundles off acrossyour disk, squeezing or fluffing all the files per your instructions.It takes a while to run, so it's best done during lunch or overnight.(See the Power Windows column in the October 1995 issue forinformation on the Plus Pack's System Agent, which can automateall kinds of tasks like this one.)But wait, as they say, there's more. If you have a large harddisk, compression software takes care of the associated wasted"overhead."If you have a 500MB hard disk, for instance, DOS (and Win95)divides the space into 16KB clusters. This means if you savea 1-byte file to your disk, that file still will automaticallyand unavoidably consume 16,000 bytes of disk space. It's evenworse with larger hard disks. If your hard disk holds morethan about 528MB, you'll have 32KB clusters. That means savinga measly little 1-byte file will eat 32KB of disk space-incrediblywasteful.Disk compression software lets you avoid much of this waste.With DriveSpace 3, for example, a file can occupy as few as512 bytes, so a 1-byte file wastes only 511 bytes-not 16,000or 32,000.This reduced overhead really adds up. DriveSpace 3 made my 1gigabyte hard disk look like 2.76GB. Plus, it saved me wellover 300MB that would have been needlessly wasted by corpulentclusters.If the phrase "disk compression" has you reflexively reachingfor your flamethrower, maybe it's time for a fresh look. Whetherfor the efficiency of unwasted cluster space or for elbow roomon diminutive hard disks, modern 32-bit disk compression canbe a nice addition to your system, especially now that othervendors are starting to ship their 32-bit disk compressors.You're not just locked into using Microsoft's solution anymore.Now, may I please get out of this flameproof suit?Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Letters: Does Microsoft Play Monopoly?Surprisingly, many readers rushed to Microsoft's defense inits ongoing antitrust battle with the Justice Department. Lesssurprisingly, the flame war generated by our Dialog Box debateover the Exon Amendment rages unabated.I was intrigued by Mike Elgan's comments about whether Microsofthas violated antitrust regulations (The Explorer, October 1995).Microsoft has been unfairly dumped upon by the Feds. I'd loveit if someone, anyone, would stand up for those who do producesomething of value in this country, instead of knuckling underto the same old bromides that regulation is necessary. JasonLockwood, via the InternetA copy of Mike Elgan's column should be sent to the JusticeDepartment, since it is obvious that Mike has a better graspon computer-related antitrust issues than Washington does.Craig Bonvechiovia the InternetMike Elgan says Microsoft's OS dominance has no effect on itsapplications success. In fact, he called this idea "hogwash."Well, his dismissal of this idea is "balderdash." Considerthe number of neophyte computer users who see "Microsoft" allover their OS documentation and on their startup screens andthink that a Microsoft product is more suitable for use withthe OS because the name matches.Microsoft makes good applications. However, there are many behaviorsthat smack of anticompetitiveness and monopolism. The properthing is for Microsoft to avoid even a hint of impropriety.Rob Stewartvia the InternetIn a world where successful people and businesses are routinelydespised because of their success, I found Mike Elgan's pieceon Microsoft refreshing. The hurdle of overcoming all thisresentment is plenty of challenge for any company; federallyimposed legal hurdles are simply not necessary.Greg Scharervia the InternetBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Letters: Designer WindowsI very much enjoyed Mark Hebert's article about being a closetWindows graphic designer (Dialog Box, November 1995). I havebeen designing on a PC since PageMaker made its first versionfor the PC. I struggled with cross-platform compatibility issuesand the smug looks from the Mac users, but now I'm glad I havePC experience. PC graphic artists may have the last laugh afterall.Robert O. Allanvia the InternetI appreciated Mark Hebert's column.I have been a graphic designer/desktop publisher/interactivemultimedia title developer for seven years now all on Windows.I don't have to convert a company's corporate data into a formata Mac can read before using it (saves lots of time and moneyfor everyone); I can give it back to a client in a form thatcan be further manipulated by the company; I can charge lessbecause of the lower overhead; I can offer much more flexibility;and I can match or better their output.Karen DeFelicevia the InternetPioneers like Mark Hebert and I will get the word out to ourpeers. With software differences being nil, pricing favoringthe Windows platform and operating speeds being arguably better,the days of Mac systems dominating the graphics arena are numbered.When you cut right to it, clients don't care how their collateralis created, only that it sells product.Steve Prestekvia the InternetBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Letters: The Exon Word SpillSen. Jim Exon's column (Dialog Box, October 1995) was hardlyworth the space. We've heard all this poppycock before. Theonly part of it that aroused me was that I don't like beingreferred to as part of the "hands-off elite." The elite arein Washington. Out here in the hinterlands, we're just simple,practical people who are tired of self-serving politicianswho use "for the good of our children" to justify every pettylittle regulatory urge they choose to pursue.Gene Warnervia the InternetSen. Jim Exon said some groups will do anything to defend thestatus quo on the Internet. He's right. The Internet is theFirst Amendment come to life. Let us keep it that way!Gabor Moroczvia the InternetI do agree with Sen. Exon that there's a lot of material onthe Internet that's inappropriate for children. Perhaps onlineservices should limit access to adults only. We don't let childrendrive on our interstate highways. Why do they need to be drivingon our Internet highways?Robert A. Swirskyvia the InternetIt is sad to see the ignorance that Sen. Exon voices. How canyou legislate a network that goes beyond national boundaries?Don't spend my tax dollars having the government do a parent'sjob.Jose Nievesvia the InternetYes, pornography is evil. But censorship is more evil.Nat Elamvia the InternetBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Letters: Long Live the FloppyWhile I agree with Fred Davis (ReadMe File, November 1995) thatthe floppy drive has not seen any improvement in quite sometime, I cannot see CD-R as the answer to the floppy disk'sobsolescence. The floppy disk is inherently reusable, is muchmore environmentally friendly, is easy to use and has a proventrack record. The CD-R is like all CD-ROM systems: temperamental,not reusable, easily dirtied and hard to read by the system.Ken Adamekvia America OnlineYour article "It's time to deep-six the now-obsolete floppydisk drive" was one of the dumbest things I've ever read. Didyou ever notice the price of a CD-R?Raymond L. Warwickvia the InternetBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Letters: This Headline..er, StinksI have come to expect thorough reporting, informative articlesand thought-provoking commentary when I read WINDOWS Magazine.I was disappointed with the thoughtless and less-than-professional"attention-grabber" to lead off the Fred Davis column ("Here'swhat's really good about Windows 95: It sucks less!" ReadMeFile, October 1995). While the words used may be common nowadaysin some circles, in my opinion they reflect a decided lackof professionalism and do not belong in your otherwise finemagazine.Paul Schleusenervia the InternetBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Letters: A Key ConcernI'm responding to your recent article "Key to Making Changes"(News, October 1995). I have encountered many keyboard arrangementsover the years. Each has its pluses and minuses, but the twobiggest overall minuses are the varied placement of the "nontypewriter"keys (especially the backslash and backspace keys) and theoffset of the "typewriter" keys to the left. The auto manufacturershave moved many controls to the steering wheel, and it seemslogical for the computer industry to do the same with keyboards.Wilbur C. Bragg IIvia CompuServeBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Letters: CorrectionIn our November New Products section, we erroneously said BlueSky Software's "RoboHELP 95 turns Windows 95 and Word 6.0 32bit into hypertext authoring tools." In fact, RoboHELP 95 turnsWord 7 for Windows 95 and 32-bit Word 6.0 for Windows NT intohypertext authoring tools.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. We want to hear from you! Please send your letter and phoneWe want to hear from you! Please send your letter and phonenumber to: Letters, Windows Magazine, One Jericho Plaza, Jericho,NY 11753, or by e-mail to winmag@cmp.com. We reserve the rightto edit letters for length and clarity.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: DirectX APIs Mean BusinessBy:Jim ForbesSometime in the (near) future, even novices will be able tocreate presentations that involve highly complex three-dimensionalgraphics. The reason: Microsoft has been playing games withWindows 95.While most of the attention devoted to the still-new operatingsystem has focused on its business applications, a few peoplelike Micro-soft game developer Alex St. John-worked on softwarecode that controls the display of graphics, creates novel waysfor programs to use sound and video, and builds support withinapplications for 3-D graphics.These snippets of code are collectively called the DirectX APIs.Microsoft was supposed to ship them with Win-dows 95, but theyarrived a couple of months later. Developed to make Win95 abetter games platform, the new APIs speed graphics by up to25 percent, according to Eric Engstrom, a software developmentmanager with Microsoft.Software analysts stress that there is a link between games,which run best on high-performance systems, and business applications.The DirectX APIs, said Dan Lavin, an analyst with researchfirm Dataquest, "could provide a significant advantage forbusiness software developers."Direct3D, one of the most important APIs, has yet to ship. Developed by Microsoft after its acquisition of the graphics firmRender-morphics, Direct3D allows developers to quickly createrendered animation segments. Companies such as LucasArts, Activisionand Papyrus say they will use the new API, which adds lessthan 300KB to the size of a program.Microsoft is certainly looking forward to some big businesswith the emphasis on business-with the new APIs. Said St. John,"We think of the DirectX APIs as being the genie we just letout of the bottle."Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: Another Crack at the Hand-Held MarketBy:Jim ForbesIt may be d j vu all over again, but the names are different.The new OmniGo 100 personal organizer is from Hewlett-Packard,and it runs on GEOS from Geoworks.Only a couple of years ago, conventional wisdom had it thatCompaq should attack the "companion" market-very portable machinesthat retain the look and feel of a desktop PC-with productsthat ran Microsoft's WinPad. But HP, which has built a reputationfor notebooks and palmtops, thinks it's found a better pathto Windows applications-without Microsoft.While the OmniGo is a far cry from the products touted by Compaqand Microsoft, it is a true second-generation hand-held thatlets users exchange data with PCs running Windows.Ironically, HP was to have been among the first manufacturersto use the ill-fated WinPad OS. But the company actually balkedat the price long before Microsoft itself abandoned its WinPad plans. The decision appears to have paid off; the OmniGois a good 300 percent less costly than what Compaq had proposed.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: Micro MultimediaBy:Jim ForbesMultimedia is big-so big, in fact, that you can soon expectto see chip manufacturers deliver new CPUs designed specificallyfor multimedia applications.First, Intel has the P55C (Newstrends, October 1995). The companywill only confirm that it's an enhanced Pentium processor withmultimedia code extensions, and delivery is set for the secondquarter of this year.Cyrix is taking a more aggressive approach with a preliminarydemonstration of its technology, a prototype part called the5GX86. It includes an on-chip graphics accelerator and otherintegrated functions that could make it attractive to costconscious OEMs.Finally, AMD may also get in the hunt by including multimediamicrocode in its new Am5x86.Virtually all these products are aimed at the SOHO market-whichis very big. Worldwide sales of notebooks and desktops nowexceed 4.5 million units per month, and nearly 40 percent aremultimedia-capable.But it's a market that cares as much about price as performance.And Cyrix's price tags have already drawn AST and Epson, whichsigned on for its 5X86 and 6X86 (or M1) series. In short, thechip wars could soon get even more heated.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: A CD-R In Every Home?By:Dave RaffoEvery computing product has a magic price barrier that it needsto crack if it wants to entice the mainstream user. For CDrecorders, analysts said that magic number was $500-half theaverage price.Enter Panasonic's PowerDrive2, which now costs $499.95. "Basically,we decided to get out of the niche market and attack the massmarket," said Rich Harada, marketing manager for optical products.And if other vendors follow Panasonic's lead-they may haveno choice-CD-Rs may yet catch on at home.The PowerDrive2 is a removable, rewritable 650MB phase-changeoptical disk and quad-speed CD-ROM drive. Consumers liked it,says Panasonic, but not the $895 price tag. Maybe now theywill.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: And Now, It's the Virtual TellerBy:James E. PowellEven as the Internet becomes an increasingly popular mediumfor providing company information or technical support-or justwhiling away the time-consumer acceptance of online servicesremains quite low. That's a challenge to firms like Intuit,whose future rests with online offerings such as home banking.Intuit's Quicken for 96 takes a big step toward getting customersto experiment with online services. The financial managementsoftware includes a custom graphical World Wide Web browserto cruise Intuit's home pages, which include personal financetips, details about online offerings from banks and order formsfor Intuit software. Company sources say the sites could eventuallyprovide stock quotes and other financial data. There are noplans-yet-to conduct financial transactions via the service,but given partner Netscape's intense interest in secure onlinecommerce, such features will probably become available in early1996.The browser is a modified version of Netscape-the most popularWeb cruiser now available-that permits customers to visit onlythe sites Intuit selects. Customers wanting to upgrade to afull Internet browser, meanwhile, can call another Intuit partner,Concentric Communications, which is offering an hour of onlinetime for $1.95 per month or seven hours for $9.95. That's thelowest-cost plan yet available from Internet service providers.One Click AwayThe installed base of modems is growing, thanks to their inclusionas standard equipment on new PCs, and easy one-click accessto the Internet should help Quicken's 8 million users. Thecompany decided to form an alliance with an Internet providerbecause Web pages can be changed quickly to respond to theever-shifting nature of financial data.Users of Intuit's chief competitor, Microsoft Money, also haveaccess to the Net via the Microsoft Network. However, theymust already be members of MSN, which comes at a price; Intuit'soffering is free.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: Inside the Corporate WebBy:Jim ForbesNever mind "World Wide"; one of the more interesting aspectsabout the Web is the growing number of private home pages,with access limited to employees of a specific corporation."Corporate home pages are an important tool for enhancing internalcommunications in workgroups and [extended] settings," saidEd Hott, vice president of Internet provider Inters in Sunnyvale,Calif. In fact, Internet consultants report that corporateinterest in the World Wide Web-which, unlike the rest of theInternet, abounds in graphics, sound, hypertext links and othermultimedia elements-as an internal communications medium isat an all-time high, and getting higher.Oil giant Chevron is among the companies using the so-calledIntranet to disseminate information and make software updatesavailable to its 42,000 employees. This has also sparked interestamong staffers who want to publish technical and other newsletters."There is tremendous potential in private Web pages that areadapted to collect information or that serve as two-way interactivelinks to network-enabled applications," said Kirk Trambel,an analyst with Chevron.This trend has great implications. For example, if the Web becomesa true medium of collaborative computing in the corporate world,it could hurt Notes, the groupware product that induced IBMto buy Lotus. Moreover, several vendors are scrambling to helpcorporations do what they need to do on the Web. Borland, Oracle,Microsoft and Netscape are among those aiming products at thismarket. And while Netscape gets most of the press, analystspoint to Microsoft's forthcoming Blackbird, which helps corporateand third-party developers build networked, Web-based apps,as a product that could fit the bill.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: A Taxing SituationBy:Eileen McCooeyWhen the holidays are in full swing ... can tax season be farbehind?Some of those who turned to tax software last year may havenot-so-fond memories of unhappy returns. Several products hadbugs, and vendors scrambled to issue mea culpas and fixes.This year, they're determined to avoid a sequel.For example, Intuit, publisher of TurboTax, has doubled itstesting but is ready to cope with problems. "We have an infrastructurein place that would enable us to ship hundreds of thousandsof [fixes] immediately," reported Guy MacNeill, group productmanager for tax software. And most vendors are setting up onlineforums, bulletin boards, fax-back programs and free support.The bottom line: Makers of tax software can't afford not totake such steps. "At current price points [typically $20 to$40], vendors can't afford to release maintenance versions,"said Lance Dunn, director of software development for Parsons,which publishes Personal Tax Edge.Vendors have enhanced the '95 tax year versions with a wealthof advice. TurboTax, for example, has over 100 video clipswith pointers from tax experts. Kiplinger's Tax-Cut and Personal Tax Edge also use multimedia to counsel users on taxsaving strategies. Most programs now offer context-sensitiveadvice and make it easier to import data from personal-financeprograms.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Windows Top Ten: Windows' Top Ten Software Sept. Aug.1 1 Microsoft Windows 95 Upgrade* from Microsoft2 2 Microsoft Plus* from Microsoft3 6 SoftRAM95* from Synchronys4 4 UnInstaller from MicroHelp5 3 Norton Utilities Upgrade* from Symantec6 8 Norton AntiVirus Upgrade* from Symantec7 7 Netscape Navigator from Netscape8 - Microsoft Works* from Microsoft9 5 Remove-IT from Vertisoft10 - Norton AntiVirus* from Symantec* Win95 Source: PC DataBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. RecapMicrosoft announced that through a combination of upgrades andthe shipment of preloaded PCs, sales of Windows 95 officiallypassed the 7 million mark less than two months after Win95'srelease. o Lotus put its IBM-enhanced weight behind Notes Release4.0, the integrated messaging and groupware package. The prerelease version was sent to 10,000 Lotus Business Partnersand other customers. At press time, the company said the productwould ship before the end of 1995. o Microsoft released updateddrivers to deal with a potential security problem in Windows95. Some end users had found that after a remote administratorlogs off a system, other network users have read-only accessuntil that system is restarted. Only NetWare users who haveenabled File and Print Sharing along with Remote Administrationare at risk. o Netscape announced Power Pack 1.0, a suite ofadd-on applications that extends the capabilities of NetscapeNavigator for Windows. Combining Netscape SmartMarks, Chatand multimedia add-on applications from Adobe and Apple, amongothers, the product lets customers take advantage of five addon apps. o According to a survey conducted by leading OEM PackardBell, almost 25 percent of PC households already have morethan one home computer, and another 14 percent plan to buyanother. o Corbis, the digital media company owned by BillGates, first acquired the entire Bettman Archive, one of theworld's largest photo collections, then reached an agreementto distribute images owned by The State Hermitage Museum inSt. Petersburg, Russia, which has one of the world's largestart collections. o Digital Equipment released FX!32, softwaretranslation technology that allows Windows 95 applicationswritten for Intel-based machines to run on Digital's Alphachips.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: Smart WarningQuantum and Symantec's Norton Smart Doctor for Windows 95, anapplication that warns PC users of impending device failures,is among some 35 products being developed by various vendorsto support the SMART (Self-Monitoring, Analysis and ReportingTechnology) System industry standard for hardware devices.Launched last summer, the SMART System calls for disk-drive monitoring by the drive as well as the host computer,plus a graphical user interface designed to alert the userwhen a device is about to fail.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: No Applications HereTo no one's surprise, Novell decided to put WordPerfect, itsumbrella applications business, up for sale. The decision camenot too long after the company decided to abandon its UNIXbusiness. After struggling to make itself a player in the applicationsarena-WordPerfect's word processing software steadily lostground to Microsoft Word, while its office suite barely gotoff the ground-Novell announced plans to focus on doing whatit does best: networking.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: Money: Good News and BadAccording to Microsoft, nearly 450,000 people took advantageof the company's offer for a free download of Money, its personalfinance product and rival to market leader Quicken. However,the rollout was marred by what the company called a "minorproblem" with the online bill-payment feature. The companyhastily sent out a fix that was also posted on Microsoft'sWeb site.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Newstrends: Alliances OnlineOnline service provider CompuServe struck several strategicalliances. The company joined forces with Premiere Communicationsto launch the CallingAll Card, which looks like a phone cardbut actually gives members a "virtual office" that includesfax mail, voice mail, speed dial, conference calling, travelservices, and up-to-the-minute reports on news, weather andsports. CompuServe also announced plans for a service thatenables users to view multimedia clips online without havingto download playback software and multimedia files. It's thegoal of a deal with Macromedia that will bring the firm's DirectorPlayer technology to the online environment.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Technology Watch: And the Oscar Goes to ... TrinityBy:Jim ForbesDon't look now, but the next big thing in Windows computingcould be seen on a really big screen. Some of the brains behindthe mid-1980s product Video Toaster are working on a new devicethat, despite its vaporware status, has already been pitchedby Intel's CEO Andrew Grove to Steven Spielberg.Trinity, from a company called Play, is a standalone box thatconnects to Pentium PCs running Win95 or Windows NT via a PCIcard. In ess-ence, Trinity, which starts at about $6,000, allowsvideo professionals to turn their computers in-to digital editingstations. Like Video Toaster, which worked with Commodore'sAmiga, Trinity allows videographers to edit and add a varietyof complex special effects to digital video images. It canaccept up to 29 expansion cards.Trinity has several features that previously required rack-mountedsolutions. For example, it supports 10-input digital switching,chroma keying, and the addition, creation and manipulationof color special effects. It includes a timeline editor, audiomixing and ultra-high-speed (10-nanosecond) character generation.The system also supports a 330Mb-per-second proprietary networkingsolution that allows users to interconnect PCs in productionenvironments.Play is bootstrapping its growth from an existing product, Snappy.And though officials say they won't develop one- or two-cardversions for the low end, next-generation versions of Snappywill support some of the effects generated by Trinity.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Technology Watch: Acrobat: Gunning for HTMLBy:James Alan MillerAcrobat, Adobe's electronic publishing tool, has been slow tofind a niche. But its recent integration into browsers couldsignal a major change.Acrobat allows a document to retain its look without requiringthe user to have the application used to create it. And becauseAcrobat has given documents an elegant look and feel, Adobehopes it will overtake HTML.Netscape is now developing a plug-in architecture for its nextgeneration browser. This will allow a future version of Acrobat,expected this year, to render PDF files (Acrobat's file format)in Netscape itself. Look for Acrobat to appear in several upcomingonline packages, including AT&T's Internet service and Microsoft'sBlack-bird browser.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Technology Watch: Dialing Up SavingsBy:Ian EtraRemember VocalTec? The firm sparked interest when it introducedthe Internet Phone, a software package for voice communicationsin real time between two PCs on the Internet. The idea hada simple premise: Linking the PC and the phone via the Netcould lead to big savings.Now some other companies are targeting the same goal. Quarterdeck recently rolled out WebTalk, which provides full duplexphone capabilities over the Net. WebTalk can also be used onone PC to broadcast to multiple PCs running the program, andis bundled with the Mosaic browser. Quarterdeck believes WebTalkcould become effective in collaborative computing.Coming from a different angle, IDT, a provider of Internet accessand international callback services, allows a user to initiatea phone call via the Net. The "call" is placed through a switchthat handles communications routing. In its rollout period,the service will be available only for dialing into the U.S.and the U.K.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Notes From The Lab: From Winmag Central -- We Could Use a UtilityOkay, you caught us, and now we have to don the dunce cap. TheWindows 95 upgrade guide feature in our November 1995 issuementioned that Norton Desktop contains a utility to convert .QAG files back to Windows .GRP files. No such luck. Let'sface it-we were staring out at the playground instead of payingattention in class. Maybe someone (hello, utility programmers!)will come up with a solution.The arrival of the first 120MHz notebooks bodes well for powerportable lovers. A quick look at the Gateway 2000 Solo ($5,999),complete with 1GB hard drive and impressive Wintune scores200 MIPS, 67 MFLOPS and more than 13MB-per-second disk transfertriggered a Pavlovian response among the WinLab rats. Staytuned to upcoming WinLab reviews for a look at the new performancestandard in notebooks, which are still evolving.That buzz you're hearing might not be feedback from your speakers,but bugs being ferreted out of Win95. Microsoft recently posteda fix on its online forums to address a problem with linkingcells to multiple worksheets ... Maybe Office95 should haveincluded a flyswatter.For those not yet connected to the Internet (Hello, McFly! Rejointhe 20th century!), here's a way the plain old telephone canhelp answer your Win95 questions. A Fast Tips for Windows 95number (800-936-4200) has been set up to answer frequentlyasked questions and provide special-announcements informationon the Microsoft support network, plus other important facts.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Notes From The Lab: Netwotking NuggetsHere are a couple of tricks for networking types courtesy ofMark Frale, WinMag's Network Administrator (with an assistfrom Microsoft). To add long filename support to a NetWare3.11 server, you must load a patch from Novell, available onlineat ftp.novell.com/pub/netware/nwos/nw311/osnlm. Run the file311PTD.EXE to extract the file OS2OPNFX.NLM. To see the longfilenames, Windows 95 machines must add a value to the Registryin the HKey_Local_Machine\System\CurrentControlSet\Services\VxD\Nwredir\section-add a SupportLFN key value and insert a line with abinary value of 2.Network administrators also can receive NetWare messages ina flash by running Windows 95-and best of all, it's absolutelyfree! Run WINPOPUP.EXE (conveniently located in your WINDOWSdirectory) minimized to stay one step ahead of trouble. Youcan also use WINPOPUP to chat with others instantly if youcan't wait for an e-mail response.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Notes From The Lab: Update -- Monitoring CutsSampo has dropped below the 1K barrier, but we're talking lowpriced monitors, not low memory. The AlphaScan GLX-KDM-2077E20-inch monitor (WinLab Product Comparisons, February 1995)lists for $995 and is the first large-format display we'veseen at this price threshold.Texas Instruments' notebook prices are also taking a downwardspiral. The TravelMate 5000 line (WinLab First Impressions,September 1995) now starts at $2,999 for a 75MHz Pentium modeland tops out at $4,799 for a P90.The teeny-tiny Datasonix Pereos storage cartridge ("HardwareHeaven," June 20, 1995) now boasts an equally small price.The 1.25GB unit is now $499, down from $649.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Notes From The Lab: Heads UpBully for our alert readers! Craig Bull of the University ofDayton submitted this tip in response to the problems withZoom modems (November 1995). If your modem won't dial out becauseyour phone service beeps to indicate that you have a message,don't panic. You can issue the command "ATX3" to instruct yourmodem to dial even if it doesn't detect a tone-or better yet,include this command as part of your initialization string.Like everyone else, we ran for Office-95 because of the promisesincluding long filename support. But our first response wasto vote against the way files are saved in Word95-that is,with a .DOC extension. That happens even when you try to customizethe extension (e.g., FEATURE.JAN becomes FEATURE.JAN.DOC). To get around this naming convention, you only needa good quote-okay, two quotes: Surround your document namewith quotation marks ("FEATURE.JAN")Jim Powell, our man in Seattle, recently received an Acer Aspire133MHz desktop that has a dramatic new look, including a curveddark-green system and a monitor with Swiss-cheese holes ontop. Alas, it had so many problems we couldn't do a full review.The disk-drive door fell off, the cover wouldn't go back onproperly, and there was a loose part rattling around somewherethat must have come free during shipment. We called Acer, andthe company plans to redesign the case for systems shippingin the spring.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. WinTips: Win95 Tips of the Month Eject! Eject!Right-click on the CD-ROM icon in My Computer and select Ejectfrom the Context menu to eject the CD from the drive.Write Makes RightThe Win95 installation wipes out Windows Write and associatesyour .WRI files with the new WordPad. If you want to keep Write,copy WRITE.EXE and WRITE.HLP to a diskette before you installWin95.Space: The Final FrontierFind out where all the drive space is: Open My Computer, selectall or some of the drives in the folder, right-click on anyof the drives and select Properties from the Context menu.You'll get a tabbed dialog containing available-space informationon each of the selected drives.-Dave Caracappa via the InternetSwitch to Setup SwitchesBy adding switches to the Setup command, you can control whatthe Win95 Setup utility does. To find out what those switchesare, just type SETUP /? at the command prompt.When 'Up' Brings You DownIf you navigate the Start menu with arrow keys, you know thatitems on the top of cascading menus are selected until youpress the down arrow to select items below. To get to the bottomof a long menu, press the up arrow key. When the top menu itemis selected, pressing the up arrow key brings you to the bottom.No More Longing for Long FilenamesGet in the habit of using long filenames! Suggestion: Flag filesyoudon't use but don't want to delete either. If you're going tomake a backup file, remember that you can add a "second extension."For example, instead of renaming the AUTOEXEC.BAT file AUTOEXEC.BAK,rename it "AUTOEXEC.BAT.backup created on January 13 1996."Bill Davisvia CompuServeDisable AutoRunAutoRun plays CDs as soon as you put them in the drive. If youdon't like this feature, you can turn it off. Right-click onMy Computer and select the Device Manager tab. Find your CDROM drive on the list, then double-click on it. Select theSettings tab and deselect Auto Insert Notification.Tell DOS Who's BossBatch files in Win95 leave a telltale DOS residue-the open MSDOS Prompt window. To close it, create a shortcut to the batchfile, right-click on the shortcut to bring up the Propertiesdialog, select the Program tab and click on the Close on Exititem at the bottom.DriveSpace Isn't Just for Hard DisksUse DriveSpace for diskettes! Just remember that if you needto format them in the future, you must do so from the DriveSpaceutility.Launch Folders At StartupYou already know you can put programs and documents in yourStartUp folder to launch things at Win95 startup, but you canalso put folders in there. Just follow the normal procedure Right-click on the Start button and select Open, double-clickon the Programs folder, then the StartUp folder. Now drag thefolder of your choice into the StartUp window.The End Is NearIf you've got a folder window open and want to get to the bottomof it, don't use the scroll bar. Just press Ctrl+End.A Smart RestartSometimes you need to restart Windows to make a settings changetake effect. But there's a faster way. Select Shut Down fromthe Start menu, then press and hold the Shift key when youclick on Restart the Computer, then (still holding down theShift key) click OK. When the screen prompt reads, "Windowsis now restarting," you can let go of the Shift key. Performingthis action bypasses the boot sequence.It's a Cool Feature, Period!You DOS veterans know that typing two periods after the ChangeDirectory command (CD ..) brings you to the parent directoryof the current directory. The Win95 MS-DOS prompt improveson this by the use of three periods and four periods to bringyou to the parent directories once and twice removed, respectively.Got a hot tip? Send it to melgan@cmp.com or Mike Elgan, WindowsMagazine, One Jericho Plaza, Jericho, NY 11753.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Explorer: Why are mighty banks afraid of little software companies?By:Mike ElganThis year, banks and software vendors will wage a bloody warover the future of banking. Even international financial behemothsare scared to death of the comparatively small Intuit and Microsoft.The two companies have been jockeying for control over onlinebanking standards ever since the U.S. Justice Department derailedtheir merger.You may scratch your head at my characterization of Microsoftas a "little software company." But compare Bank of America'sassets of $228 billion and 97,500 employees to Microsoft'sless than $10 billion in assets and 18,000 employees-they'rein different leagues.The notion of a couple of software makers scaring banks withcheap consumer products like Quicken and Money may seem absurd.Fewer than 10 million people use personal finance applications,and only 400,000 to 700,000 use PCs to bank online.But although most Americans still bank the old-fashioned way,a widespread infrastructure for a fully digital banking futureis forming behind the scenes at a breakneck pace. The AmericanBankers Association predicts the number of medium to largebanks (with assets of $1 billion or more) offering PC-basedtransactions will nearly quadruple this year, from 11 percentto 42 percent. Not surprisingly, huge advertising campaignsare in the works that will introduce millions of Americansto the wonders of online banking.The appeal of online bankingOnline banking makes current statements available to you 24hours a day, and lets you pay bills with the click of a mouse.Bill-paying transactions are simple transfers from your accountto the payee's. If the receiver can't accept electronic transfers,the service prints a check and mails it.Much of the bill-paying is automatic: The software reminds youwhat bills are due when. No more writing checks or balancingyour checkbook. No more licking stamps or shuffling off tothe branch office. And it's cheap: about $10 a month or less.Savings in stamps and envelopes alone pay for the cost of servicefor most families.Personal finance applications that support online banking, suchas Quicken, Money and Meca's Managing Your Money, not onlyfacilitate transactions but also keep track of them. They showexactly where your money goes by letting you slice and dicethe data as you can with a spreadsheet. Some services evenhelp you invest online-buying and selling stocks, monitoringyour portfolio and conducting research to stay on top of themarket.Why banks are scaredAs the number of online transactions soars, banking steadilymigrates into the familiar turf of software developers. Thebanks realize how little they know about this business, andthat's why they're scared.Banks win customers by creating a perception of security, stabilityand solvency. This perception is based on images of big, indestructiblevaults (as if the banks keep all the money in there), toweringpillars and solid names built around words like National, Americaand First. Customer loyalty is based on the psychology of trust.Software companies are out to change all that. They want usto view banking as just another form of information processing,and money as just another form of information. They want totransfer customer loyalty from the trusted bank to the preferredsoftware application. Financial institutions would become lowmargin, invisible providers of services whose main featureis low cost.As in the applications software market, the one who controlsthe standards of online banking wins. That's why Microsoft,Intuit, a host of technology companies and banks are scramblingto own the standards, and thus the future, of online banking.Reacting out of concern that borders on panic, banks are doingeverything from giving away copies of Quicken and Money tobuying software companies to launching online services. Butbanks don't know how to compete in this new environment. That'swhy they're hitching their wagons to software and technologypartners as fast as they can.Bank of America and NationsBank bought MECA, which will offerManage Your Money to bank customers and continue to sell itin retail stores. Digicash, Open Market, Block Financial Software,4Home Productions and Netscape offer different software frontends to banking services.A 21-member consortium of American banks and technology companiesis working on an initiative called the Electronic Check Projectto make Internet-based checking available within two years.That opens up the whole issue of security. Software vendorsare responding to users' concerns by developing ways to protectonline transactions. CheckFree Corp.-which provides the securebill-paying back-end services for Quicken, CompuServe and Prodigyis offering a new product called CheckFree Wallet that enablessecure credit-card transactions over the Web.In September, Microsoft and new partner Visa announced theirown means of enabling secure online credit-card transactions,Secure Transaction Technology (STT)Netscape, MasterCard, IBM, Digital, CyberCash and GTE criedfoul at the announcement. Complaining the standard wasn't opento competitors, they urged companies to support their acronym SSL (Secure Sockets Layer)A two-horse race?Despite all this competition, Microsoft and Intuit remain inthe best position to control the future of online banking.Though Microsoft dominates most of the software categories itenters, here it's playing the ill-fitting role of David takingon the online Goliath Intuit. There are more than 8 millionQuicken users out there-many of them fanatics-versus fewerthan 2 million Money users, despite a 450,000-unit giveawayof the Win95 version that expired last October.Quicken 5 tends to get better reviews than Money for Windows95. It's more powerful and offers more services for investors.The current version runs on both Windows 3.x and Win95; thecurrent version of Money runs only on Win95. Each company hasrelationships with more than 20 major financial institutions.Given Intuit's dominance, why is Microsoft even considered acontender? Because Microsoft is brimming with both vision andcash. Microsoft is in the unique position of owning an operatingsystem (the operating system, really), an online service, apersonal finance application, a huge Internet presence anda few billion in cash. Oh, and the company never gives up onwhat it considers a good idea.So, Intuit and Microsoft are the favorites in the online bankingrace. You get to decide who wins when you go to your localcomputer superstore and buy cheap shrink-wrapped personal financesoftware.No wonder banks are scared!Contact Executive Editor Mike Elgan in the "Explorer" topicof WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online and CompuServe,or at the addresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. ReadMe File: Coming Soon to a computer screen near you: MPEGBy:Fred DavisThe latest ladle of acronym soup being served up to Windowsusers is MPEG-which stands for Motion Pictures Experts Group.MPEG is a standards committee composed of people from the motionpicture industry and the high-tech world who got together afew years ago to develop a standard for compressing full-motionvideo for digital playback. That committee's work resultedin the MPEG standard, which has been around for a few yearsbut has suddenly gotten a giant boost, thanks to-you guessedit-Microsoft.Microsoft took a well-deserved drubbing for its anemic Videofor Windows in Windows 3.1. With VFW 3.1, you could watch ajerky, postage-stamp-sized movie on your computer screen inwhat seemed like a pathetic imitation of Apple Computer's QuickTime.Because Microsoft wanted to make multimedia a Windows 95 cornerstone,it launched a vigorous campaign to promote MPEG as a primaryvideo standard for Win95. The centerpiece of Microsoft's strategyis MPEG for Windows 95, a special software driver that Microsoftlicensed from MediaMatics, a small MPEG developer. AlthoughMicrosoft couldn't include this in its initial Win95 version,the company is making it available to developers for incorporationinto their products and will release it as a free add-on toboth Win95 and Windows NT.MPEG is a system for both encoding and decoding full-motionvideo, like movies or video clips. Software developers usespecial encoder hardware in the thousand-dollar-and-up category,such as the RealMagic Producer add-in card from Sigma Designs,which takes output and compresses it into the MPEG file format.To view an MPEG movie, you need an MPEG decoder, which canbe hardware, software or a combination of both. Sigma Design'sRealMagic card, which worked in conjunction with your computer'svideo card, was the first marketed product that allowed PCusers to take advantage of MPEG. In addition, more than 60other MPEG playback cards from a host of manufacturers arenow available. These cards generally sell in the $100 to $300range.MPEG for Windows 95 enables a Pentium-class system to play MPEGencoded videos without any additional hardware. Microsoft haspitched MPEG for Windows 95 as part of the newly announcedMultimedia PC 3, or MPC 3 specification for multimedia computers.The MPC 3 spec calls for a system with a minimum of a 75MHzPentium processor, 8MB of RAM, wavetable audio and a quad-speedCD-ROM drive. This specification is expected to be widely supportedby hardware and software vendors as a minimum target for thenext generation of entertainment and gaming software. Likemost Microsoft products, MPEG for Windows 95 doesn't run wellon the minimum configuration; in fact, you really need a 90MHzPentium just to get so-so performance.Normal videos display about 30 frames per second (fps) to foolyour eye into seeing smooth, seamless motion. MPEG for Windows95 running on a 90MHz Pentium will only play around 24fps,so the image will not appear quite as smooth as it should.In addition, MPEG for Windows 95 produces neither good soundnor accurate colors. The color problem also affects resolution,so that images appear chunky and splotchy. Why such poor videoquality? To explain, I'll need to tell you a few technicaldetails.The type of MPEG used on PCs is called MPEG I, which specifiesa 352x240-pixel output resolution. Since this is less thana third the size of your PC's screen, most MPEG decoders expandthe image to fill the entire screen using a technique calledupsampling. When the MPEG decoder upsamples an image, it replicatespixels to achieve the larger size. The exact technique usedto replicate the pixels makes a real difference in the videoquality. A simple decoder makes a straightforward replication,resulting in the worst quality. The better decoders use fanciertricks, such as interpolating the pixels and smoothing algorithms.Microsoft's MPEG for Windows 95 employs one of the worst MPEGdecoders I've ever seen. My suspicion is that MPEG for Windows95 is really just a come-on for buying dedicated MPEG hardware,either on a separate card or as part of a new video card. Afterseeing some MPEG clips using MPEG for Windows 95, you'll beexcited by the prospects of MPEG, but frustrated by the performanceof the software-only approach.This scenario fits in well with Microsoft's apparent overallstrategy of making Win95 the decade's hardware upgrade engine.If you do get suckered into springing for dedicated MPEG hardware,at least you'll find a dramatic performance turnaround. Thesoftware-only MPEG for Windows 95 plays the MPEG video at 24fps,with AM-radio-quality audio, and sucks up just about all theprocessing power of a 90 or 100MHz Pentium. But if you adda dedicated MPEG decoder chip to lend the CPU a helping hand,you can play back a full 30fps video with CD-quality audio,placing only a 10 percent load on the rest of your system.A good hardware decoder also makes a full-screen image appearsharper because it uses fancy tricks to smooth out the pixelswhen it replicates them.MPEG will become a major buzzword this year. You'll see it allover ads for most systems. But buyer beware! As I hope you'velearned from this column, not all MPEG is created equal. Forexample, Packard Bell currently offers the software-only versionon its systems, so you'll be watching some pretty murky movies.IBM is shipping MPEG on all its new Aptiva systems and usesa hybrid hardware/software approach that decodes the videousing the system's Pentium, but decodes the audio using IBM'sMwave audio card. This intermediary approach provides betterquality than going software-only, but still saps most of yoursystem's horsepower. Compaq is taking the high road on someof its Presario systems by offering a full hardware MPEG decoder,which provides good quality video while minimizing the impacton system performance.Because hardware MPEG decoders are the better way to go, theheated competition in the PC marketplace will drive this approachto the forefront. The next crop of PC video cards will offerMPEG as a standard feature, and pretty soon we'll see MPEGchips migrating to the motherboard. By 1997, just when MPEGI will seem like a stable standard, kaboom! It will be blownaway by MPEG II, offering four times the resolution. MPEG IIlooks better than a TV screen.Chief Analyst Fred Davis is the author of The Windows 95 Bible(Peachpit Press). Contact Fred in the "ReadMe File" topic ofWindows Magazine's area on America Online and CompuServe, orcare of the editor at the addresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Windows at Work: Quit smoking. Lose weight. Give to charity. Sound familiar?By:Cheryl CurridIt's January-time to start making good on those New Year's resolutions.It's also time for my annual plea to encourage you to worksmart. If you work smart, you'll have more time to work outand follow through on a few of your other resolutions as well.Working smart involves rethinking how you do your job. If youroffice is like most, you and your coworkers have probably transferredmany legacy habits to your current jobs. Look around. How aretelephone messages distributed?Still using those pink message slips?Who sets up meetings? Does your company continue to torturesecretaries and administrative staff by making them call listsof people and manually coordinate the best meeting time andlocation?Dig a little deeper. Are you using the right tool for the task?Do you use a spreadsheet as a glorified calculator? Do administrativefolks use the tables in a word processor to calculate expensereports?How does your company distribute information? Are your businesspresentations chock-full of boring lists? Do managers sleepduring presentations, awaking only to render a decision?I'm always amazed at the incredible misuse of technology. Inmany organizations, you see computers everywhere, but theydon't contribute to the bottom line.What's the solution? For starters, let's consider communicationsaids, group calendars, and user training and education courses.Communications aids combine several technologies.Take clip art. Imagine you've prepared a business report andyou want your audience to get the gist of both the good newsand the bad news. Rather than force them to wade through nothingbut boring lists of numbers or a gaggle of graphs, try supplementingyour work with clip art. You could spread the good news byincluding an image of a cheerleader, a superhero taking flightor a person toting a bag of coins accompanied by the caption"We're crying all the way to the bank." You can transmit thenotion of bad news quickly with a clip-art image of a golfermissing a swing, a worried man sitting at his desk with a downwardspiraling chart behind him or a businessperson perched in atree with the caption, "We're out on a limb with this product."One more tip: Put your pictures on the left side of a screenor page, and text or numbers on the right. According to brainresearch experts, this technique wakes up both sides of thebrain and gets the message across more quickly.My favorite clip-art collection is Task Force from New VisionTechnologies. Some of the characters had my staff ROFL (that'srolling on the floor, laughing). Along with the zany charactersare plenty of images for more staid corporate cultures wherehumor isn't politically correct.Color countsColor is another great communicator. It speeds the viewer'sperception of trends by up to four times over black and white.Fortunately, the cost of color has dropped considerably overthe past few years. At the beginning of this decade, a decentcolor printer would have set you back $15,000 to $25,000. Today,Tektronix, Lexmark and Hewlett-Packard provide exquisite coloroutput for a fraction of that cost. Top-quality color printersnow range from $2,500 to $7,500 depending on the technologythey use (laser, thermal wax or phase-change solid ink)The price of LCD panels has also dropped. Expect to pay between$3,000 and $6,000 for a quality LCD panel. I'm partial to thoseby In Focus, Sharp and Proxima. Also, make sure you pair yourpanel with a high-intensity overhead projector. No dim lights,please!By now, you may be wondering if the time it takes to shop forall this stuff, and then get comfortable using it, is worththe eventual productivity gain. It is. If you stick with it,you'll start preparing materials faster-and, more importantly,your audience will make decisions faster.And start using a group scheduler. I know I've sung this tunebefore, but I'll keep singing it until paper appointment calendarsare driven from desktops. They should come with a warning labelthat says "Caution: This product may be hazardous to your company'sproductivity."Do I sound too severe? My firm's research shows companies thatstill use paper calendars consume (make that waste) 20 to 25percent of their administrative staff's time scheduling meetingsand updating duplicate calendar copies. The situation is evenworse for organizations slim on support staff where white-collarprofessionals may spend a day a week on administrative tasks.I shudder to think that in this age of excellent group schedulingproducts-Microsoft's Schedule+, Novell's Groupwise-people stillmake meetings with only slightly modified versions of a quillpen and parchment tablet. This silently robs people of timethey could spend on more productive work, and it artificiallyinflates staffing needs. Even if companies do buy group schedulingproducts, many workers in the organization barely understandhow to use them.This takes me to my last suggestion: training and education.Lack of how-to knowledge robs companies blind. Instructor-ledcourses, which cost $99 to $395 per person per day, are a smallprice to pay for increased efficiency. If that's too pricey,consider video and computer-based training courses. They'renot as effective as live interaction with instructors, butthey beat no training at all.Special-interest groups within your organization are a goodway to spread expertise and knowledge. Users can learn a lotfrom other users.Some organizations prefer to import knowledge by hiring a consultantto teach users special techniques about technology. Just makesure someone opens the session with a discussion about choosingthe right tool for the task.If you need to justify training-course expenses, use simplemath. If each person picks up only one tip from a course, thenuses it to save 30 minutes per workday, that translates to6.25 percent of that person's average work time. It adds upto 2.5 hours per week, or an average of $2,400 per year perperson in labor savings. That sure sounds like a decent returnon investment.I'll bring you more productivity-boosting technologies and techniqueslater this year. In the meantime, Happy New Year and best ofluck with your work-smart program.WinMag Analyst Cheryl Currid is president of Houston-based Currid& Company, a research and consulting firm. Contact Cheryl inthe "Windows At Work" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas onAmerica Online and CompuServe, or care of the editor at theaddresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Dialog box: I'm sitting at my Mac, pondering the most overhyped productin history.By:BRADLEY JOHNSONIt's Windows 95. I'm wearing the "Been there, done that" T-shirtApple sent to journalists as part of its "Windows Truth" campaign.The company's goal was to convince the world that Windows 95is just a poor imitation of the Macintosh operating system.Apple's partially right: Windows 95 makes an average PC clonealmost as easy to use as a Mac. Windows 95 isn't as good asthe Mac OS. It may not even be as good as IBM's flounderingOS/2 Warp.But in the technology business,"best" isn't good enough. Sony'sBeta was the superior videotape standard, but most makers ofvideocassette recorders opted for VHS because Sony bungledits licensing strategy. Today, all the hit movies at Blockbusterare on VHS. With VHS, consumers got what they deserved: a competitivemarket for electronic hardware and an abundance of software.Ditto Windows 95.And the Mac? Been there, done that. I'm using my Mac less andless, and spending more time on a Windows 95 PC. I'm happilybuying into the Win95 hype. Masterful hype turns a good productinto a global movement, and I don't feel like being left behind.If this software is good enough for my haircutter, a cameraguy I met at a TV station and a cabbie, it's good enough forme.Microsoft, other PC software and hardware makers, and retailersare spending an estimated $700 million on advertising and promotionto ensure that Windows 95 becomes the VHS of computers. Thecomputer industry stands to make billions off the success ofWindows 95.But there's a downside to all this hype: The product can neverlive up to its buildup. As the young, obsessed managers atMicrosoft like to say, Windows 95 isn't a cure for cancer.It can't even eradicate bugs. The software giant had to offerreplacement disks to squash a bug just days after the product'sintroduction.Bugs are inevitable in software, but the pressure is on Microsoftto fix them-and not to leave customers stranded. Microsoftis pitching Windows 95 to millions of people who've never evenused computers. If Microsoft doesn't deliver customer satisfaction,its reputation will crash faster than, well, the early Windows95 beta it sent out last spring.Fear not. Microsoft's campus is brimming with people drivento build good products, and the company can deliver on itspromises. Bill Gates, best known for being the richest guyon Earth, is not P.T. Barnum selling his circus acts to suckers.And Windows 95 isn't New Coke, an overhyped product no onewanted. Win95 is what the computer industry and users wantand need: a good product backed by a great vision.In the ever-changing world of computers, Gates is selling acompelling view of where technology will take us. That's thesort of vision Apple founder Steve Jobs and former chairmanJohn Sculley offered in the 1980s. Today, Apple has lost thatvision thing, but Gates is seeing 20/20 through his smudgedglasses. He's offering Windows 95 to take computer users exactlywhere they want to go today. For $89.95, Windows 95 is a bargainfare to the future.Gates' salesmanship (read: hype) is causing hundreds of PC makers,thousands of software developers and millions of customersto buy into Windows 95, creating a computer supermarket ofproducts. The combination of mass appeal and competition meansthis hype-as with VHS-is buying a good deal for users.Microsoft appropriated many Macintosh features for Windows 95,so it's not surprising Microsoft also borrowed the conceptof computer hype. Apple turned Macintosh into a global sensationwith a 1984 Super Bowl commercial that suggested the new computercould save the world from Big Brother. Unfortunately, the originalMac didn't have the software to do that or much else. Becauseof bungled business decisions, what was called "the computerfor the rest of us" is used by less than 10 percent of us.By contrast, Windows 95 succeeds clunky, tired Windows 3.x,which is used on some 80 percent of PCs. Given that the worldhad already settled for bad Windows, the introduction of goodWindows is something worth hyping.Windows 95 is, to be sure, a media Circus Maximus. Microsoftencouraged the frenzy with an army of public relations executivesand an aggressive effort to put early versions of Win95 intothe hands (and PCs) of journalists. During the carnival-themedlaunch at Microsoft's suburban Seattle headquarters, some 3,000journalists jostled for interviews with Gates, struggled tofind an exclusive angle on the overblown story and searchedfor nonjournalists to interview. Not too different, perhaps,from the upcoming political conventions, except Gates has ahigher ambition-it's global domination, stupid!This was "Boys (and Girls) on the Bus" at its best. Microsoftrented school buses to remove journalists from the groundsafter the all-day event.In the month leading up to the Aug. 24 introduction, journalistswrote more than 6,000 Win95 stories. During the week beforethe launch, TV stations and networks ran 345 segments on thetopic, approaching the coverage devoted to Bosnia, accordingto Medialink Public Relations Research. During the three weeksleading to launch, NBC and its CNBC cable channel accountedfor 70 percent of total Win95 coverage among the major networkand cable news outlets. NBC and Microsoft, coincidentally,have numerous business dealings.Microsoft doesn't deserve-and doesn't claim-full credit forthis PR coup. "We just got the ball rolling," one PR staffersays. Then all media creatures great and small jumped in, notwanting to miss The Big Story.A case of media lemmings rushing headlong toward the hype? There'sno doubt a bit of that, but Windows 95 is worth writing aboutand reading about as a cultural and business phenomenon.The birth of this savior is a once-in-a-lifetime event. Windows95 arrives as the masses leap into the computer and Internetage. It's backed by every advertising and promotional trickimaginable, on an unprecedented global scale.Like any pop culture phenomenon, Windows 95 has taken on a lifeof its own. But when Microsoft unveils the sequel in two tothree years, it's unlikely the world will again stop to watch.The Second Coming happens only once.Bradley Johnson is a Los Angeles-based columnist and technologymarketing writer for Advertising Age, a weekly trade newspaper.Contact Brad in the "Dialog Box" topic of WINDOWS Magazine'sarea on America Online and CompuServe, or care of the editorat the addresses on page 18. Have an opinion (or a gripe) aboutWindows computing you'd like to share? Send it to Nancy A.Lang at the addresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Multimedia: A Rich Mixture of Sight and SoundBy:Dave RaffoThe IBM ThinkPad 760CD is the Rolls-Royce of multimedia PCsit's for people who want everything in a notebook and don'tmind paying for it.The ThinkPad 760CD comes with a quad-speed CD-ROM, giant 12.1inch Black Matrix high-resolution screen (800x600 pixels),video decoder chip for movie-like video, and MWave media processorfor stereo sound. It's capable of phone, fax and modem functions,and it comes with a 90MHz Pentium processor, up to 40MB ofRAM and a 1.2GB hard disk.For comfort, the ThinkPad 760CD's full-size keyboard tilts upautomatically and includes a built-in palm rest.And there's much more: The ThinkPad 760CD runs MPEG-1 and MPEG2 video with NTSC/PAL video output that lets you plug the unitinto a color TV. It includes 16-bit wavetable audio with SoundBlaster, MIDI and WAV support, speakers, and built-in microphoneand headphone jacks. The 7.4-pound unit measures 8.3 by 11.7by 2.1 inches.$5,349 to $7,449IBM800-426-2968, 919-517-1950Toshiba Satellite Pro 410CDTThe Toshiba Satellite Pro 410CDT multimedia notebook featuresa quad-speed CD-ROM module, an 11.3-inch TFT active-matrixdisplay with 800x600-pixel resolution, and Sound Blaster Procompatible audio with MIDI and WAV support. It has a 90MHzPentium processor, and ships standard with 8MB of RAM and a772MB hard drive with 13-millisecond access time. The SatellitePro 410CDT weighs 7.4 pounds and measures 2.2 by 11.8 by 9.2inches.$4,699Toshiba America Information Systems800-999-4273, 714-583-3000Panasonic KXL-D740You don't have to spring for a new notebook to get quad-speedCD-ROM capability. The Panasonic KXL-D740 portable quad-speedCD-ROM drive will keep that notebook you just bought with dualspeed CD-ROM from becoming old hat.The 14-ounce unit connects to your notebook through a PCMCIAType II card, or to a desktop PC with a SCSI II interface.The KXL-D740 measures 1.4 by 5.52 by 8.2 inches, transfersat 600Kbps and provides about two hours of data and four hoursof audio on six AA batteries. It doubles as an audio CD player.$499Panasonic800-742-8086, 201-348-7000Real ImpactReal Impact, a 32-bit video editor, lets you seamlessly importthe files you need to create digital content for multimediapresentations. Its instant full-screen, full-motion digitalvideo playback with audio eliminates the need to compile multipletracks. Besides presentations, you can use Real Impact forCD-ROM titles, information kiosks and cost-effective videotapes.Real Impact requires an Intel 486 or Pentium PC running WindowsNT.$2,995Avid Technology800-875-4699, fax 508-640-9486VideoCraftVideoCraft's seven effects editors take advantage of Win95's32-bit architecture, interface and OLE capabilities. The videoproduction tool's editors-Overlay, Stylize, Colorize, Distort,Morph, Transition and Warp-combine to offer millions of specialeffects. You can use up to three effects simultaneously toedit videos or images. VideoCraft supports advanced Alpha Channelcompositing for ghosting, montage and other effects.$199.95Andover Advanced Technologies508-635-5300, fax 508-635-5326Umax MaxMedia TV MiniThe Umax MaxMedia TV Mini is a pocket-sized (1.5 by 1.75 by5 inches), 8-ounce box that converts the VGA video output ofyour computer into a broadcast-TV-standard signal.The device connects to a TV for computer-based multimedia presentationsor to a VCR for video publishing. It supports 640x480-pixeltrue-color-to-NTSC conversions as well as 800 x600-pixel PALbased conversions.$179Umax Technologies800-562-0311, 510-651-4000miroVideo DC20The miroVideo DC20 video editing card provides 640x480-pixelfull-motion digital video capture, along with editing, playbackand print-to-tape capabilities at 60-field S-Video quality.It uses onboard Motion-JPEG compression to work at low datarates. You can edit and store video clips and images as MotionJPEG files on your hard drive, then output them to videotapewithout any loss of resolution. The package includes AdobePremiere 4.0 LE software for digital video editing, visualeffects and titling. Adobe Photoshop LE and Asymetrix 3D fx software are also included for image enhancement and specialeffects. The miroVideo DC20 supports NTSC, PAL and SECAM standards.$999miro Computer Products800-249-miro, 415-855-0940Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Notebook ComputersThe HP OmniBook 5000 CTS 5/120 notebook provides desktop-likeperformance with a 120MHz Pentium processor, 16MB of RAM anda 1.2GB hard disk. The notebook, based on a PCI bus for acceleratedgraphics, also includes 16-bit Sound Blaster-compatible audio,a 10.4-inch TFT active-matrix screen and NTSC/PAL video outputthat lets you connect the unit to a TV.$6,630 (street)Hewlett-Packard Co.800-443-1254, 503-715-2004Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Desktop ProjectorsThe Proxima Desktop Projector 2400 is the company's entry-levelmultimedia LCD projector. It's designed for traveling professionalswho make lots of presentations before small audiences. TheDesktop Projector 2400 provides 190 lumens of brightness, projectsimages at 640x480-pixel VGA resolution and weighs 21 pounds.$6,295Proxima Corp.800-447-7692, 619-457-5500Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: SpeakersTwo Labtec LCS-3210 speakers produce three-dimensional audio,thanks to the speakers' Spatializer 3-D stereo sound. The Spatializerinteractive technology enriches the sound and makes you thinkit's coming at you from all sides. Because the speakers don'trequire a subwoofer, they generate deep bass notes despitetheir narrow design. The speakers measure 11.5 by 3.34 by 9inches.$119.99Labtec360-896-2000, fax 360-896-2020Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Personal OrganizersThe Sidekick 95 Deluxe CD-ROM is enough to make Oscar Madisona neat freak. Not only does it include Starfish Software'sSidekick 95 personal organizer and Dashboard 95 desktop utility,but it throws in two interactive videos on getting organized.Sidekick 95 Deluxe also makes going online a snap by offeringAmerica Online software, which includes 10 hours of free connecttime.$79.95Starfish Software800-765-7839, 408-461-5800Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Digital Input: HP OmniGo 100 -- Hold a World of Info in Your HandsCombining the functions of a paper notebook and computer notebook,the HP OmniGo 100 puts personal information and financial toolsin the palm of your hand.The hand-held organizer packs an appointment book, phone book,notepad, database, calculator, spreadsheet and business toolsin an 11.6-ounce unit. At 1 by 3.75 by 6 inches, the OmniGo100 fits into your coat pocket. Its 240x240-pixel monochromescreen folds back on a 360-degree rotating hinge, so you canuse it like a traditional notepad.Also available for the HP OmniGo 100 are a Connectivity Packfor connection to a Windows-based PC, Clip & Go to link itto Windows' Clipboard through a serial port, and six StrategyGames. The HP OmniGo 100 is based on the Geos operating system.You use a pen or the keyboard to input information. The OmniGo'sJotter application lets you jot notes that you can organizelater, and its Graffiti system provides handwriting recognitioncapability.The OmniGo 100 comes with 1MB of RAM, a Type II PCMCIA slotand 3MB of ROM. It runs on two standard AA batteries and alithium backup.$349 (street)Hewlett-Packard Co.800-443-1254, 503-715-2000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Digital Input: TV One DeltaScan and TV One DeltaScan-PRO -- Images Go fromPC to TVLooking for a way to turn your PC's video output into NTSC (NationalTV Standards Committee) or PAL (Phase Alternating Line) video?The TV One DeltaScan family consists of two models that convertyour computer's video signal into images that are compatiblewith professional display standards. The TV One DeltaScan isrecommended for systems with display outputs of 800x600 pixels,although it can work with outputs as dense as 1600x1200.The TV One DeltaScan-PRO is for computers with a resolutionof up to 1024x768 pixels. Both systems include an infraredremote-control unit, are compatible with 24-bit video subsystemsand include controls that allows precise adjustment of thedisplay window size.DeltaScan, $395; DeltaScan-PRO, $695TV One Multimedia Solutions800-721-4044,606-282-7303Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Digital Input: Connectix QuickCam -- Plug and PictureThe Connectix QuickCam turns your PC into an instant snapshotdeveloper. The 4-ounce digital video camera plugs into theparallel port, installing as easily as a mouse.The QuickCam's bundled software lets you take pictures and makemovies on your PC. The device produces still and video imagesat up to 320x240 pixels with 64 shades of gray. It capturesvideo images at 15 frames per second or better.$99 (street)Connectix Corp.800-950-5880, 415-571-5100Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: VideoconferencingIs videoconferencing becoming mainstream? The PictureTel LivePCS 200 costs about one-third the price of PictureTel's firstvideoconferencing product, released in late 1994. The PCS 200,jointly developed with Compaq, has an interface modeled afterMicrosoft Office and plug-and-play features. It offers a customizablefloating toolbar, an easy-to-use address book and support for32-bit color in a video call.$1,995PictureTel Corp.800-716-6000, 508-762-5000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Tape BackupWhat do you do if your hard disk crashes under Windows 95? TheTapedisk Professional for Windows 95's codeblue feature letsyou recover without reinstalling Win95. From a boot diskette,the tape storage system lets you restore the complete tapebackup to a newly formatted hard disk. The Tapedisk lets yourPC use a SCSI tape drive like a logical disk. Any Win95 applicationcan write files directly to the tape.$249.95 (direct)Tapedisk Corp.800-827-3372, 715-235-3388Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Fax ModemsBesides providing 28.8Kbps transfer rates, the Creative LabsModem Blaster 28.8 PCMCIA includes Internet access and faxsoftware. The fax modem bundles NetManage's Chameleon InternetTools and Pacific Image Communications' SuperFax software.SuperFax includes fax broadcasting, pager notification of newfaxes, a phone book, fax viewer and TWAIN support.$249.99 (street)Creative Labs800-998-5227, 408-428-6600Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Notebook Computers: AST Ascentia 950N/90 -- Speed and Video to GoFor speed and desktop-like multimedia features in a notebookcomputer, check out the AST Ascentia 950N/90, which uses Intel's90MHz Pentium processor.This notebook ships standard with 256KB of cache memory, 1MBof video memory and a 32-bit graphics accelerator. It provides16-bit Sound Blaster audio, 8MB of RAM, an 800MB or 1.2GB harddisk, and either a 10.4-inch color active-matrix or TFT screen.The Ascentia 950N/90's dual operating system install optiongives you a one-time choice of Windows for Workgroups 3.11or Windows 95. The operating system not chosen will be deleted.AST's Ascentia 950N/90 uses lithium ion batteries, which willpower the notebook for up to 6 hours, according to the manufacturer.The portable weighs approximately 6.4 pounds without its batterycharger, which charges faster with the system on.From $3,449 (street)AST Research800-876-4278, 714-727-4141Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Notebook Computers: Kiwi OpenNote -- A Kiwi That Can Take FlightLooking for an expandable multimedia notebook computer? TheKiwi OpenNote uses Cyrix's 5x86 (Intel-compatible) processorand an open architecture designed for hassle-free configurationand upgrades.The OpenNote incorporates 16KB of write-back cache and shipsstandard with a 540MB removable hard disk, at least 8MB ofRAM and a 100MHz processor (a 120MHz processor is optional)Also included with the system are one Type II stacked PCMCIAslot, a 10.4-inch dual-scan color screen, touchpad pointingdevice, 14.4Kbps fax modem and 16-bit sound card, and nickelmetal hydride batteries.With easy upgrades in mind, Kiwi uses 72-pin SIMM modules andthe Cyrix 5x86 processor, which is a plug-in module. You canexpand to 32MB of RAM through one 72-pin slot. The OpenNoteweighs 5.8 pounds and ships with Windows 95.A quad-speed CD-ROM drive and 28.8Kbps fax modem are optional.8MB of RAM, $2,495;16MB, $2,795Kiwi Computer408-492-9188, fax 408-492-9187Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Notebook Computers: Epson ActionNote 890 Series -- Take Action NotebooksA notebook from the Epson ActionNote 890 Series won't put youin the poorhouse, even if it's designed for multimedia. The890C and 895C run on a Cyrix DX4-class 100MHz processor. Bothcome standard with 8MB of RAM, a 540MB removable hard disk,an ActionPoint touchpad, palm rest and a 10.4-inch dual-scancolor display. You can choose between Windows 95 or 3.11. The895C multimedia model adds a built-in Sound Blaster-compatible16-bit stereo, internal microphone and speaker.890C, from $2,099 (street); 895C, from $2,299Epson America800-BUY-EPSON x3000,310-782-0770Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: NotebooksDoes the average laptop computer lack the muscle necessary foryour applications or lifestyle? The Itronix X-C 6000 CrossCountry Computer is a rugged notebook that is available witha self-contained 14.4Kbps modem and wireless communicationsdevices, a 260MB hard disk, 4MB to 16MB of system memory and512KB of video memory. It also features a Type III PCMCIA slot,nickel cadmium or nickel metal hydride batteries, and a 40MHzlow-voltage 486 processor. It's available with a 640x480-pixelmonochrome display with touch screen and meets most U.S. militarydurability standards.From $4,810 (with touch screen)Itronix Corp.800-555-4104, 509-624-6600The Texas Instruments Extensa 550, 550CD and 550CDT are 75MHzPentium notebooks for home and small businesses. They shipstandard with 524MB hard disks, 8MB of RAM and modular floppydisk drive bays that also accept an optional lithium ion battery.The 550CD adds a dual-speed CD-ROM drive. The 550 and 550CDuse 10.4-inch dual-scan displays. The 550CDT includes a CDROM drive, 16-bit Sound Blaster Pro-compatible stereo and a10.4-inch TFT display.550, $2,499; 550CD, $2,999; 550CDT, $3,599Texas Instruments800-TI-TEXAS, 817-771-5856Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Internet Access: Instant Internet 3.0 -- Fast and Wide ConnectionsInstant Internet 3.0 lets you use the latest and greatest resourcesto access the Internet more efficiently.The new version of the hardware/software product includes a32-bit Winsock for compatibility with Windows 95 and NT, andthe newest Netscape version. It also comes with a built-in64Kbps ISDN connection to deliver dramatically higher bandwidththan its previous versions. Its new administrative tools includeSNMP support, logging and monitoring facilities, and sophisticatedcontrols on user access.Administrators can assign and limit access to particular Websites on a per-user or group basis, as well as by weekday andtime. A dynamic monitoring screen displays connection status,transfer rates and number of connected users.Instant Internet connects up to 50 concurrent users.$4,495Performance Technology800-784-4638, 210-349-2000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Internet Access: CyberJunction -- NT: A New Internet FrontierA Windows NT-server based product, CyberJunction offers Internetaccess, TCP/IP and host connectivity for Novell NetWare environments.Designed specifically for workgroups, CyberJunction lets youconnect to the Internet quickly and securely.CyberJunction includes Frontier's SuperWeb Web server, andFrontier Internet applications from SuperTCP Suite 1.2 andSuperHighway Access 2.0.  This bundling allows NetWare users toimprove internal and external communications through the WorldWide Web.  By providing IPX to IP bridging through a WindowsNT-based server, CyberJunction eliminates the needfor TCP/IP software on every desktop.Five-user package, $1,795; 100-user package, $17,250Frontier Technologies Corp.800-929-3054,414-241-4555Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Internet Access: iCAT Electronic Commerce -- Purr-fect CatalogsDesign customized, interactive catalogs for the Internet oryour CD-ROM with iCAT Electronic Commerce Toolkit 2.0. Thisthree-product set-the Commerce Manager, Commerce Exchange andoptional Commerce Engine-lets you create an electronic catalogand conduct business either by CD-ROM or the Internet.Manager Pro, $4,495; Lite, $1,495; Exchange, $5,000; licensingfee for first run, Engine Pro, $35,000; Lite, $15,000Interactive Catalog Corp.800-558-4228, 206-623-0977Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: InternetYou or your business can set up a graphical online system andaccess the Internet and World Wide Web with the WorldgroupInternet Server. This package includes a 20-user version ofGalacticomm's Worldgroup online system/workgroup software,the Internet Connectivity Option 2.0 and a Dial-Out add-onoption. The new Internet extension offers proxy and pass-throughSLIP/CSLIPP/PPP.$1,400 (street)Galacticomm800-328-1128, 305-583-5990Is your business still using slow modems to connect to the Internet?Speed things up with Netopia 630 and Netopia 640. The productsare part of Farallon Computing's family of high-speed ISDNproducts and services. They provide Netopia Internet routersand software, including the Netopia Starter Kit, Netscape Navigatorand the MS Plus Internet Jumpstart Kit. The products work withEthernet LANs supporting Windows 3.1, 95 and NT.The Netopia 630 supports up to five simultaneous users; the640 supports unlimited users.Netopia 630, $1,299;Netopia 640, $1,599Farallon Computing510-814-5000, fax 510-814-5023The InterGO browser is aimed at students, parents and educators.It uses scenes, including an office, library, newsroom andeven a treasure map, to connect to integrated reference resourcesand to the Internet.$99TeacherSoft214-424-7882,http://www.teachersoft.comBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Database: Prospero -- Safety Through a Tempest of AppsProspero bridges your desktop applications, databases and LotusNotes. The visual software tool lets you quickly move databack and forth among Notes, Microsoft Excel and Word or corporateSQL databases.And because it requires no source or OLE code, department headscan work with information systems managers to build the bridges.Prospero constructs an application from reusable components.It uses OLE to integrate applications and ODBC to integraterelational databases. You assemble graphical building blocksto perform a specific task and connect those blocks with arrowsto indicate how you want the data to flow. When you run theprogram, Prospero reads and writes data to and from applications.The 32-bit application runs on Windows 95, 3.1 or NT.$695 (direct)Oberon Software617-494-0990, fax 617-494-0414Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Database: BMDP/Diamond -- Color Your Statistical WorldJust because a software program analyzes and interprets data,it doesn't have to be drab. BMDP/Diamond, a tool originallydeveloped for OS/2 and UNIX, has been redesigned for Windowsand transforms data into revealing graphics.Using tools such as 3-D scatter plots, Parametric Snake plotsand a real-time spreadsheet editor, BMDP/Diamond helps youexplore and manipulate data. It dynamically links each session'sdata representation windows. Change information or color, andthe program updates those changes in all related data windowsand graphics. BMDP/Diamond directly imports from MicrosoftExcel, Lotus 1-2-3, dBASE and BMDP products. It also worksas a front-end application to other statistical packages.$395; competitive upgrade, $295BMDP Statistical Software800-238-2367, 310-207-8800Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Database: Optimas Library -- When Image Is EverythingOptimas Library is a database for the image-conscious.The multiuser image database provides data management and batchimage analysis. It enables you to cus- tomize, archive, search,analyze and automate your image management.Optimas Library accepts images from disk or Clipboard, as wellas those captured from TWAIN-supported scanners or multimediaboards.$995Optimas Corp.800-635-7226, 206-402-8888Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: E-MailEmbla 2.0 is a 32-bit enhanced version of the network e-mailapplication that includes right-mouse-button access to contextsensitive menus, priority flagging, message and attachmentsearching, batch sending and Netscape Navigator integration.You can also now activate Embla from other applications.$99ICL ProSystems800-755-8646, 714-855-5505Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Help AuthoringDoc-To-Help 2.0 is an upgraded version of the Windows help-authoringtool. The program was updated to work with Microsoft Word forWindows 95. It uses 32-bit architecture with support for longfilenames, automatically generates contents files (CNT files)and makes it easy to include multimedia elements in Help files.WexTech also released Doc-To-Help 1.7 for Word 2.0 and 6.0users who work in Windows 95 or 3.1.$395; upgrade to 2.0, $129; upgrade to 1.7, $29WexTech Systems800-939-8324, 212-949-9595WinHelp Office 95's ToolKit includes Help-To-Source functionand Internet Access. Help-To-Source lets you convert any Windows3.x, 95 or NT help files into their RTF (Rich Text Format)and HPJ (Help Project) source files. Internet Access allowsyou to create a jump from Windows Help to the Internet withany Web browser. The WinHelp Office suite also includes RoboHelp95, Mastering WinHelp and the Moving to WinHelp 95 Kit.$599Blue Sky Software Corp.800-459-2356, 619-459-6365Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Graphics: Gryphon Batch It -- Convert a New Batch of ImagesA graphic artist's work is (almost) never done. There are alwaysfiles to convert from one format to another. Gryphon BatchIt helps perform these critical image-processing and batchmode operations. With its "tile" interface, Gryphon Batch Itsimplifies complex graphics-processing procedures and reducesproduction time.Want to perform a color correction on a series of images? Justdrag out a few tiles and link them together; Gryphon BatchIt does the rest. The program's image utility performs tasksin succession by "linking" specific tiles. You can resize,adjust brightness and contrast, and convert several imagesto a different file format in a single batching process.Gryphon Batch It saves the tiles that define a particular batchsequence. The application works in the background while youperform other tasks.$199Gryphon Software Corp.619-536-8815, fax 619-536-8932Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Graphics: SolidWorks 95 -- Solid Work for a CADNo software is poised to take advantage of Windows 95 like CADprograms. SolidWorks 95 takes steps to improve CAD by utilizingWin95's long filenames, 32-bit operating system, multitaskingand resource management. The application brings the power ofproduction-level solid modeling to the Windows desktop.SolidWorks 95 forms the basis of a 3-D-centric design process.In 3-D-centric design, a fully detailed solid model is usedas a master model for producing drawings and performing otherdownstream functions such as finite element analysis and numericalcontrol programming.Designed for mechanical engineers and designers, SolidWorks95 features the FeatureManager for displaying the model anda list of features to build it.$3,995SolidWorks Corp.508-371-2910, fax 508-371-7303Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Graphics: Instant 3D for Windows 95 -- Eye-Popping WordsIn a world full of dull documents and pedestrian Web pages,nothing grabs a reader's attention like 3-D.Instant 3D for Windows 95 adds 3-D words and graphics to MSWord, PowerPoint or any Windows 95 document or presentation.Instant 3D allows users to turn any text into a 3-D objectwith, say, a wood- or chrome-like texture. It includes hundredsof 3-D clip-art objects.$49Visual Software818-883-7900, fax 818-593-3737Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Imaging/GraphicsGet a whole new image with Kai's Power Tools 3. The imagingprogram's new features include the KPT Lens f/x, which givesyou control over effects like smudges, noise and Gaussian blur;the KPT Spheroid Designer, a 3-D ray-tracing engine to rendercustom 3-D spheres; and KPT Interform, which lets you mix multipletextures to create whole new textures. The KPT Texture Explorercreates new generations of visual effects with no tiling.$199MetaTools805-566-6200, fax 805-566-6385Drag 'n Draw 1.1 is a 32-bit version of the easy-to-use chartand diagramming program. The upgraded version, designed forWindows 95 and NT, supports OLE 2.0, long filenames and e-mailintegration. You can drag and drop objects from libraries intoa drawing, or create a custom work of art. The product willship with diskettes for the 16- and 32-bit versions in thesame box.$79 (street)DeltaPoint800-446-6955, 408-648-4000As Windows PCs make inroads into the graphics area traditionallydominated by Macs, the ability to share files is becoming increasinglyimportant. Canvas 3.5 for Windows 95 allows Windows users toexchange graphics documents with Macintosh and Power Macintoshplatforms. The program runs under Windows 95, 3.x and NT.$399.95; $99.95 competitive upgradeDeneba Software305-596-5644, fax 305-273-9069Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Business Software: Visual AccountMate -- Hold Win95 and NT AccountableWith Visual AccountMate, number crunchers can take full advantageof the power of Windows 95 and NT and the programming languageof 32-bit Visual FoxPro.Visual AccountMate's tools include Express Icons for quick accessto common functions, Drill Down for convenient access to microinformation in each field, Lookup for selecting macro informationfrom extensive lists and View for revealing financial detailsbehind summary totals.Other features include Transaction Rollback-which prevents incompleteentries during a power failure-internal e-mail messaging andphoto-imaging capabilities. Visual AccountMate links directlyto Microsoft Excel and Lotus 1-2-3, includes multiple passwordsecurity levels and has a built-in Report Designer for dragand-drop form customization. AccountMate consists of sevenlevels-System Manager, General Ledger, Accounts Payable, AccountsReceivable, Sales Order, Purchase Order and Inventory Control.Compiled version, $995; source-code version, $1,295; developerversion, $1,795SourceMate Information Systems800-877-8896, 415-381-1101Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Business Software: Crush -- Crush the Competition or CrashCrush, a rather fancifully named program, can help you crushthe competition or at least keep you from getting pounded byconstantly changing market forces.This interactive CD-ROM tool helps you develop marketing strategiesand action plans.Enter information about your company, and Crush's database refinesmarketing objectives and evaluates competitive strengths andweaknesses. It helps you identify and analyze trends and competitors,map competitive positions, and create reports, presentationsand action plans.Crush's tables and charts include a Competitive Database, MarketAnalysis, Positioning Charts, Action Planner and Reports Generator,and Mentor and Case Studies. The Competitive Database spellsout your strengths and weaknesses against those of your competitorsin relation to market trends and perhaps information from yourspreadsheets. The Market Analysis defines your product andits target audience.$499Hands-On Technology800-772-2580, 415-579-7755Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Business Software: WinMerge 2.1 -- Point-and-Shoot MergingWinMerge 2.1 lifts screen data from virtually any Windows-basedapplication for point-and-shoot merging into word processingapplications such as Microsoft Word, WordPerfect and Word Pro.WinMerge lets you switch from a form letter with the click ofa mouse, so you can create form letters with drop-in mergefields. You don't have to learn merge procedures, there's noneed to manually type in merge commands, and you don't haveto learn how to create and maintain OLE links.$89 (direct)Napersoft800-380-1000, 708-778-0080Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Bar CodingB-Coder 3.0 provides high-quality bar codes for labels, forms,coupons, book covers, invoices and other documents. Its fulldesktop publishing features-including color, rotation and barwidth reduction-give you complete control of the bar-code format.B-Coder comes in two versions, B-Coder Pro and B-Coder DTPfor desktop publishers with limited bar-code needs.B-Coder Pro, $395; B-Coder DTP, $199T.A.L. Technologies800-722-6004, 215-763-7900Barcode Anything lets you design and print bar codes directlyfrom its database. The Barcode Anything Track database includestemplates for items you're likely to bar code, and lets youset passwords and manage your bar-code data. Barcode AnythingScan is a scanning pen that reads and decodes bar-code types.The Barcode Anything Label software reads files from otherapplications, and prints to laser, dot-matrix and selectedthermal printers.$379Zebra Technologies VTI800-477-5589, 801-576-9700ProSort 2.0 can presort and bar code 300,000 pieces of mailper minute, and provides optimum postal discounts from a user'sdatabase.$595Group 1 Software800-368-5806, 301-731-2300Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Input Devices: Mitsumi Wireless Mouse -- Let Your Mouse Run FreeTired of always tugging on your mouse's cable? Don't be trappedby your mouse-break free from that desktop web of wires withthe Mitsumi Wireless Mouse.This two-button cordless mouse communicates via radio to a receiverthat attaches to your PC's standard serial port, and worksfrom within about 3 feet of your computer. The Mitsumi WirelessMouse features 400cpi resolution, a 4800bps baud rate and aretail price of about $50.The receiver attaches to your PC via a 6-foot cable. You canplace the mouse inside the receiver when you're not using themouse.The included lithium battery provides up to three years of power,assuming typical usage.The Mitsumi Wireless Mouse works with any PCs running Windows95, Windows 3.1, or DOS 5.0 or higher. It comes with a twoyear warranty.$49.95Mitsumi Electronics Corp.800-MITSUMI, 214-550-7300Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Input Devices: Interlink DeskStick -- Joystick Makes Its PointThe Interlink DeskStick saves desktop space and is more comfortablefor your hands and wrist. It frees up space because it usesno mousepad. And-good news for lefties-it works with eitherhand.The fingertip joystick controls the cursor, which eliminatesrepeated side-to-side hand motions and awkward wrist angles.Its Force Sensing Resistor converts changes in pressure appliedby your finger into cursor movement.The DeskStick is symmetrically designed with click buttons locatedon both sides.The device provides standard serial or PS/2 mouse ports, iscompatible with Microsoft Mouse, DOS, Windows 3.x and Windows95 mouse drivers, and ships with VersaPoint software in caseno driver is present.$59.95Interlink Electronics800-340-1331, 805-484-1331Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Input Devices: P.I. Engineering WhyKeyKey -- WhyKeyKey? Why Not?No, the P.I. Engineering WhyKeyKey isn't a CD-ROM title depictingthe delights of a Hawaiian beach. It's an adapter for folkswho feel that two keyboards are better than one.The dual keyboard adapter uses the existing software interfaceto let you plug in and use two keyboards simultaneously. Thiswould allow people who share a home PC or a workstation toeach have their own setup.$49.95P.I. Engineering800-628-3185, 517-655-5523Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: Input DevicesThe Logitech TrackMan Marble uses an electronic sensing deviceinstead of the usual trackball's system of rollers, shaftsand wheels. You control cursor movement with a marble thatsits atop the TrackMan. A sensor tracks the motion of the marblethrough dots printed on the bottom of the ball. This is designedto eliminate tracking problems caused by dust.$99 (street)Logitech800-231-7717, 510-795-8500The Mitsumi ZW 104 Keyboard provides three new Win95-specifickeys that allow easy access to functions such as task switching,while two Application keys support Win95 application shortcuts.The keyboard also features ergonomically shaped keys and a6-foot cable.$34.95Mitsumi Electronics Corp.800-MITSUMI, 214-550-7300The Corporate Source Star-Track is a cordless infrared trackballdesigned for remote one-handed cursor operation. The remotetrackball weighs only about 2 ounces and has a range of upto 15 feet at 90-degree angles. The Star-Track runs on twoAAA batteries, and comes with a recharger and presentationsoftware.$79.95Corporate Source800-722-7748, 714-582-1946Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Mapping Software: Maps and Data for Microsoft Office 95 -- See the World fromYour DesktopMaps and Data for Microsoft Office 95 combines with Excel toprovide point-and-click analysis of a comprehensive set ofmarket and demographic data. With this program, you can, forinstance, identify the median income of potential customers,along with age patterns and housing descriptions.The CD-ROM program provides more than 1,000 high-resolutionmaps of foreign countries and every U.S. state. Each statemap contains eight map layers, including zip code boundaries,waterways, airports, railroads, landmarks and census tracks.Maps and Data's worldwide information includes data on population,age, marital and employment status, housing, school enrollment,occupation and gender. The program's data can work with MapInfoand Atlas GIS.$99MaconUSA617-254-2295,fax 617-254-2883Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Mapping Software: FirstMap -- Map a Smart Business CourseFirstMap, a CD-ROM mapping program designed to work with Excel95, can break down every major U.S. neighborhood into usefuldemographic sales information. Now you can have the type ofmarketing tools on your desktop that were previously the domainof large corporations.The program includes boundary maps for counties, zip codes andcensus tracts. You can print FirstMap's full-color maps directlyfrom Excel or embed them in Word, PowerPoint or other OLE-compliantsoftware.FirstMap contains hundreds of variables of U.S. census information,including age, sex, race, household composition and incomefigures. It provides information on national, state, city andeven neighborhood levels.$69Wessex800-892-6906, 708-501-3662Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Mapping Software: Select Street Atlas -- Become StreetwiseTurn business and travel data from more than one million destinationsacross the country into detailed street maps with Select StreetAtlas.The program packs a complete street map of the United Stateson one CD-ROM. It allows you to create a customized map ofany area of the nation, with the help of the program's andyour own databases. You can drag any of 100 icons onto themaps, add text and highlight routes or areas.$99 (street)Pro CD800-992-2376, 508-750-0000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: UtilitiesProject Updater picks up where Time Line and Microsoft Projectleave off. The Windows 95-compliant client/server app automatesproject updating and status reporting through a centralizedOracle repository. It is aimed at managers of projects withover 20 team members working with Project 4 or Time Line 6or higher.Project Update Server and three client licenses, $9,995; additionallicenses, $199 per userTime Line Solutions Corp.800-222-TLSC, 415-898-8200Partition Magic 2.0 lets you reclaim lost disk space and makesWindows 95 more efficient by modifying your PC's File AllocationTable (FAT) file system. The program can resize clusters, morethan double the size of the Windows 95 root directory for longfilenames, and replace FDISK and FORMAT utilities with a fastergraphical utility.$49.95PowerQuest Corp.800-379-2566, 801-226-8977FontMinder 3.0 makes it easier to preview and manage fonts inWindows 95 and 3.1. The utility's new version includes a tabbedinterface. You can preview, print and install fonts with aright mouse-button click.$79.95; upgrade, $24.95Ares Software Corp.800-783-2737, 415-578-9090Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Networking: Rumba Office 95/NT -- Keep Your Network Data in StepYou should be the one who leads when you're dancing with businessdata, regardless of when you need it or where it resides onyour network. Rumba Office 95/NT uses a notebook metaphor andOLE 2.0 support to let you control data access.Rumba provides access to latent client/server capabilities onIBM mainframe and AS/400, Digital VAX and UNIX systems. TheRumba Notebook lets you organize and insert applications andinformation-wherever the resources reside-into tabbed notebookpages. Click on a notebook tab for the information you desire.The Rumba Notebook accepts any OLE 2.0 server object. RumbaOffice 95/NT also lets you manage network printers from a graphicalconsole, so you can preview host print requests before committingto printing a job.$500Wall Data800-915-9255, 415-856-9255Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Networking: Remote Access -- FMI PC Card family -- This Deck's Stacked withCardsFujitsu Microelectronics made its debut in the retail PC Cardmarket by releasing a whole deck of cards-10 in all-for communications,multimedia and networking. All the FMI PC Card family productsare interoperable, hot swappable and Plug-and-Play compatible.The communication cards-14.4 and 28.8 Fax/Modems, ISDN Interfaceand Serial Card-enable functions such as faxing and e-mail.The multimedia cards-SCSI 600 and 1200 Interface, and StereoSound-connect to presentation, entertainment and sound peripherals.The LAN cards-10BaseT and 10BaseT/2Ethernet, and LAN/SCSI Combo-provide network connectivity.From $169 to $600Fujitsu Microelectronics800-642-7616, 408-922-9000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Networking: Remote Access -- Eicon Diva -- Make Beautiful MusicEven if your laptop has never spoken to your NT serverbefore, it can now serenade it with the help of the Eicon DivaISDN card. The Diva card uses IP, IPX or PPP to connect notebooks(its PCMCIA version) and desktops (ISA version) to peer workstations,remote networks, SNA mainframes, fax services, online servicesand the Internet.ISA bus, $595; PCMCIA Type II bus, $696Eicon Technology800-803-4266, 214-239-3270Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: UPSThe HP PowerWise L1250 UPS entry to Hewlett-Packard's advancedUninterruptible Power Supplies family is aimed at midsizednetworks and includes all its SNMP (Simple Network ManagementProtocol) software on a CD-ROM for easy administration. HP'snew PowerWise Assistant tells you when something is wrong andpredicts battery wear-out. The PowerWise software supportsnearly all operating systems, including Windows NT.$649Hewlett-Packard Co.800-533-1333, http:\\www.hp.com\netserver\prodinfo.htmlOnly 3.5 inches high, the Best Power Rackmount Fortress UPSmodels are designed for internetworking and communicationsprofessionals. The new no-break, line-interactive, sine-waveUPS products come in three models: 720VA, 1020VA and 1420VA.All are compatible with Best, CheckUPS, CheckUPS II, and SNMPinterface and control products.From $799 to $1,149Best Power, a unit of General Signal800-356-5794, 608-565-7200LanSafe III 3.0 power management software protects Windows 95,NT and 3.x systems against power outages. It lets you customizeshutdown functions on your network. LanSafe III saves worksin progress and closes network devices in a sequence you design.The program thus saves critical workstation data to the serverbefore routers and bridges shut down.$99Deltec Electronics Corp.800-DELTEC1, 619-291-4211Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Programming: StarTeam -- Get Your Project TogetherThe StarTeam players are a combined set of collaborative developmenttools from StarBase. Using a single user interface to helpyou maintain all project information within a central repository,the package includes version control, defect tracking, electronicconferencing, auditing and reporting systems (with charting).The Visual C++ edition integrates within the VC++ project window.Version control features include check in and out, branchingand merging, multiple directory support and fast sorting ofproject information. StarTeam can convert a PVCS project database.A side-by-side comparison utility compares different projectfile versions.The defect tracking component is integrated with project files,so bugs are displayed when a file is checked in. Clicking onthe defect changes its status to "fixed" and updates the audittrail. The Version History window allows direct version manipulationthrough a right-mouse click.Standalone, $549; integration with Visual C++, $299StarBase Corp.800-997-8272, 714-442-4400Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Programming: Wise Installation System 4.0 -- Use Self-Installing ExecutablesWise Installation System 4.0 makes it easy for users to createinstallation programs for Windows, including both Win95 andNT. You create installations as a single .EXE file, or oneper disk for multiple-disk installations.With its Custom Dialog Editor, no programming is required. Youcan drag and drop installations without writing a line of code.It includes an installation expert for fast script creation.Wise comes with a 16-bit and 32-bit IDE. It supports callsto DLL-based functions, scans for DLL/VBX dependencies, andautomatically compresses and splits your files across multiplediskettes. In addition, it also supports network, CD-ROM andODBC installations.Wise supports 256-color graphics and password-protected installations.$199 (direct)Great Lakes Business Solutions800-554-8565,313-981-4970Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Programming: VanGui -- An Original VanGuiWith VanGui, COBOL programmers can work in a visual environmentand create true Windows applications using their familiar languagesyntax.The design tool lets you design windows, add standard Windowsand VBX controls, and change an object's properties or addevent-handling logic in COBOL. You can also preserve businesscritical legacy logic. It supports calls to over 150 WindowsAPI functions, using COBOL parameters.Including compiler and debugger, under $3,000Ryan McFarland800-RM-COBOL, 512-343-1010Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. In Brief: ProgrammingVtoolsD for Windows 95 lets you build 32-bit Win95 device driverswith Microsoft or Borland C or C++ compilers. You can buildoptimized drivers for high-speed devices (including Plug-andPlay hardware), create dynamically loaded and pageable devicedrivers, or build drivers for virus checkers and security applications.The toolkit includes support for communicating between Win32applications and device drivers, and a revised utility to generateVxD source code.$495Vireo Software508-264-9200, fax 508-264-9205Teams working in Visual Basic can design and document a project'srequirements, as well as functional, internal and quality assurancespecifications, with Vision StoryBoard 3.0. The program walksyou and your customer through an application, capturing andannotating forms, controls and menus. Then it produces customreports, complete project specifications or training materials,including screenshots. The SpecMaker feature can document allcontrols on a VB form, while SlideShow illustrates VB formtransitions and logic flows using a graphical storyboard.$249Vision Software Tools800-984-SOFT, 510-238-4100Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Paradox 7 -- Easy Way from Data Maze to DatabaseBy:James E. PowellFrom the moment you launch Paradox 7 and use the new StartupExpert, you know you're using a vastly improved database. Newexperts take you through the chores of creating tables anddatabases, running mail-merge applications, building chartsor importing ASCII data. The Startup Expert even steps youthrough building seven predefined applications that Paradox7 provides, including a powerful contact manager applicationcomplete with forms, tabbed menu choices and reports.Paradox's Form, Report and Mailing Label Experts now let youuse aliases or path names for saving files, and accept bothqueries and tables for input. The Mailing Label Expert nowallows you to define nonstandard label formats, and the MailMerge Expert creates documents using WordPerfect, MicrosoftWord or Paradox's own report writer. The new Chart Expert helpsyou graph your data 18 different ways. Fixed-length or delimitedtext files are easy pickings for the Import Expert, which alsolets you save your layout definition for future use. To giveyour application a professional look, use the Application LauncherExpert to design a tabbed window from which your forms, reportsor queries can be launched.Version 7's Table Expert makes it easier to create a table.Using this expert, you build a new table by selecting bitsand pieces from other databases. Cannibalize your own tablesor those provided, such as Paradox's predefined Orders table.It's a great time-saver, especially if you need to create severalsmall, but similar, databases.After you've developed your data formats, the Report Experthelps you design the data displays. The program has severalnew display options, including a pleasing 3-D look. Version7's Report Expert also streamlines some operations, such asadding page numbers and defining page breaks. The banded reportdesigner simplifies adding or repositioning fields, groupingthem and adding GUI objects such as check boxes and graphics.The Object Explorer, which is available throughout Paradox,lets you click on any object and change properties, such asthe font size and color and the visible/hidden setting. Youcan also view the object's place in the hierarchy (report,group, field, label and so on), and use the alignment optionsto set the horizontal or vertical spacing among objects orto make their horizontal or vertical sizes conform. The ObjectExplorer also has tabs for inspecting methods and events. Doubleclick on a method, and an edit box pops up where you can addyour own method code.Paradox's ObjectPAL Editor has been enhanced to include functionalityfound in Borland's C++ compiler and the company's Delphi developmentproduct. New to the Editor are color syntax highlighting, indentingand outdenting, keyboard recording, incremental search, keyboardmapping (to mimic Brief and Epsilon, for instance), bookmarksand multilevel undo and redo.The Design Layout dialog lets you quickly change an existingreport's look, switching from individual fields to a table,for example. New controls for forms-such as list boxes withmultiselect, combo boxes, spin controls and progress bars-areavailable. You can now create tabbed dialog boxes and placedata on the tab sections-an especially useful way to segregatethe information in large records. Select the number of tabsand determine how many are displayed in each row.Current users will be pleased that version 7 maintains compatibilitywith Paradox 5 data, forms, reports, queries and applicationswithout any special conversion steps. Just open the objectsin Paradox 7. This means you can use version 7 to easily convertWindows 3.x applications built with Paradox 5 to Windows 95.Paradox 7 also supports OCX controls so you can extend its functionalitywith third-party add-ins to add features like pop-up calendarsto your applications. The controls can be manipulatedwith ObjectPAL, Paradox's programming language. ObjectPAL hasbeen enhanced with over 100 new methods, including 10 thatprovide MAPI functions like Send Mail.Version 7 can be used as an OLE automation controller (to executethe functions revealed by another server-enabled application)and a server (to let it be controlled)Paradox 7 boasts a few fit-and-finish touches, too. For instance,a new menu system organizes the functions more logically. Youcan dock Paradox's customizable toolbars to any screen edge,and add Paradox to the Microsoft Office and Novell PerfectOfficetoolbars.Despite its new features, Paradox has some odd inconsistencies.When you select the File/New/Table command, you're tossed directlyinto the table builder, bypassing the Table Expert. But ifyou pick File/New/Form, you're offered the choice of creatinga form from scratch or using the Form Expert. At times, theExperts, too, may be sources of confusion, like when it jumpsyou from step 2 to step 5. This isn't a goof. It's done tomaintain consistency among steps-step 5 always controls charttype, for example-but it can be perplexing.Still, Paradox 7 does whatever it can to help the new or occasionaluser. The CD Quick Tour offers an animated program overview,and the Windows 95-style help is clear and easy to follow.Even in the beta version I tested, the help system answeredall my questions.With Paradox 7, Borland has taken a giant step in making databaseapplication development accessible. While there's still roomfor improvement, Paradox 7 is a good choice for building anythingfrom a simple database to a complex data-intensive application.--Info File--Paradox 7Price: $299 (street); upgrade, $89 (street); competitive upgrade,$99 (street)In Brief: Paradox 7 hides its sophistication and processingpower behind a more intuitive interface and expands the breadthof its helpful experts.Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NTBorland International800-233-2444, 408-431-1000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Toshiba Tecra 700CT -- 120MHz Book's a BurnerBy:Jim ForbesWhile other notebook manufacturers walk the razor's edge tryingto balance performance against weight and price, veteran laptopmaker Toshiba America takes a different tack. Its hot new Tecra700 series is powered by a 120MHz Pentium processor and, whenfully configured, can take a $6,000 bite out of your wallet.But the unit's 7.3-pound heft makes it obvious that Toshibahas come down on the side of performance. And the Tecra 700delivers the goods in spades through its use of the PCI architectureand the attention to design detail that have become the markof Toshiba products.The Tecra 700 is indeed dense. The 7.3-pound travel weight includesits surprisingly small power supply, an external 3.5-inch floppydisk drive and case. Its dimensions and overall shape, however,resemble those of other Toshiba notebook computers.The unit I tested, the Tecra 700CT, arrived with an optionalquad-speed CD-ROM drive, a lithium ion battery, 16MB of RAM,a brilliant 11.3-inch active-matrix display, Sound BlasterPro-compatible sound and some of the best internal speakersI've heard on a notebook. This machine also comes with serial,parallel, PS/2, SVGA, serial infrared and two stacked TypeII PCMCIA slots, as well as a docking-station port.The Tecra 700 ships standard with a removable 1.2GB hard drive.A lower-cost version with an 11.3-inch passive-matrix colordisplay and 8MB of RAM will also be available soon.This computer is not designed for globe-trotting journalistslooking to write the Great American Novel over the Atlantic,or corporate managers working on that career-defining spreadsheetbetween New York and the West Coast. Not surprisingly, giventhis notebook's hungry processor, hard drive and screen, itsbattery life (which I measured at well under two hours) isnot a strong point. But since this machine is much more likelyto run connected to a wall outlet than on batteries, I don'tthink this is a serious problem.One of the features I particularly like on the Tecra 700 isits ability to use the optional CD-ROM and its 3.5-inch drivesimultaneously-something you can't do with other high-end notebookssuch as the NEC Versa 4000 or the Gateway 2000 Solo. Drivesattach to a pocket on the front of the unit, under the keyboard.This pocket will accept either the CD-ROM or 3.5-inch drive.To use both drives, you must insert the CD-ROM into this pocketand attach the 3.5-inch drive to an external connector thatsits on the right-hand side.I also like Toshiba's use of a quad-speed CD-ROM drive, whichmakes short work of loading complex programs.The active-matrix color screen on the unit I tested, a prototypeversion, is as suited to showing full-motion video as it isto giving presentations in the boardroom. Video speed is greatlyenhanced by the notebook's PCI bus.The keyboard is comfortable to use for extended periods andsits behind a palm rest. Like all Toshiba computers, this machineuses a stick pointing device to position the cursor. The pointeris located above the B key on the keyboard, and its two associatedbuttons are on the palm rest. All controls and switches areeasy to find and use. Lighted status displays for power, driveaccess and other features are on the front, which for someusers may not seem particularly instinctive.Like other Toshiba notebooks, this machine is built like a tank.For added security, there's a 3-year limited warranty.On our WINDOWS Magazine Wintune benchmarks, the Tecra 700CTdelivered an astounding 217MIPS and 67MFLOPS. The 1.2GB harddrive had a cached throughput rating of 12.5MB per second,and the video generated 6Mpixels per second. The unit tookan average of 28.33 seconds to execute our Word 7.0 macro,and 24.33 seconds to complete our Excel 7.0 macro.This machine is not for everyone. In fact, the price means it'sunlikely ever to be a big seller. Nevertheless, like othernotebooks in the Toshiba line, the Tecra 700 should be a standardsetting piece of hardware.--Info File--Toshiba Tecra 700CTPrice: $5,999 (with 4x CD-ROM, 11.3-inch TFT screen and 16MBof RAM)In Brief: This notebook computer offers great performance, usesthe PCI architecture, has an optional quad-speed CD-ROM driveand can display full-motion video on its 11.3-inch screen.Toshiba America Information Systems800-993-4273, 714-837-4408Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Harvard Graphics 4.0 for Windows 95 -- Smooth Delivery for Your PitchBy:James E. PowellOn the surface, Harvard Graphics 4.0 is much like the versionfor Windows 3.1. But once you dive beneath the surface andget beyond the standard Windows 95 features like tabbed dialogboxes, context menus and common toolbars, you'll discover arich set of tips and other helpful aids, including new quickstart presentation templates. These new features will get youup and running in no time.For harried presenters, the Quick Presentations option providesa variety of templates for common types of pitches. The templatesinclude Marketing Plan, a Quarterly Review and a Business Planto Partners. This version has five new templates, and all aremore than just graphic design elements-they also get you goingon your presentation's content with suggested text, such asa sample agenda. You can also add templates that you developto the Quick Presentations choices.The program's Graphics Advisor System, a combination of helpand advice, has always been impressive. You can use the DesignChecker to inspect for presentation faux pas, such as too manybullets on one slide. The new Fixer Mode will take you to theright place in the program to fix errors that the Advisor detected.In addition to the Advisor, Harvard Graphics offers a coupleof other comfort-inducing features. A Quick Tour shows youaround the program and describes its major features, and the"Five Minute Coach" provides some more-than-basic instructionabout creating text slides, building charts or delivering effectivepresentations.Harvard Graphics includes a "light" version of Harvard Montagefor managing image libraries and the more than 500 pieces ofclip art also in the package.Some of this version's more subtle changes are worth noting.For example, you can now include text in superscript or subscript,and control type leading more accurately. You can use Findand Replace across an entire presentation, and printed outputcan be page numbered. When you switch between landscape andportrait modes, the new Aspect Ratio Correction feature makesappropriate adjustments to all the objects on the slide.The program is extremely easy to use. You can resequence slidesby dragging them in the Slide View, and if you drag a slidefrom one presentation to another, Harvard Graphics adjustsits properties to keep it consistent with the rest of the presentation.Other features include dockable toolbars, VCR-style navigationcontrols, and slide sorter and outline views. For most options,there are thumbnail graphics or previews to show what the selectionlooks like. Though HG offers its own charting capabilities,its OLE 2.0 support lets you drag charts from Excel or textfrom Microsoft Word into a slide.Harvard Graphics still lags behind the competition in some areas.For instance, the program doesn't support simple animationsthat are included in some rival programs, including PowerPoint'slatest release. This makes it impossible to move objects aroundto create some dramatic effects. Among other things, you can'tset the bars in a bar chart to "grow" from the x-axis and youcan't fly in other graphics elements.Harvard Graphics is a lone wolf in a world of application suites.Most of these suites include presentation graphics programs,so you might wonder if you really need Harvard Graphics. Theanswer is a resounding yes. The product offers excellent help,an eye-pleasing set of predefined templates and a simplicitythat belies its highly professional output.--Info File--Harvard Graphics 4.0 for Windows 95Price: $290 (street)In Brief: The Windows 95 version features an easy interface,quick-start templates and plenty of help.Platforms: Windows 95Disk Space: 13MB (minimum); 37MB (full installation)RAM: 4MB (8MB recommended)Software Publishing Corp.800-234-2500, 408-986-8000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: NEC Versa 4000C and 4050C -- The Complete NotebookBy:Jim ForbesIt's not often you run across a product that does everythingright. NEC has come very close to producing a notebook computerthat fits that criterion with its Versa 4000 family, an innovativeseries of Pentium-powered notebook computers. Simply stated,these machines are an exercise in elegance.The NEC 4000 family comes standard with Intel's 75-, 90- or120MHz Pentium processors for portable computers, 16MB of RAM(8MB for 75MHz), 256KB of level 2 cache, a variety of harddrives, and a choice of 10-plus-inch active-matrix color anddual-scan color screens. Also standard is a full array of externalconnectors including serial, parallel, docking station, twostacked Type 2 and two IRDA-1 infrared transceivers (one onthe front and one on the back)All the NEC Versa 4000 family members have the same basic shapeand size. They measure 2.1 by 11.7 by 9.5 inches. The travelweight, including the battery charger, is about 7 pounds (dependingon which screen you order). The 4000C unit I examined had a10.1-inch, 640x480 active-matrix display; a 75MHz processor;a 540MB hard drive; and 16MB of RAM.Although I've criticized the keyboards on previous NEC notebooks,I like the one on this model almost as much as I like the Lexmarkkeyboard IBM uses on its ThinkPad line. Unlike older NEC machines,this keyboard includes an integrated palm rest and uses a VersaGlide touchpad pointing device with double-tap capability.The trackpad is located to the left-center of the palm rest,which some users may find uncomfortable.The NEC V4000 family's sound subsystem should please anyonewho really needs to punctuate presentations with audio. NEChas built two decent speakers into the case. They are placedhigh enough so your audience can hear your presentation clearly.Virtually all the controls are positioned intuitively and withinfast reach. And NEC has included software that simplifies controlof the power-saving features.Like Gateway 2000's Solo, the Versa 4000 series uses a singlebay (VersaBay II in NEC parlance) to accommodate a dual-speedCD-ROM drive, a 3.5-inch disk drive, a second battery or asecond hard drive. Unfortunately, you can't hot swap drives.To change from the 3.5-inch drive to the CD-ROM, you have topower down the computer, pull out one drive, snap in the otherand reboot.NEC gets bonus points for including a small zip-up pouch thathouses the unused drive and a hard-shell case large enoughfor the computer, its documentation, the unused drive and otherparaphernalia.The battery life on the unit I tested was about 2.5 hours withoutpower conservation (other than turning off the audio and removingmy 28.8Kbps modem). With strict power conservation, I was ableto run it about 3.5 hours on its single lithium ion power cell.NEC claims Quick Charge Time takes about 2.5 hours; this unittook less-slightly more than 2 hours.The results of our WINDOWS Magazine Wintune 95 benchmarks were135MIPS and 40MFLOPs for the 4000C, 5.23Mpixels per secondfor the video and 9.16MB per second cached data-transfer ratefor the hard drive. The 4000C took 21 seconds to execute ourExcel 7.0 macro and 36.3 seconds to complete our MicrosoftWord 7.0 macro.Priced at $5,100, the 90MHz 4050C -with 16MB of RAM and 810MBhard drive-posted 162MIPS, 48MFLOPS, 5.5Mpixels per secondand cached hard drive throughput of 9.94MB per second. Timesto execute the Excel 7.0 and Word 7.0 macros were 14 and 39.66seconds, respectively.There are few tasks for which the Versa 4000C is not suited.Its audio and video subsystems make it a dream for presentations,and its Pentium processor has the horsepower for virtuallyany undertaking. It has a full suite of connections, and NECoffers a docking station that makes the Versa 4000C an idealdesktop replacement. This notebook has a 3-year warranty.The Versa 4000 family is brawny, yet elegant. Its VersaBay letsyou add a CD-ROM, a 3.5-inch disk drive or other peripheralas the need arises. That, and the ability to use a dockingstation that has expansion ports, make for a very attractiveand versatile-package.--Info File--NEC Versa 4000C and 4050CPrice: 4000C: $3,999; with 16MB of RAM, $4,474; 4050C: $5,100In Brief: The NEC Versa 4000 family is available with 75MHz,90MHz or 120MHz Pentium processors, lithium ion batteries,a variety of hard drives and a CD-ROM drive.NEC Technologies800-632-NEC-INFO, fax 800-366-0476Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542 -- Twin Towers for Home, OfficeBy:Jim Forbes and James E. PowellNEC Technologies makes stunning monitors and rugged notebooks.It also makes terrific desktop computers, as evidenced by thePowerMate and Ready series. We were extremely pleased withthe two latest offerings, both 133MHz Pentium systems.These machines are similar in many respects. Both use a PCIbus and come standard with 2MB of video memory, 16MB of RAM,infrared support and a generous 1.6-gigabyte hard drive. Theyalso boast a full battery of ports, full-sized keyboard, NECbranded mouse, 16-bit Sound Blaster-compatible audio and greatspeakers. Both are housed in a wide mini-tower case that allowseasy access to the internal components.The PowerMate series is aimed at the corporate market and includesa minimal software bundle, since most of its users prefer toinstall their own applications. The Ready line is designedto be sold by computer retailers and includes an impressivesoftware lineup.At $3,299, the PowerMate P133 is the more expensive of the twosystems. The basic configuration includes a 6x CD-ROM driveand a small software bundle. Getting inside the mini-towercase is a snap: Just twirl two readily identifiable machinescrews, lift out a side panel and you're in. This is a muchmore elegant and useful way of opening up a system than removingan entire cover assembly.The PowerMate P133 has two ISA and four PCI open slots so itcan grow with your needs. The 6x CD-ROM is wickedly fast, andthe speakers that ship with this unit have a rating of 8 watts.Other goodies include a full complement of communications programs,a TranXit infrared software front-end and support for voiceinput.The Ready 9542, geared more toward the home market, also hastwo ISA and four PCI open slots, though one PCI slot can beused only to replace the on-board video. It ships with a 4xCD-ROM and nearly two dozen multimedia titles, including gamessuch as Descent. The system includes MPEG-1-software compatibilityfor full-screen video playback, SRS 3-D surround sound, wavetableaudio and a telephone answering system with speakerphone.Productivity titles include Microsoft Works, Publisher, QuickenSE and Encarta. The Ready also ships with Bob-which you canremove-and Midisoft's MediaWorks, a similar but less cutesyWindows 95 front-end that resembles a home office. MediaWorksincludes utilities that let you capture and edit video andaudio or send a fax.A 28.8Kb-per-second modem with DSVD (for simultaneous voiceand data transmission) is also part of the package, as is NetscapeNavigator and sign-up kits for the major online services.The PowerMate offers you the option of installing Windows forWorkgroups or Windows 95 when you power up for the first time.We installed the Workgroups edition, then used our own copyof Win95 to upgrade, which took 24 minutes.The Ready unit comes with a setup program that first examinesthe installed equipment, then loads the installation programfor Win95. In all, it took 30 minutes to install the operatingsystem before we could use the machine, an annoyance that beginningusers-presumably the primary intended buyers for this desktopshouldn't have to deal with.The PowerMate P133 blew the doors off most of our Wintune 95benchmarks. Its 133MHz processor cranked out 246MIPS and 74MFLOPS,while its hard disk scored a 3.43MB-per-second uncached datatransfer rate. Due to a problem with the video driver, we couldnot report a video score in our standard 800x600-pixel, 256color mode.The Ready 9542 was similarly impressive, yielding 244MIPS and74MFLOPS. The Maxtor hard drive's uncached performance was3.5MBps, and its video system pumped out 13.1Mpixels per second.The results of our applications benchmarks were also good, butnot quite as startling. The PowerMate P133 took only 39.66seconds to execute the 32-bit version of our WinWord macroand a scant 17.33 seconds to run our 32-bit Excel macro. TheReady unit took 19.7 seconds with Word and 40.3 seconds withExcel.If you're looking for Pentium 133 power at a reasonable price,these units should be at the top of your shopping list.--Info File--NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542Price: PowerMate, $3,299 (without monitor); Ready, $2,999 (withoutmonitor)In Brief: The NEC PowerMate P133 and Ready 9542 are both fullfeatured, PCI-bus, 133MHz Pentium systems in a mini-tower case.The PowerMate is aimed at corporate buyers, while the Readyis intended for the home user.NEC Technologies800-632-4636, 508-264-8000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: FileMaker Pro 3.0 -- Old Friend with New RelationsBy:James E. PowellSometimes it takes a while to commit to a relationship. ForFileMaker Pro-long a favorite among flat-file fans-its longawaited foray into the relational world is welcome.FileMaker Pro 3.0, which I tested in beta, now lets you createone-to-many and many-to-one relationships between two files,including a minimal amount of referential integrity. The programretains its look-up feature, which copies data from one fileto another-sometimes all the relational capability you need.You can glimpse into another database to set up master/detailreports and forms with a special object called a portal. Althoughit's an effective process, it isn't as effortless or intuitiveas similar operations in Approach or Access.FileMaker Pro is well designed, making it easy to use and navigate,especially for database beginners. It still doesn't have atraditional programming language, but its script builder isamong the simplest to learn, understand and use that I've everseen. You can build scripts with programming constructs suchas loops and if/then/else, and you can include custom messagescomplete with OK and Cancel buttons. The program also supportsvariables, which it calls global fields.Database files are easily set up, and the tabbed dialog boxeslet you set options such as range checking and automatic serializationfor numeric fields. Vastly improved built-in functions, likeFuture Value, IsEmpty and Length, make it possible to buildcomplex validation rules. You don't get a wide range of fieldtypes to choose from, but the unique, repeating field typelets you create multiple field values within a single record.Forms are easy to create and can contain traditional GUI elements,such as radio buttons and check boxes. You can also set theorder in which the cursor moves through fields when you pressthe Tab key.Although the reporting module is generally simple to use, settingup totals and subtotals is cumbersome. You have to assign summaryfields to the database, specifying which calculation to perform(sum, count, average) and upon which field to perform it. Then,position the summary field on your report. In most other databaseprograms, you would define the calculation field on the reportitself.You can quickly create forms for columnar reports, labels andenvelopes. But the program lacks wizards to help you throughcreating more complex reports. You can, however, display actualrecord data from a sample to facilitate setting field sizes,with empty fields replaced by dummy text or numbers FileMakerPro generates.Specify colors, fonts and object alignment for forms and reports.You can lock objects so they don't get accidentally nudged,draw your own lines and boxes, and use snap-to-grid for alignmenthelp. In this version, you can format paragraphs, includingcustom indents and precise line spacing, but you still can'tformat a numeric field as a telephone number.Automatic phone dialing and mail merge are also new in thisversion. And you can now have up to 50 files open simultaneously,rather than the previous version's 16. Windows 95 featuresinclude long filenames, uninstall and OLE Container support.Field indexing is now optional, and you can let FileMaker Procreate indexes when necessary to speed up searches and sorts.Other features of the network-ready FileMaker Pro include aspell checker, a converter that imports files created withother programs and the ability to export a file's structurewithout its data. Assign groups and passwords, and specifysecurity down to the field level. More unusual features includethe ability to find records containing illegal date and timevalues or duplicate values.For current FileMaker users, the look and feel of version 3.0will be immediately comfortable. Database dilettantes willfind FileMaker Pro's ease of use and jargon-free manuals refreshing.--Info File--FileMaker Pro 3.0Price: $199In Brief: An easy-to-use FileMaker has entered the relationaldatabase world.Platforms: Windows 95, NT 3.51Claris Corp.800-544-8554, 408-727-8227Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Windows Draw 4.0 -- Palatable Price for Paint AppBy:James BellFor little more than the cost of a computer book, you can pickup a great Windows 95 drawing program. Micrografx's WindowsDraw 4.0, which I tested in beta, includes both drawing andimage-editing modules, along with 250 fonts and over 10,000pieces of clip art.Although the bundle is marketed for home use, don't assume it'sa limited package. While the low-cost program doesn't includeall the features of Micrografx's high-end ABC Graphics Suite,Windows Draw is a useful office addition.Windows Draw makes good use of the Win95 interface. If you'veworked with Microsoft Office 95, you'll find Windows Draw especiallyeasy to learn as it mimics Office's menus, commands and toolbars.You can also customize your screen layout and use tear-offtoolbars that can be docked or left to float in the drawingwindow.All the Windows Draw modules support OLE 2.0, drag-and-drop,and in-place editing. You can drag clip art from ABC MediaManager, the clip-art manager, into either the drawing or imageediting module and the program will automatically handle anynecessary format conversions. Windows Draw supports over 50vector and bitmap graphics formats.Nonartists will appreciate Windows Draw's 150 drawing templates.They're organized into six categories-Celebrations, Diagrams,Publishing, Fun, Games and Sports-and cover everything fromplay money to floor plans and stationery. You have to mastersome basic skills to use the templates effectively, since theyare predesigned documents that you modify manually. Each templateincludes suggestions for where to start making changes, buta few well-placed wizards would have been helpful for new users.Windows Draw's drawing tools have been substantially updatedfrom version 3.0. Beyond the standard fare-lines, ovals, rectanglesand B zier curves-there are 11 new CoolShape tools for onestep polygons, stars, arrows and 3-D shapes. The program evenautomatically shades the 3-D CoolShapes (too automaticallysometimes, as you can't control the light direction)Among the new features are "sticky" connecting lines that makeit a snap to create organizational charts, flowcharts and annotationsfor illustrations. Also new are multiple levels of undo, aspell checker, a "format painter" for quickly copying objectformatting and multiple drawing layers.Windows Draw's image editor, Photo Magic, now supports TWAINcompatible scanners and includes options for cropping, rotating,resizing, and modifying resolution and color depth. A Stitchfeature lets you recombine images that were scanned in separatesections. Photo Magic's powerful masking tools can mask specificcolor ranges and create freehand masks.Photo Magic supports over 40 special effects, from basic picturecorrections-like sharpen, remove pattern, and adjust contrastand brightness-to special effects such as add color noise,wind, pop art, crystallize and charcoal. You can preview allthe effects.It's also possible to draw images in Photo Magic, using thedozen-plus painting tools that simulate chalk, pencils, markers,crayons, pastels, oils and watercolors.ABC Media Manager, also in the bundle, simplifies using thepackage's clip art. You can also create your own clip-art libraries,including thumbnails and searchable keywords and descriptions.Windows Draw doesn't offer all the features of high-end drawingpackages. There are no color separations or sophisticated textcontrols in Draw, or multiple object layers in Photo Magic.For these capabilities, you'll have to turn to high-end graphicspackages from Micrografx, Adobe, Corel or Macromedia.If you have professional needs and a larger budget, WindowsDraw may not be the program for you. But if you're lookingfor a good entry-level drawing program for Windows 95 thatalso works well with Office 95, this is it. Grab a copy beforeMicrografx comes to its senses and raises the price.--Info File--Windows Draw 4.0Price: $49.99 (street)In Brief: Windows Draw 4.0 is an inexpensive Windows 95 drawingand image-editing software bundle packed with fonts and clipart.Platforms: Windows 95, 3.xMicrografx800-653-2610, 214-234-1769Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: CA-SuperProject 4.0 -- The Best Laid PlansBy:Sara G. StephensThere's an ironic, dark truth shared by many project managers.Behind their impeccable PERT charts' veneer of order lie frenziedefforts to patch every leak with last-minute scheduling fixes.But haste can lay waste to even the best-planned project scenarios.The folks at Computer Associates know how the real world ofproject management works, so they graced SuperProject 4.0 witha number of practical tools, not the least of which is a multilevel undo feature.Like some of its competitors-Primavera System's SureTrak ProjectManager being the closest match-SuperProject blends the featuresof a heavy-duty project manager into a lightweight-lookingpackage. And, while graphical interfaces generally make easierto-use programs, too many graphics and macros can restrict,or at least obscure, the functionality of a more sophisticatedapp that requires entering and manipulating a lot of detailsin various formats. It's a fine line between easy and messy.Fortunately, SuperProject is on the right side of this line.Each project view is tabbed like a file folder. You can openmultiple projects, stacking these "file folders" on top ofone another, and clicking on the tabs switches from one openproject to another. Like Microsoft Project, another close competitor,SuperProject puts similar tabs on its dialog boxes and popup forms.Other MS Project similarities include Calendar views, Ganttcharts that let you display different start and end symbolsfor each item, and gridlines between rows. You can also combineproject windows on a single outline, PERT chart or WBS chartview. The program's ability to illustrate interproject relationshipswith distinctive symbols is especially useful in this mode.You can use the Auto-Open feature to instruct SuperProjectto open related projects whenever you open a particular projectfile.Large organizations with mixed-breed setups should find SuperProject4.0's expanded export/import formats particularly useful. Itnow includes the .MPX (MS Project) extension. Even more significantis the program's LAN support installed via CA's Activate program.It's compatible with IBM PC, 3Com, Novell NetWare, Banyan andother networks. This feature, combined with the program's ODBCsupport, means subproject managers can each update the serverresiding relational database from their desktops, regardlessof the database program they're using.SuperProject can create a work breakdown structure with formsthat flow more intuitively than those I've seen in competingproducts. For example, task, resource and account names havea generous length limit of 56 characters. The program alsolets you check your project schedule's progress by transferringit to as many as three baselines, rather than the traditionalsingle-baseline option.Because the fruits of a project manager's work eventually mustbe printed and shared with staff or management, CA also improvedSuperProject's reporting capabilities. It now prints bitmapsin a report's header and footer. It also lets you Print toFit, so you won't be tied to your desk with a roll of Scotchtape, piecing together panels of a Gantt chart. Balloon helpis convenient for newcomers, while a configurable toolbar letsthe more fluent SuperProject user customize his desktop withup to 50 different buttons.SuperProject comes bundled with TimeSheet Professional, an electronictime-sheet app that integrates nicely to form a full projectand resource-management solution.While many "improved interfaces" actually intimidate ratherthan invite users, SuperProject combines color, graphics andsolid features so they not only look cool on the desktop, butalso let you keep cool-headed control of your projects.--Info File--CA-SuperProject 4.0Price: $649; upgrade, $149In Brief: SuperProject combines the graphical with the functional,resulting in a friendly package that also delivers to the moresophisticated project manager.Platforms: Windows 95, 3.xDisk Space: 8MBRAM: 4MB (8MB recommended)Computer Associates International800-225-5224, 516-DIAL-CAIBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: voysAccess for Visual Basic -- Dialing for DataBy:James E. PowellThe term Interactive Voice Response (IVR) might seem cold, butwhen you use the technology to phone and access up-to-the-minutebank account information without talking to another person,it's not just cool, but efficient, too. With voysAccess, atoolkit that works with Visual Basic 3.0, you can build yourown custom IVR applications. The toolkit's designer is so simpleto use that your first IVRVB-based application will be up and running in just a few hours.VoysAccess, which I tested in beta, includes a custom VBX controland voysDesigner, an application generator that lets you designyour voice response application in a spreadsheet-like grid.You select actions from a toolbox or the main menu, then pickaction-specific options from dialog boxes. For example, yourlogic can include commands to play a greeting, wait for digitsto be pressed, analyze the response and branch to a subroutinebased on the caller's keystrokes.The Record command lets your customer leave a message, and youhave the option of limiting its length. You have to write thelogic that organizes these messages and plays them back. Becausethe system supports variables, it's easy to create a "count"field to tally the number of incoming calls. The system candial or transfer a call, too, and you can specify the numberof rings before your program terminates a call.Using a caller's Touch-tone input, your application can retrieveinformation from a database. The application can also respondvocally, even formatting values such as adding the words "dollars"and "cents" to currency fields and translating numerical datesinto their narrative equivalents.To retrieve information you use the designer's Data Query Wizardto map a schema of the data, including relationships betweentables and databases. The Query Wizard builds SQL statementsusing Select, From, Where and Order By parameters, which canbe completed by picking field names and conditions from popup lists. The Query supports most popular database formatsdBASE, Paradox, Access and FoxPro-and ODBC.The digits that a caller enters can also be captured as dataand stored in a database, so your application can receive informationas well as disseminate it.Once you've designed your application, the designer generatesthe entire application in Visual Basic code and can automaticallylaunch the application. The code-building process checks forerrors such as undefined branches. The resulting source codeis well commented and uses easy-to-understand function names,such as voysAcces1.Vspeak ="C:\MYAPP\HELLO" which "speaks" the HELLO voice file.Programming purists may not like the way the voysDesigner worksheethandles branching indentation because all actions are leftjustified. However, the generated VB code is properly indented.The toolkit includes a starter prompt library and a collectionof about 300 professionally recorded voice files. There isalso a sound processing and editing utility that supports .WAV, .VOX, .VOC and other sound file formats.The package includes a two-line Dialogic voice card that isrequired to run your completed application. Installing it isrelatively easy, though you'll need to manually set jumpers.While there are a few alternatives available, voysAccess offersthe fastest, easiest route to custom VB-based IVR applicationsthat I've seen so far.--Info File--voysAccess for Visual BasicPrice: $595; with two-line Dialogic card (needed to run application),$995In Brief: Combined with Visual Basic 3.0, voysAccess providesthe easiest way to build Interactive Voice Response applications.Platforms: Windows 3.xVoysys Corp.800-7VOYSYS, 510-252-1100Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: ClarisDraw 1.0 -- Drawing on Mac App-titudeBy:James BellA million Mac users can't be wrong. At least Claris hopes so,as it tests the Windows waters with its popular ClarisDrawgraphics program. The company says the Mac version-along withits predecessor, the MacDraw family-has an installed base ofalmost a million users, and it has drawn heavily on that experienceto create ClarisDraw for Windows.The beta version I tested is a 32-bit application that runsunder either Windows 95 or Windows 3.x. Designed for the generalbusiness user, the program takes a simple, streamlined approachto drawing, but also includes a handful of interesting surprises.One of ClarisDraw's obvious advantages is its complete crossplatform compatibility with the Mac counterpart. You can evenconvert MacDraw files after running them through a file "splitter"utility (which ClarisDraw provides)ClarisDraw's interface closely matches that of its Mac sibling.While this would be helpful for someone using both platforms,it's a real disadvantage for Windows users-especially Windows95 users. There are no context menus, ribbon bars, tabbed dialogboxes or even help balloons to describe program icons. Nordoes it support OLE or drag-and-drop between documents or withother applications. None of these features are crucial to thedrawing process, but they would have made ClarisDraw easierto learn and use.To its credit, the program does provide some shortcuts, includingtear-off tool palettes that you can shrink down to just theirtitle bars when you're not using them.ClarisDraw's real strength is the intelligence of its toolset.Beyond the basic tools for drawing lines, curves, and standardshapes like ovals and rectangles, you'll find several "smart"features. These include 16 Shape tools for one-step creationof polygons, stars, arrows, and 3-D boxes and cylinders. Butshading for 3-D shapes isn't provided, and you can't ungroupthem to add shading manually.Other smart tools include SmartConnector lines that maintainlinks between objects; SmartSize for scaling objects proportionally;Guideliner and PointGuide for precisely positioning objectsand lines; and SmartAlign for keeping elements aligned or distributed,even after being moved. ClarisDraw also provides quick formattricks with SmartShadow and SmartEmbossing, and there's evena search-and-replace feature called Replace Clones for substitutingone piece of clip art with another in a drawing.ClarisDraw includes basic image-editing capabilities for importedbitmaps and the ability to create black-and-white, 16-colorand 256-color images. If you can use the somewhat limited tools,they can save you the trouble of having to switch to anotherprogram. The software supports both HLS and RGB color palettesbut not CMYK-and bundles predesigned palettes of up to 256colors.Nonartists can import several PC and Mac graphic file formats,including .EPS, .TIF, .CGM, .GIF, .WINF, PICT, PICT2, .BMP, .PCX, MacDraw, MacPaint and .AVI movie frames. Included, too,are 60 TrueType fonts and 2,400 pieces of clip art. The clipart is organized into drag-and-drop libraries, and you addyour own images by dragging them onto a library window.It's also possible to import text and lay out ClarisDraw pagesby using linked text boxes. The program supports paragraphformatting, text styles, a spell checker and thesaurus, andboth regular and irregular text wrapping around graphics. ClarisDrawwon't replace a true desktop publishing package but it shouldsatisfy most basic needs.ClarisDraw's layering feature is a pleasant surprise. It's idealfor floor plans, maps and diagrams, and can be used to createslide shows, too. Slide shows can be augmented with fades,bulleted text lists and simple sequence controls. Again, thisfeature can't compete with dedicated presentation programs,but it's adequate for simple projects.Like the generalist users ClarisDraw was designed for, the programdoesn't aim to be the best in any particular category. Instead,it focuses on providing simple, useful tools for the occasionaluser. Limitations in its interface are offset by a bevy ofintelligent drawing options.--Info File--ClarisDraw 1.0Price: $199 (street); competitive upgrade, $99In Brief: ClarisDraw offers cross-platform compatibility withits Mac version, intelligent tools, and drag-and-drop clipart.Platforms: Windows 95, 3.xClaris Corp.800-544-8554, 408-727-8227Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Dabbler 2 and Wacom ArtZ II Tablet -- Take One Tablet and PaintBy:Hailey Lynne McKeefryPerhaps it's true that a poor master blames his tools, but havinggreat tools can't hurt. The dynamic duo of Dabbler 2 and theWacom ArtZ II graphics tablet helped me discover my well-hiddenartistic talents.The ArtZ II Tablet, which measures 0.5 by 13 by 9.6 inches,has a 6-by-8-inch drawing space with a resolution of 2,540lines per inch. The unit plugs into a serial port and comeswith drivers for Windows 95, 3.x and NT. A menu strip at thetop of the ArtZ II provides five user-definable function buttonsand 11 predefined buttons (including Cut, Copy, Paste, Undo,Delete, New, Open and Save), as well as controls to changepressure sensitivity.Wacom's Erasing UltraPen, included with the tablet, literallyturns the world of graphics tablets upside down. If you useit with an eraser-enabled application, you can flip the penover and rub its top against the tablet to erase what you justdrew. Dabbler, Fractal Design's Painter, SmartSketch, QFX andAdobe Photoshop all support the eraser technology, and AutodeskAnimator Studio, Fauve Matisse and Aldus Freehand will supportit soon.With the tablet in place, I loaded Dabbler from its CD-ROM.The CD holds both 16-bit and 32-bit versions of the program,in addition to more than 300 stencils, 120 paper testers, 3image font libraries and 100 stock photographs.Dabbler is the definitive program for anyone who wants to learnPC-based drawing and have fun doing it. The program uses adesk-and-drawer scenario-to peruse the selection of brushes,colors or paper textures, you slide open the appropriate drawer.Your sketch pad sits atop the on-screen desk, and you can flipthrough its pages by clicking on the arrow keys. Rotating thesketch pad lets you draw at any angle. The program also allowsyou to create multiple sketchbooks and open them one at a time.Dabbler's Multimedia Art Tutors led me through some of the basicsof cartooning and cartoon animation, as well as the nuts-andbolts operation of the program. Although the program won'tlet you draw as you watch the lessons, you can switch easilyback and forth between the two modes. Once you've masteredanimation, the Flipbook Animation feature lets you create animationsand export them as QuickTime or AVI movies.The software's stencils, clip art and stock photos give youa running start and help you get by that first blank page.Once I had a stencil in place, I used the Effects menu to customizethe color and texture of the shapes. Dabbler's Effects includeFill, Auto Clone, Fade, Glass Distortion, Motion Blur, Negative,Sharpen, Soften and Texturize.Dabbler also provides several features to help you forge anduse art elements from the CD-ROM or other images in any ofseveral formats (including RIFF, TIFF, PICT, Targa, BMP, PCXand Photoshop). The Tracing Paper feature lets you pick animage and trace it onto your drawing. You can also manipulatean existing image using natural media cloning; this featurelets you select an image and render it using the medium ofyour choice (such as ink, oil paint or chalk)Even with these great tools, my artwork isn't likely to endup on a museum wall, but within an hour or so I was able tocreate drawings that were better than I could have ever imagined.The Wacom ArtZ II felt as natural as using a pen and paper,and the eraser came in handy. Dabbler, which can also be usedwith a mouse, is fun to use, versatile and provides enoughhelp that you're bound to learn something each time you useit.--Info File--Dabbler 2Price: $69; upgrade, $29Platforms: Windows 95, 3.xDisk Space: 23.6 MBRAM: 8MBFractal Design Corp.800-297-COOL, 408-688-5300Wacom ArtZ II TabletPrice: $389.99Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NTWacom Technology Corp.800-922-6613, 360-750-8882Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: miroConnect 34 wave -- New Board Surfs Comm WatersBy:Sara G. StephensIt's time to stop watching others ride the currents of communicationstechnology while you wait for the easy-to-use, state-of-theart solution. The miroConnect 34 wave packs all your messagingand communications tools into one circuit board with a V.34modem and a bounty of software.The hardware consists of a single 16-bit card with IBM's MwaveDSP (digital signal processor), audio connectors, MIDI or joystickconnector, and CD-ROM cable connectors. The miroConnect's V.34modem transfers data up to 28.8Kbps and supports fax at a transferrate of up to 14.4Kbps.Hardware setup was surprisingly easy. In fact, the miro manualis about the best I've seen. Technical support comes in theform of fax-on-demand, a bulletin board and a toll-free phonenumber.Included among miroConnect's software components are MultimediaConnect, for telephony apps; Multimedia Blender, for mixingsound; Multimedia Wave Editor; various Internet access tools,including America Online, Netcom Web browser, Prodigy and CompuServe;a pack of MIDI files; and the Intel ProShare conferencing app.The primary application in this package is Multimedia Connect,a full-featured comm app that combines voice mail, a fax anda speakerphone into a single, easy-to-use system.Multimedia Connect joins the ranks of Creative Labs Phone Blaster'sAncilla, Boca Research's CallCenter and Spectrum's Office FX by offering such advanced features as Caller ID, fax-on-demandand call forwarding. With this tool, you can even be notifiedvia pager of any new voice or fax messages waiting in yourinbox.All in all, the miroConnect 34 wave is an impressive product.This package lets you ride the highest, fastest waves of communicationswithout wiping out during setup and customization.--Info File--miroConnect 34 wavePrice: $299Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NTDisk Space: 20MBRAM: 4MB, 8MB recommendedmiro Computer Products800-549-MIRO, 415-855-0940Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: CleanSweep 95 -- Snappier App ZapperBy:Rich CastagnaIt's tough to say au revoir to ancient apps. Sure, parting withold friends is hard, but it can get even harder if you accidentallygive the heave-ho to needed files along with those you reallywant to deep-six. You can cross your fingers and whisper alittle prayer before clicking on Delete-or you can use CleanSweep95.The Windows 95 version of this uninstaller boasts big improvementsover its 16-bit predecessor. CleanSweep's tabbed interfaceand step- by-step guidance not only make it easier to use,but enable you to use the program with more confidence.The tabs in the software's dialog divvy up its functions clearly.From the Program tab, you can delete, archive, back up andmove files, or transport them to other computers. The Cleanuptab scours your system by finding duplicate and orphan files,redundant DLLs and infrequently used files. You can use Restoreto fetch files you've backed up, moved or transported, whileView lets you look at logs to see just what you've done. TheOptions tab provides configuration settings to toggle the usagemonitor, set alerts for rarely accessed files and so forth.Whatever you do, there's a wizard to lead the way. For example,when you uninstall a program, you click your way through wellprompted steps that include suggestions for using CleanSweepeffectively-and safely. Just before your final click, CleanSweepstops for confirmation and tells you how much space you'llgain. You can also look at a list of program components ifyou want to spare something from the purge.If you don't want to shuffle a bunch of files into oblivion,you can opt to keep them in compressed form; CleanSweep tucksthem away in a PKZIP-compatible format. When you find you doneed the app after all, a click on the Restore tab puts itback in working condition.The Master Log tracks almost everything CleanSweep does. Youcan append each new activity to the printable file to keepan audit trail, or you can clear it and start with a blankslate. CleanSweep also outsmarts Win95's own uninstaller: Itwill find programs that aren't in the Registry.As you ring out your old apps and ring in new Win95 versions,CleanSweep makes it easy to clear the clutter and keep yoursystem up-to-date.--Info File--CleanSweep 95Price: $29.95 (street)Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NTDisk Space: 2MBRAM: 4MBQuarterdeck Corp.310-309-3700, fax 310-309-4217Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: d-Time 95 -- Cache In for a Speedy CDBy:James E. PowellEven quad-speed CD-Rom drives get a performance boost with dTime 95. The utility works like a system caching program, usingyour hard disk to store data read from a CD-ROM. Your harddisk's speed will affect performance gains, but in my testsusing a 30MB cache-I netted an average 50 percent pickup.Many CD-ROM-based programs install a few files and then runthe program from the CD-ROM. Performance is sluggish, but withd-Time, your patience will no longer be sorely tested.D-Time's monitor shows you how it's working by displaying thepercentage of "hits"-reads from the hard disk rather than fromthe CD-ROM. My tests yielded greater gains with large files,especially multimedia files. A "learn" mode tracks how youuse a particular CD-ROM, then stores this information in aTimelog. The next time you use that CD-ROM, load its Timelogand performance is automatically optimized.The speed gains are d-Time's good news; its setup is not. Thesetup routine first called a DOS program to run an animatedlogo, then froze my system. I got further with tech support'shelp, but my system hung up again after running Scandisk. Itwas supposed to run Disk Defragmenter next, as a safeguardbefore d-Time installed its files.Once you get over the rough spots-and if you have 30MB or moreavailable for the cache-d-Time can make your CD drive hum.--Info File--d-Time 95Price: $54.95 (street)Platforms: Windows 95Disk Space: VariesRAM: 4MBBallard Synergy Corp.800-754-1204, 206-656-8070Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Art-Scan Professional 3.95 -- Scant Effort for Swift ScansBy:Hailey Lynne McKeefryI've often wished that getting paper-based images into my PCwas as easy as getting them out. Art-Scan Professional simplifiesthe document scanning process and, after I overcame some setupdifficulties, it provided me with a straightforward way ofmoving images on paper off my desk and into my computer.Art-Scan promises to work with more than 100 scanner engines,including major manufacturers such as Hewlett-Packard, Microtek,UMAX, Envisions, Epson and Relisys. But when I tried to useit with an Agfa StudioScan flatbed scanner-which was on thelist of supported hardware-I ran into a jam because Agfa usesa slightly different SCSI driver for this new model. Jetsoftsupplied replacement software with a bug fix, and I had noproblem loading the program. Art-Scan requires that you haveTWAIN-compatible image editing or graphics software such asAdobe Photoshop or PageMaker, Corel Photo-Paint, Aldus PhotoStyler,Fractal Design Painter or Caere OmniPage Professional.The program's interface is simple and easy to use. In Auto-Mode,all scanning options are set without user intervention; thesoftware determines the image type and configures the scannerautomatically. I just had to choose the type of original, eitherfilm or photo. If you want to make your own setting adjustments,you have a multitude of options, including scan mode, resolution,size of the original and image range. You can scan color, grayscale and line art, and you can choose to scan directly into .EPS or vector-based files without having to convert them separatelyto PostScript. A Batch Scanning feature prompts for more pagesas each scan completes.The simplicity and organized design of Art-Scan made scanningsimple enough that I quickly recovered from the stress causedby my initial difficulties. In all, it was worth the work andwait to get this program up and running.--Info File--Art-Scan Professional 3.95Price: $149.99Platforms: Windows 95Disk Space: 90KBRAM: 8MBJetsoft Development Co.800-374-7401, 513-528-8668Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Canon BJC-210 -- Bubbling with ColorBy:John PerryDespite all the talk about the next generation's growing intimacywith technology, I never realized there was a market for "cyberCrayola" applications. The Canon BJC-210 color BubbleJet printerbrings color printing home to the family.The BJC-210 is just about the smallest color printer I've seen,measuring only 8.2 by 13.7 by 6.9 inches and weighing only5.8 pounds.Color output is quite good. The BJC-210 has a 360x360dpi resolutionand prints as fast as 0.27 pages per minute, at a cost perpage of 35 cents. For best printing results, coated paper isa must. The vertical-feed paper tray holds 100 sheets. An applicationbundled with the Canon Creative software allows you to makeheat transfers for T-shirts.The BJC-210 ships with Canon Creative and Windows 3.x drivers,and Win95 drivers will be available by the time you read this.The Canon Creative package includes Sticker & Label Store,Stationery Store by DogByte Development, Crayola Art by Micrografxand Pattern Maker by HobbyWare. Swap out the color cartridgefor a black one, and you've got a black-and-white printer witha printing resolution of 720x360dpi that's quite usable forbusiness.As far as repairs go, a 2-year full warranty with InstantExchange24-hour replacement offers you a new printer instantly shouldyours break.--Info File--Canon BJC-210Price $269 (street)Canon Computer Systems800-848-4123, 714-438-3000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: PaperMaster 2.0 -- Master the Paper MonsterBy:Cheryl DominianniAt a snail's pace, we creep along toward the paperless office.But if your patience is wearing thin, you don't have to waitto tame your paper monster. PaperMaster 2.0 is personal papermanagement software that, when coupled with a scanner, providesinstant access to information that was previously paper-based.The program lets you file, find, fax, copy, edit, e-mail, formfill and annotate digital documents.PaperMaster uses an intuitive file cabinet metaphor. The cabineton the opening screen has some drawers already named, but youcan easily create new drawers and folders. You can customizeyour cabinet with graphics and font colors. Drag-and-drop makesmoving drawers, folders and documents a snap, and a lock optionlets you restrict drawers with passwords.PaperMaster accepts documents via scanner, fax modems, e-mailand other Windows applications. You can scan documents directlyinto the file cabinet using any TWAIN- or ISIS-compliant scanner.The program installs the PaperMaster File Cabinet as a printerdriver, which simplifies inputting documents from Windows applications.You can directly import image files in .TIF, .PCX, .BMP, .GIFor JPEG formats. It's also possible to set the software sothat all incoming faxes are routed directly into PaperMaster'sInbox.Once a document is in your cabinet, you are able to fill ina form for the doc and annotate the file with sticky notes.You can also search for specific text (after using the Readand Index command), and fax and e-mail the file. PaperMaster'sfax/copy tool can replace a dedicated fax and copier-a featuresure to interest small-office users.Version 2.0 enhancements include the ability to share cabinetsor take them on the road; support for color and gray-scaledocuments; and an Inbox where you can store documents for laterfiling, straightening and autocropping features. The abilityto fill in forms with a type text tool, and MAPI- and VIM-enablede-mail are also new.PaperMaster is a versatile program with an intuitive interfacethat can help you master the paper chase.--Info File--PaperMaster 2.0Price: $99 (street); upgrade from 1.x, $49 (street)Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1Disk Space: 7MBRAM: 8MBDocuMagix800-DOCU-MAGIX, 408-434-1138Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: askSam 3.0 -- Play It Again, SamBy:Philip AlbinusRight when you thought you could come up for air in a sea ofinformation, along comes the Internet tidal wave. Before yougo under for the last time, give askSam 3.0 a look.I tested a beta version of askSam and found its search enginevastly improved. This fleet-footed application can search fora word or text string in the blink of an eye. It also has newfeatures for working on the World Wide Web. HTML import andexport capabilities have been added to simplify organizingWeb information. Just find a Web page and save it to your harddrive as an HTML file. AskSam 3.0 will open the file and preservethe hyperlinks in bold-faced, colored type, and you can turnthe Web page into a searchable askSam database file. The InternetDesktop section also offers predefined templates for managinge-mail and newsgroup messages.AskSam 3.0 ships with a set of clever applets called askSamOffice. The six apps include askSam files to track addresses,notes, to-do items, faxes, memos and letters.AskSam 3.0 is a 16-bit application that works well under Windows95. The company says a 32-bit version will debut by mid-1996.Until then, you won't be sacrificing anything with this powerfuland flexible program.--Info File--askSam 3.0Price: $149.95Platforms: Windows 95, 3.xaskSam Systems800-800-1997, 904-584-6590Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: MyAdvancedBrochures 95 -- Biz Docs Made SimpleBy:Hailey Lynne McKeefryEven if you're a little fish in a sea of big businesses, youcan still project the spit-and-polish image of the big boyswith MyAdvancedBrochures 95. The program lets you create professionallooking business publications that cost a lot less than a tripto the printer.This 32-bit version of MyAdvancedBrochures has been tuned totake advantage of Windows 95, including features like longfilenames, right mouse-button menus, and OLE drag-and-drop.The program, which I tested in beta, also runs under WindowsNT.Other new features simplify printing and mailing. A Mail MergeWizard walks you through creating mailing labels from a dBASEIV, MyMailList or delimited ASCII file. In a few easy steps,the mail merge is done, including any filtering.The program also supports an increased number of preprintedpapers from a variety of vendors, including Beaver Prints,Image Plus, Image Street, Paper Direct and InstaColor. In all,this CD-ROM version supports 650 paper designs, from dual-and trifold brochures, flyers, and letterhead to business cardsand newsletters. In many cases, MyAdvancedBrochures supportspaper designs across several formats (brochures, letterhead,business cards and so forth) so all your documents can havea consistent look and feel. There are also 14 designs thatyou can print yourself and an option for plain paper for creatingyour own designs. The CD supports about 1,000 clip-art images,or you can import art in 13 graphics formats.The newsletter design templates now include about 40 differentdualfold brochure options as well as 28 designs for fourfoldbrochures that print on legal-sized paper. The previous versionsupported only trifold designs. You still have the option ofadding reply or rotary cards, as well as space for a "sendto" or return address label.MyAdvancedBrochures has maintained its easy-to-use interfaceand clear toolbars, while adding more design choices. Thismodestly priced program will more than pay for itself evenif you only use it a few times a year for promotional mailers.--Info File--MyAdvanced-Brochures 95Price: $79.95Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1, NTMySoftware Co.800-325-3508, 415-473-3600Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Sejin Wireless Keyboard Model SPR-8630WP -- Look, Ma, No WiresBy:James E. PowellHaving worked with Logitech wireless mice for a number of years,I appreciate the way these peripherals keep my desktop freeof wires. Now Sejin offers a compact wireless keyboard thatcan remove yet another cord from my desk.The unit's infrared receiver plugs into your computer just likeany keyboard (there's an adapter for both PS/AT- and PS/2-sizedplugs). There are no special drivers to load: Windows 95-and,presumably, Windows 3.x-recognizes the unit as just anotherkeyboard.The keyboard itself is powered by two AAA batteries and canbe used within 16 feet of the receiver. The keyboard doesn'thave to be in exact line of sight, either; the unit works withina 45-degree range.Though all the letter and number keys are full-size, the functionand navigation keys are tiny by comparison. There's a numerickeypad layout, available on several letter keys, that's accessibleby pressing the Fn key, just as on most laptops.I like the feel of this quiet, 86-key keyboard. The product'ssize (1 by 11.5 by 5.5 inches) is ideal. It's incredibly lightweight,and it has adjustable tilt legs and nonskid rubber feet fordesktop use. But its best feature is what it doesn't have:a wire.--Info File--Sejin Wireless Keyboard ModelSPR-8630WPPrice: $99.95Sejin America408-980-7550, fax 408-980-7562Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: First Aid 95 -- Snafu Sniffer Suggests SolutionsBy:James E. PowellWhen all's not well with your Windows system, there is a doctorin the house if you have a copy of First Aid 95. The utilitydiagnoses problems and suggests remedies and, despite having"95" as its surname, First Aid works for Windows 3.1, too.If your multimedia system is in trouble, for example, FirstAid's diagnostics may suggest fixes such as replacing missingdrivers. If the necessary driver is tucked in the wrong folder,you can move it with just a click on the AutoFix button. Ifthe driver can't be located, First Aid opens the appropriateControl Panel Wizard.First Aid examines the error your application returns and describesthe hitch in plain English. Then the program checks to seeif the condition is among the 10,000 in its knowledge base.If it is, it sets out to look for the file the applicationrequires.Running under Windows 95, 16-bit applications can still crash.But if First Aid's Crash Guard is running in the background,it can monitor the app and intercede to save your data if itdetects a GPF.First Aid's Trim feature is like a selective uninstall. It removesfiles related to an application's features you no longer use.On the flip side, it can check to ensure that all the filesneeded for a particular feature are in place.But First Aid can be confusing. The manual refers to Crash Guardby another name (Problem Monitor). And when Crash Guard starts,it's not represented by a taskbar icon as are the other backgroundutilities. The manual also mentions a feature called WindowsGuardian, but there is no such screen.Most disappointing, though, is First Aid's limited list of supportedapplications. Not supporting the very latest version of a programis reasonable, but not including support for mature programsisn't. For example, First Aid can check Access 1.0 and 1.1,but not version 2.0, which is more than a year old. However,you can use the programs' Support Exchange to get updates fromthe company's BBS, the Internet, CompuServe, Prodigy, MSN orAOL.--Info File--First Aid 95Price: $49.95 (street)Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1Disk Space: 7MBRAM: 4MBCyberMedia800-PC-1ST-AID, 310-843-0800Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Hewlett-Packard LaserJet 5Si MX -- Workhorse Laser for Workgroup PrintingBy:Hailey Lynne McKeefryFive thousand dollars may seem like a lot to pay for a laserprinter. However, the HP LaserJet 5Si MX packs in paper-handling,output and networking features that make it worth the price.This network powerhouse is built to handle the demands of alarge workgroup with ease and style. It is decked out withtwo 500-sheet input paper trays and a 100-sheet multipurposetray that can handle 10 different sizes of printable media,to make restocking paper a once-in-a-while job. You can alsoadd a whopping 2,000-sheet input tray (for $1,299) to bringthe total capacity to 3,100 sheets.This speed demon whips out letter- and A4-sized documents at24 pages per minute with a resolution of 600x600 dots per inch.The unit weighs in at 99 pounds and measures 21.3 by 31.3 by20.5 inches. It comes standard with 12MB of RAM, expandableto 76MB. The LaserJet 5Si is rated for a duty cycle of 100,000pages per month.The printer's networking options are legion: They include 10Base2and 10BaseT Ethernet and DIN-8 LocalTalk bi-directional interfaces,as well as an HP MIO expansion slot. The unit supports justabout any network OS right out of the box. The included JetAdminsoftware gives network managers real-time remote printer statusand diagnostic alerts. This is one printer you can share witha large office and still not keep anyone waiting.--Info File--Hewlett-Packard LaserJet 5Si MXPrice: $4,899Hewlett-Packard Co.800-752-0900Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: PowerDesk 1.0 -- Roll Your Own DesktopBy:Joel T. PatzI'm always looking for ways to make my work easier, so PowerDeskis my kind of utility. It organizes my work tools and putsthem on my desktop within easy reach of a mouse click.You can integrate the PowerDesk toolbar with Windows 95's taskbaror use it as a separate window on your desktop. You place launchbuttons for specific files, folders or applications on thetoolbar, or use the DOS command box if you like to do thingsthe old-fashioned way. System monitors watch CPU usage, threads,available memory, available disk space, and system, user andGDI resources. You can specify how often you want the monitorsupdated and display them as bars or moving graphs.PowerDesk's multiview feature lets you switch among up to 16virtual screens, which you customize by adjusting their colorand size, hotkeys and applications. System shortcuts to shutdown or restart your computer, restart Windows, log on as anotheruser or change screen resolution can also be added to the toolbar.It's even possible to display up to seven clocks set for differenttime zones.Installed printers can be represented by icons on the toolbarwhich can be used as shortcuts. Any item in your Start/Programslist will be identified by a start button by PowerDesk and,like everything else in the program, can be modified.PowerDesk provides one-click access to drives, files and folders.Menu choices make managing zip files quick and simple. Thecustomizable toolbar's buttons make it easy to rename files,change icon sizes, call up a detail view of the file list,and arrange file lists by name, extension, size, date and type.Other file operations, such as cut, copy, paste, undo and delete,are just as straightforward. The DOS command line at the bottomof the ExplorerPlus screen is a real timesaver.PowerDesk's intuitive interface, seamless integration with Windows95 and easy customization make it a timely addition to a busyuser's toolkit.--Info File--PowerDesk 1.0Price: $79.95Platforms: Windows 95MicroHelp800-777-3322, 770-516-0899Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Dr. Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows 95 -- This Doctor Makes House CallsBy:Rich CastagnaThere is a doctor in the house, and he has his finger on yourPC's pulse. Dr. Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit is a healthy doseof preventive medicine that will help keep your Windows 95system free of crippling-or even just plain annoying-viruses.I tested the beta version of this cure-all kit. It has severalcomponents, including WinGuard, which you can set to run atWin95's start-up. WinGuard lurks in the background and checksthe health of files as you access them. You can also manuallyrun a virus check from Dr. Solomon's dialog box and scan anydrive-including your floppy-for over 7,000 known maliciouscritters.The good doctor also provides an online encyclopedia of about300 common viruses. It's interesting reading in itself, andwhen Dr. Solomon nabs a nasty before it can put the hurt onyour hard disk, you can look it up and see what peril you justescaped. Besides a description of each bug's evil intent, theencyclopedia explains how it works and if there are any knownvariations.A Scheduler lets you set up regular scans that will kick offwithout your intervention. And if your reading preferencestend toward hexadecimal, you can select Inspect from the Advancedmenu and peer into the darkest recesses of a file or disk.Dr. Solomon's past releases have been effective vaccinationsagainst destructive viruses. With the amount of downloadingand file swapping we do these days, the need for effectivedetection is greater than ever.--Info File--Dr. Solomon'Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows 95Price: $125Platforms: Windows 95, 3.xS&S Software International800-701-9648, 617-273-7400Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Mosaic in a Box for Windows 95 -- Sleek Intro to the Net SetBy:Julie R. BlumenfieldNeophyte Netters, take note: Mosaic in a Box for Windows 95is the perfect Internet browser for beginners.Installing Mosaic in a Box creates a program group on the Startmenu with a dialer app, 32-bit browser, mail client, graphicviewer, the program's help system and an account-creation utility.Newcomers will also appreciate the World Wide Web 95 Tour,an Internet introduction. CompuServe Wallet (an Internet paymentservice that uses CheckFree) and an access-number phone bookround out the offerings.This 32-bit version of Mosaic is considerably faster than itspredecessor. The browser is supposed to conform to the HTML3.0 standard, but some 3.0 enhancements like tables and textwraps around graphics weren't supported. It does, however,support Win95 conventions such as context menus, and also providesa configurable hotlist and viewing options such as the abilityto change the hyperlink display color.Mosaic's newsgroup feature is anemic. Your only option is toenter the name of a newsgroup-there's no master list or searchcapability.The mail function, on the other hand, is intuitive and quick.And the file-viewer utility is so good that it alone mightbe worth the price.Mosaic's easy operation and detailed help screens make it perfectfor Internet newcomers.--Info File--Mosaic in a Boxfor Windows 95Price: $9.95 (street)Platforms: Windows 95, 3.xDisk Space: 9KBRAM: 4MBCompuServe Internet Division800-557-9614Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Virtus WalkThrough 2.5 -- The Shape of Things to Come By:Lynn GinsbergAs you travel about the virtual worlds in the Web's cyberspace,you might begin to believe that Columbus was wrong: This worldis flat. But the Web is becoming a more inhabitable space,thanks to programs such as Virtus WalkThrough, which supportsthe latest Internet protocol of 3-D VRML modeling. VRML (virtualreality modeling language) lets developers create 3-D modelsfor the Internet. These models can be navigated by multipleparticipants and hyperlinked to other 3-D worlds or HTML documents.Virtus WalkThrough is a natural for VRML development, with itsinnovative approach to implementing navigable 3-D scenes andenvironments. WalkThrough's strength is its straightforwardset of tools, which you use to create complex 3-D worlds forthe Internet using a relatively humble PC rather than a highpowered workstation.The process for creating WalkThrough's VRML environments issimple. First, you use the program to create your 3-D scene.Next, you map out which objects within the scene will be "hotspots" for linking to other HTML Web pages or another VRMLdocument. Once you've chosen these hot spots, you fill in adialog box to attach a VRML anchor to the object, which designatesthe URL link. After assigning all of the anchors to objects,you export your 3-D model to VRML using a File menu option.That's all there is to it.I found the hot-spot and linking process extremely easy to followconsiderably less challenging than creating the 3-D scene itself.This WalkThrough version also supports stereoscopic viewinghardware which, if you have virtual reality equipment, letsyou interact even more realistically within a 3-D scene.While it's easy to convert 3-D environments to VRML with WalkThrough,navigating a 3-D environment online is still a far cry fromreality given current modem, line and hardware limitations.Unless, of course, that reality is really, really slow. Untilthe supporting hardware and communications infrastructure isin place, the worlds created in Virtus will demand as muchpatience as vision from the virtual traveler.--Info File--VirtusWalkThrough 2.5Price: $495 (direct)Platforms: Windows 95Virtus Corp.800-VIRTUS-1, 919-467-9700Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: EasyPhoto 2.0 -- Dress Up Docs with Digital PicsBy:Jim ForbesIt's easy to be image-conscious with EasyPhoto 2.0, a graphicsand scanning application that makes it a snap to add photosor pictures to reports, proposals and other documents.EasyPhoto is available on a CD-ROM or bundled with a scanner($249). This release incorporates features that improve itsversatility. It supports photos with enhanced resolutions ofup to 1200dpi. In addition, its ClearPrint technology has beenenhanced to optimize output for specific printers. The programworks with new color ink jet printers from such vendors asHewlett-Packard, Epson and Canon, and it supports OLE 2.0.EasyPhoto is easier to use than its predecessor, and the photoscanner is faster. These improvements help non-graphics professionalscreate great-looking documents with text that wraps aroundcolor photos. Another key benefit of EasyPhoto is the abilityto print the graphics-enhanced documents using a relativelyinexpensive color ink jet printer.Other programs provide similar features, but EasyPhoto is-rightnow-the best solution available for dressing up documents witheye-catching graphics.--Info File--EasyPhoto 2.0Price: $69; with scanner, $249Platforms: Windows 3.x, 95Disk Space: 12MBRAM: 8MBStorm Software800-275-5734, 415-691-6600Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: ArtMedia Monitors TC1864 and TG1882 -- Practically Perfect PicturesBy:Joel T. PatzPerfection is rarely encountered in life, but two new monitorsfrom ArtMedia, the TC1864 and the TG1882, come close. They'realso competitively priced, considering their performance.Both these Trinitron CRT monitors provide an approximate 16inch diagonal, conductive silica-coated viewing area. The 42pound TC1864 offers 1280x1024 maximum resolution, with an optimalresolution of 1024x768 at 75Hz and 0.25mm grill pitch (Trinitron'squasi-equivalent to dot pitch). Its horizontal scan frequencyfalls within a 31kHz to 64kHz range, and the vertical scanfrequency lies between 50Hz and 120Hz. Hidden behind a flipdown panel on the monitor's front, the digital control buttonsfor the TC1864 allow you to adjust brightness and contrast,horizontal and vertical centering and size, and color temperature.You can also correct for pincushioning and rotation.The maximum resolution for the TG1882 is 1600x1280, the optimalbeing 1280x1024 at 75Hz. It supports horizontal and verticalscanning frequencies between 29kHz and 82kHz and 50Hz and150Hz,respectively. Located on the monitor's lower edge, the TG1882'scontrols include plus and minus contrast and brightness buttons,and a Select button joined to a series of tiny indicators.You can adjust centering, picture size, tilt and horizontalpincushion, convergence and color temperature. The TG1882 weighsin at 49 pounds and uses a BNC connector cable.Both monitors, which measure no more than a space-saving 18inches in height. width or depth, are automatically degaussedon start-up and comply with MPR II standards. In compliancewith power-saving guidelines, each supports three levels ofoperation with the appropriate video card.I ran each monitor through its paces using DisplayMate for Windows(Sonera Technologies, 800-932-6323) to check for focus, convergence,color, resolution and other characteristics. The results wereexcellent. I found no evidence of moir patterns and a completeabsence of distortion on both test screens, although the TG1882did have a sharper picture. They were both, quite nearly, perfect.--Info File--ArtMedia Monitors TC1864 and TG1882Price: TC1864, $899; TG1882, $1,099ArtMedia800-278-6334, 408-980-8988Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: AcerNote Light -- Bantamweight Book Won't Break Your BudgetBy:Jim ForbesValue-class machines provide the basic functionality most ofus need for mobile computing. I recently saw a preproductionversion of one such machine, the AcerNote Light model 352.It ships with a 10.4-inch dual-scan passive-matrix display,a 75MHz 80486 DX4 processor, a 420MB hard disk, an internal3.5-inch floppy disk drive, a single Type II PCMCIA socket,one serial port, one parallel port, a self-contained infraredtransceiver and a touchpad pointing device.The internal battery consistently powered the machine for 2.25to 2.75 hours. Recharging the batteries takes about 3 hourswith the power off. Optional lithium ion batteries should beavailable by the time you read this.The notebook's dual-scan passive-matrix screen is bright, witha diagonal width of 10.4 inches, but it has a narrow viewingangle. The AcerNote Light is smaller than most notebooks. It's1.7 by 11.7 by 8.2 inches and has a travel weight (includingits small recharger) of 5.6 pounds. Windows 95 is standard,as is a card game, a personal organizer and software utilities.The AcerNote Light's Wintune 95 benchmark results were goodfor a 75MHz 486: CPU, 44.6MIPS; FPU, 15.5MFLOPS; video, 2.07Mpixelsper second; and 4.34MB per second data-transfer rate for thehard disk.I wouldn't hesitate to send one away with a college student,or to carry it day in and day out in my book bag.--Info File--AcerNote LightPrice: As configured, $2,199Acer America Corp.800-733-2237, 408-432-6200Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Visioneer PaperPort Vx -- Port in a Paper StormBy:Rich CastagnaImagine a machine that sucks stacks of paper off your desk andtucks them onto your hard disk. And imagine a program thatlets you do just about anything you want with those digitizeddocuments. Now turn off your imagination and turn on the PaperPortVx.The new scanner/document manager combo offers a slightly revisedlook and a slew of small but useful enhancements. On the outside,the 3.75- by 12- by 2.5-inch scanner is a little sleeker thanits predecessor, but its beauty isn't only skin deep. A newchip provides 8-bit scanning for up to 256 shades of gray.And it's still quick-taking only a lickety-split 5 or 6 secondsto scan a full page.Depending on the material you plan to scan, you can switch amongPaperPort's six modes for scanning text or images. For eachsetting, there's a description of the level of quality to expectand the resulting file's relative size.PaperPort wakes up when you slip a document into the scanner.Once the scan is complete, the Page screen pops up, where youcan adjust the image or add annotations in the form of stickynotes, arrows or freehand lines. For skewed images, you usea new alignment tool to turn the image until it lines up.The Desktop screen shows the scanned pages and lets you dropthem into folders or shuffle them into stacks. A slider barmakes it easy to flip through the stack, and the Browse buttonlists the items in the selected folder. You can also add adescriptive header record to a scan, which-like the stickynotes-is searchable.PaperPort searches your disk for installed apps and for eachone it recognizes, it creates a link and a big button at thebottom of the Desktop screen. You can drag scanned pages tothe buttons to launch the applications. When applicable, PaperPortfirst runs the page through OmniPage Lite's OCR software beforestarting the program.There's no easier way to get from paper to pixels.--Info File--Visioneer PaperPort VxPrice: $369 (street)Platforms: Windows 95, 3.1Disk Space: 8MBRAM: 8MBVisioneer800-787-7007, 415-493-9599Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Sharp PC-8800 -- Easy on the Eyes (and Ears)By:Michelle A. TyrrellWith Pentiums now ubiquitous, great deals abound on systemswith slower processors. The Sharp PC-8800 notebook computer,with its 486DX4/75 processor, is one example.The PC-8800 ships with 8MB of RAM (expandable to 32MB) and a320MB hard disk (upgradable to 500MB). It has 1MB of videomemory, 32-bit VESA local-bus video, and 16-bit sound withbuilt-in stereo speakers and microphone. The keyboard is comfortable,and the 10.4-inch, 800x600 resolution dual-scan SVGA screenis easy on the eyes. A GlidePoint Trackpad makes all the differencefor comfort and accuracy.The PC-8800 comes with an infrared port, allowing the user tocommunicate wirelessly with infrared-equipped systems, PDAsand printers. It has a nickel metal hydride "Smart" batteryand dual-battery capability for extended travel.The floppy disk drive is on the front of the unit, while theback houses the usual complement of ports. The PCMCIA slotholds two Type II cards or one Type III card.The model I tested was running Windows 3.1. The Word 6.0 macroexecuted in 110 seconds, while the Excel 5.0 macro finishedin 56 seconds. The CPU scored 39.5MIPS and 8.2MFLOPS, harddisk access was 1.826MB per second, and the video system rackedup 3.068Mpixels per second. The battery delivered 2 hours usage.The PC-8800 measures 2 by 11.6 by 8.8 inches and weighs 6.2pounds. MS-DOS, Windows 3.1, America Online, CompuServe andCheckFree were preinstalled.--Info File--Sharp PC-8800Price: $2,399Sharp Electronics Corp.800-237-4277, 201-529-8200Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Texas Instruments Extensa 455T -- Book Brings Value, Saves BucksBy:Jim ForbesTexas Instruments has been known more for high-end notebookcomputers than for value-class machines. The TI Extensa 455Tmay change all that. It's a new 75MHz DX4 486-based notebookthat muscles into the notebook market's action area-systemsthat cost less than $2,400.The Extensa is manufactured for TI by Acer and is almost identicalto the AcerNote Light, also reviewed in First Impressions thismonth. Standard equipment includes a single Type II PCMCIA(PC Card) slot, one parallel, one serial and two PS/2 ports,14MB ofRAM expandable to 32MB, a 3.5-inch (removable) floppy disk drive,accelerated graphics and a full-sized palm rest with an integratedGlidePoint pointing device.The Extensa allows you to plug optional lithium ion batteriesor an optional Type III PC Card socket into a module that normallyholds the floppy disk drive. The unit includes a small, easilyconnected port replicator, weighs under 6 pounds and measures1.7 by 11.7 by 8.2 inches. Duracell makes the primary powercell. I was able to get up to three hours' use between chargeswith only moderate power conservation. The power supply issmall, measuring approximately 1 by 4 by 2 inches.The 9.5-inch active-matrix color screen should be adequate formost users' needs, although I wouldn't recommend the Extensa455T for presentation graphics.The Extensa 455T ships with Windows 95, Microsoft Works, LotusOrganizer and other software. My test unit had less than 102MBfree on its 340MB hard disk.The TI Extensa 455T's Win95 Wintune benchmark results were 45MIPS,15MFLOPS, 1.56Mpixels per second for the video, and 4.36MBper second data-transfer rate for the hard disk. These resultsare slightly better than those of other 75MHz DX4 machinesI've tested, although the Cirrus Logic-based video is slow.This machine took 72 seconds to complete our 32-bit Excel macroand 154 seconds to run our 32-bit Word macro.Texas Instruments has stuffed a lot of value in a small casewith the Extensa 455T. With the optional lithium ion battery,it should compete well with much more expensive models.--Info File--Texas Instruments Extensa 455TPrice: $2,099 (street)Texas Instruments800-848-3927, 817-771-5856Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PS -- Appetizing Apple Offers Crisp, Colorful PagesBy:Hailey Lynne McKeefryApple has long been a desktop publishing leader, so it's nosurprise that the company's newest color laser printer is atechnological tour de force. What's surprising is how nicelythis Apple unit fit into my Windows setup.The Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PS is for workgroups withany combination of Macintosh, Power Macintosh, Windows andUNIX computers. It comes standard with support for most networkprotocols.Setup was simple, although I did have to install a number ofpieces including four toner cartridges (cyan, magenta, yellowand black), a photoconductor drum, an oil canister and an emptytoner collection box. The printer's control panel indicateswhich toner cartridge is low, and which portions of the unitneed maintenance.The LaserWriter 12/600 outputs at 600x600-dot-per-inch resolution.It ships with 39 PostScript fonts, 64 TrueType fonts and 12MBof RAM. The colors produced are bright and vibrant even onplain, uncoated paper. It prints at 12 pages per minute inblack and white and 3ppm in color. You can also print colortransparencies at 1ppm.The printer ships with one 250-sheet cassette, a 100-sheet multipurposetray; an additional 250-sheet tray is also available.Toner cartridges for the unit cost $119 for black and $139 forcyan, magenta and yellow. Apple estimates that the cost is3 cents per page at 5 percent black coverage and 13 cents perpage at 20 percent color coverage.--Info File--Apple Color LaserWriter 12/600 PSPrice: $6,989Apple Computer800-538-9696, 408-996-1010Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: AppleVision 1710AV -- Multimedia MacMonitorBy:Hailey Lynne McKeefryThe split between the Apple Macintosh and the Windows PC hastraditionally been as stringently observed as the separationbetween church and state. The walls separating the two arebreaking down, but they aren't rubble yet. I found that whilethe Apple Vision 1710AV multimedia monitor had the traditionallyhigh price tag of Macintosh products, it lacked the ease-ofuse of a VGA monitor.First, the unit requires an adapter (included) so that it canplug into a Windows PC. Second, there is no Windows versionof the AppleVision utilities. On-screen controls allowed theadjustmentof geometry, brightness, contrast and color temperature. However,I was repeatedly unable to get the pincushioning and convergenceexactly right.On the bright side, the AppleVision's flat screen, combinedwith an antiglare coating, made it very easy on my eyes. The17-inch Trinitron CRT provides a healthy 16.1-inch diagonalviewable image and a 0.26mm stripe pitch. For PCs, it supportsresolutions from 640x480 to 1280x1024. You can use an ergonomic75Hz refresh rate at any of those resolutions.A set of stereo speakers mounted at the unit's bottom providesgood-quality sound, while a directional microphone sits embeddedat the top of the monitor. These features add some size tothe unit, which measures 19.7 by 15.8 by 17.6 inches and weighs60 pounds.--Info File--AppleVision 1710AVPrice: $1,159Apple Computer800-538-9696, 408-996-1010Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Robotech Cobra XLT P133 Multimedia System -- Jazzy 133 for After-5 FunBy:Philip AlbinusNow's your chance to get off the couch and become a bona fidePC potato. The Robotech Cobra XLT is a fast and furious 133MHzPentium system that offers more video thrills than a Schwarzeneggeraction flick.The Robotech Cobra XLT isn't just a speedy PC; it's a home entertainmentsystem. Though it lacks a modem and network card, there's videogalore. The Robotech Cobra ships with the Jazz Multimedia JakartaMPEG Video Graphics Accelerator card with 2MB of DRAM. Theunit also features the Jazz Multimedia Port of Entry card,a cable-ready tuner that puts your TV and Sega, Nintendo and3DO games within Windows. You can also watch videotapes fromyour VCR or camcorder. Unfortunately, Jazz Multimedia was stillfinishing its 32-bit drivers at presstime, so portions of ourvideo testing were incomplete.You will certainly need full-blown sound to accompany all thisflashy video. The Robotech Cobra ships with a Sound Blastercompatible Cobra Wave Table audio card that delivers 16-bitsound. The unit also offers a pair of Yamaha YST-M10 poweredmonitor speakers.The PC came installed with Windows for Workgroups 3.11 and MSDOS 6.22, and was loaded with 16MB of RAM and a 1GB hard drive.Installing Windows 95 was a breeze from the Panasonic quadspeed CD-ROM drive. A Robotech spokesman said the company willbe shipping Cobras with Win95 installed by the time you readthis.The system's monitor is its only drawback. The 17-inch screenhas a 0.26mm dot pitch, but its performance was only adequate.This PC has spectacular multimedia peripherals; it deservesan equally impressive monitor.The Cobra scored 243MIPS and 76MFLOPS on our WINDOWS MagazineWintune 95 benchmark tests, about average for a 133MHz Pentium.Its video score of 2.4Mpixels per second and uncached harddrive data transfer rate of 3.4MB were disappointing, however.It posted equally lackluster times of 88 seconds to completeour Word 7.0 macro and 62 seconds for the Excel macro. Butif it's wall-to-wall video goodies you want, the Robotech Cobracan flex plenty of multimedia muscle.--Info File--Robotech Cobra XLT P133 Multimedia SystemPrice: $3,599Robotech800-533-0633, 801-565-0645Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Packard Bell Multimedia Corner Computer -- Angular PC Is a Niche ProductBy:Cynthia MorganYou know PCs have become household appliances when space-savingdesigner models come along. The Packard Bell Multimedia CornerPC is just that, with dual drive sections that split off at90-degree angles to fit a desktop corner.A 133MHz Pentium system with 16MB of EDO RAM, 1.6GB hard diskand PCI video with 1MB of video RAM, the Corner PC is alsoa home entertainment center. Packard Bell uses all three ISAslots and fills them with a combo voice mail/14.4Kbps modemsound card, an FM radio adapter and PBTV4, an integrated cableTV card. An included remote control handily doubles as a mouse.Packard Bell gets high marks for its user-friendly welcomingtutorial, built around a family living room metaphor.As with a TV, you don't ever want to remove the cover. PackardBell takes seven pages to explain how to remove it, and it'snot easy, especially since it's partially wired to the chassis.Unfortunately, the Corner PC scores on the low end for a 133MHzsystem. WINDOWS Magazine's Wintune benchmarks rated the processorat 230MIPS, with on-target 77MFLOPS for floating point buta disappointing video score at 4.3Mpixels per second. Uncacheddisk operation transfers data at 3MB per second.At $3,398, the Corner PC is a full-featured value for the casualhome user. For faster performance and do-it-yourself serviceability,however, you might want to look elsewhere.--Info File--Packard BellMultimedia Corner ComputerPrice: Including 15-inch monitor, $3,398 (street)Packard Bell Electronics800-733-5858, 818-865-1555Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Zenith Z-Station GT 590MM -- Lots of Vroom, Little RoomBy:Cynthia MorganZenith Data Systems is known for stuffing everything possibleonto its motherboards. So I was surprised to find that thecompany's design philosophy had taken a different tack withits new Z-Station GT 590MM. Instead of cramming the motherboardto the gills, this multimedia desktop fills all three ISA slotswith network, sound and modem cards, so don't plan on addingmore.The Hayes Accura 144B fax modem, Creative Labs Sound Blaster16 and SMC network card leave just two PCI slots free. Of course,with 16MB of RAM, a 256KB level 2 cache, a 1.2GB EIDE harddrive, a quad-speed Toshiba IDE CD-ROM and built-in S3 Trio32-bit PCI graphics adapter with 2MB of video memory, you won'tlack for much. Moving sound and communications off the motherboardeases future upgrading.However, tech support may call this desktop a service headache,despite the fact that internal components are easy to find.Although it's wider than most slimline desktop PCs-17 insteadof the usual 14 to 16 inches-there's not much room inside.You'll probably need to remove cards and/or drives to makehardware changes. The four filled SIMM sockets crowd out apossible fourth ISA slot, and drive bays restrict one ISA andone PCI slot to short-length cards.WINDOWS Magazine's Wintune benchmarks clocked this CPU doing164MIPS, while floating-point operations moved along at 52MFLOPS,a little higher than average for a 90MHz Pentium. The unitshowed lackluster hard-drive performance, though with a 1.8MBper-second uncached data-transfer rate. Video was also middling,at 6.7Mpixels per second.The GT 590MM's start-up screens offer extensive system and supportinformation, but the manual is sometimes confusing when itcomes to installing Windows 95 drivers. The price includessound, support and modem utilities, plus Internet softwareand a copy of Symantec's Norton Navigator and Norton Antivirusfor Windows 95.If you're more interested in using a PC than in tinkering insideits case, you'll find the Z-Station GT 590MM is a solid performer.--Info File--Zenith Z-StationGT 590MMPrice: $3,383; with 15-inch monitor, $3,822Zenith Data Systems800-533-0331, 708-808-5000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab First Impressions: Maximus P-133 -- Mini Tower of PowerBy:David GabelMaybe I've just become a jaded New Yorker. I approach each reviewI undertake with skepticism. I did not think, for example,that I was going to like the Maximus P-133 desktop system.I was wrong.I tested this computer in my office, which is jam-packed withreview products, and was therefore happy for the space-savingmini-tower construction. The included 15-inch MAG InnoVisionmonitor is similarly space-efficient, while maintaining pictureclarity and good color. It took about 2 hours for me to getthe computer unpacked and set up.The P-133 performs. The low-level Wintune 95 benchmarks gaveme 243MIPS, disk speed of 3.4MB per second (uncached) and videospeed (from an ATI PCI video card) of 7.5Mpixels per second.You won't catch this PC napping. The Microsoft Word 7.0 macroran in 18 seconds, while the Excel 7.0 macro executed in 13seconds.I do have some minor quibbles with this system: The case issecured by Phillips-head screws, which are less convenientthan the thumbscrews that some companies are using. I didn'tlike the Chicony keyboard, which had little tactical or audiblefeedback. In addition, printer and comm ports are suppliedon an expansion card, leaving only one ISA slot free. And ifyou need to install more than a network interface card, ithas to be PCI.But I can live with those. My initial misgivings proved unfounded;this is a nice machine.--Info File--Maximus P-133Price: $2,545Maximus Computers800-888-MAXI, 818-305-5925Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Connectivity: Collabra Share 2.0 -- Enterprise WiseBy:Jeffrey SlomanGroupware is a product category that has taken time to comeof age. The long maturation is due mostly to pioneer productsthat were too big for all but the largest organizations. Butthanks to groupware applications like Collabra Share 2.0, youdon't have to be a Fortune 500 company to reap the productivitybenefits that enhanced communications promises.Collabra offers two versions of Share, a workgroup edition thatmakes files on a central server sharable and a full-fledgedclient/server edition. The client/server version is more appropriatefor larger installations that require a multiple-site setup.Installing Share is straightforward, but you should first readthe manual's excellent section on planning. For a multiplesite configuration, you designate one site as the initial installationsite before you add the other locations using the Setup program'sconnect option. A network installation takes about 10 minutes.Once that's done, workstation software is installed from theserver by network users or the system administrator. You caninstall the client programs on local drives or run them fromthe server. Installing the client software from the networkis a snap.Share provides threaded discussions within forums-similar tothe participant areas offered by commercial online services.Each forum focuses on a specific topic, and threading keepsthe topic's messages and replies logically connected.Compared with simple mailing-list discussions, which tend tobe serial, the threaded-message approach can handle nonlinearinterchanges adeptly. If an interesting-but tangential-discussionarises from the main topic, it can be continued without disruptingthe original direction. And because everyone in a forum cansee all of the messages, it's easier for participants to keeptrack of what's going on.Share's forums are, in turn, organized into libraries. Thishierarchical structure makes it easy to perform global actionson large sets of topics and messages. For example, if you wantto search for items that contain a particular word or phrase,you can apply the search to an entire library rather than havingto search each forum separately.A Share forum can have a designated moderator, who reviews andapproves documents submitted to the forum before making themavailable to the rest of the group. The moderator can thushelp keep discussions to the point or defuse potentially controversialtopics. Another option allows anonymous contributions, whichis ideal for encouraging people to engage freely in discussionsof sensitive topics.For the system administrator, Share offers excellent enterprisefeatures. The program's user list-called the Registry-is basedon your e-mail system's user list, so it's easy to maintain.Share works with MAPI or VIM mail systems such as MicrosoftMail, Exchange, Novell Groupwise and Lotus cc:Mail. Mail Agent,an add-on product, allows the transfer of forum traffic toa simple e-mail address.Share is also highly configurable. You can choose to let allusers have access to the administrator's tools, or you canimplement stringent security policies. The system administratorcan select the level of control appropriate to the organization.The client/ server version offers full forum replication acrossmultiple sites. A scheduling function facilitates the process.Collabra Share 2.0 is a great solution for e-mail users whowant to step up to groupware. It offers the advantages of solidgroupware features without the hassles of more complex systems,and its scalability means that you're unlikely to outgrow it.--Info File--Collabra Share 2.0Price: Server (NT), $995; Workgroup Edition100-user license,$6,995; Client/Server Edition 100-user license, $9,995.In Brief: Share uses your installed VIM or MAPI e-mail systemto create a groupware environment.Platforms: Windows 95, 3.x, NTDisk Space: Server, 7MB; Client, 780KBRAM: Client, 1MBCollabra800-474-7427, 415-940-6400Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Connectivity: OnTime Enterprise for NetWare 3.0 -- Well-Appointed SchedulerBy:Jeffery SlomanOnTime has been around since the days DOS outdueled Windowsin the software wars. The newest version, which I tested inbeta, faces stiff competition from a much-improved MicrosoftSchedule+. But OnTime's maturity shows, and it could becomethe standard against which other scheduling programs are measured.OnTime's strength is its true client/server architecture, whichoffers enterprise-worthy features that can't be matched bypeer-to-peer products. This architecture enhances OnTime'sperformance, and the program's functionality-including singlepoint multiserver configuration-makes administration much easier.OnTime Enterprise for NetWare 3.0 runs on a NetWare file serverand takes full advantage of the existing network user databaseto make adding new users a snap.The program uses Novell's industry-standard, high-performanceBtrieve record manager to maintain its database. The shippingversion of the server product will be NetWare 4.x-certified,but my tests were conducted under NetWare 3.11.Installation of the server software is complex but not particularlydifficult, thanks to the included installation checklist. Ifyou haven't run client/server applications on your NetWareserver before, you should pay particular attention to the sectionin the manual that details file versions. It's important thatyour NetWare system is up-to-date. The OnTime package includesa NetWare Btrieve update disk.Most of this version's enhancements are on the client side.OnTime Enterprise manages to strike a balance between addingnew features and maintaining ease of use. For example, thenew client interface eliminates many dialog boxes by offeringin-place editing for appointments.You can select time periods directly on the grids that are usedto show appointments. The dialog box for editing appointmentsand tasks is now non-modal-that is, it no longer changes dependingupon whether you are the person who created the appointmentor a proposed attendee.All appointment and task activities are in a single, tabbeddialog, and you can open more than one calendar at a time.OnTime Enterprise's interface was quite complete in the betasoftware, although some of its underpinnings were still underconstruction. The shipping product will offer Windows 95 supportfor the client. Campbell Services says the final product willlet an administrator designate a resource-such as a conferenceroom-as an entity that can be scheduled. Also promised arenew security features that will, for example, allow certainusers to view the details of a calendar but not to modify anything.OnTime's new interface makes it much easier to use. For example,everything related to an appointment can be set in one place.First, you set a date by picking it directly from a calendar.VCR-like controls make finding a particular month quick andeasy. The time and duration of the appointment can be set usinga timeline control. You can then assign a priority to the appointmentand add a reminder alarm.Appointments can be displayed in three views: daily, weeklyor monthly. You can edit an appointment from any of these views.All three views have some nice components, including a statusbar that displays current date and time, and the number ofoutstanding appointments that others have scheduled for you.To the right, a three-month calendar provides easy access tofuture or past dates. The daily and weekly views also haveto-do lists with prioritization and completion check boxes.Current OnTime users will be pleased with this excellent upgrade.If you're shopping for a true enterprisewide group-schedulingpackage, OnTime Enterprise merits your attention.--Info File--OnTime Enterprisefor NetWare 3.0Price: 3 users, $427; 10 users, $994; 100 users, $5,616In Brief: The newest version of OnTime offers usability improvementsfor this mature group scheduling product.Platforms: Server, NetWare 4.x, 3.11; client, Windows 95, 3.1Campbell Services800-559-5955, 810-559-5955Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Cover Story: The Worst and Best of Win95 -- You've read interviews, experimented with previews and seen a million overviews. Now you're readyto use Windows 95 in the real world. And we're here to help you. This month's package of Win95 stories takes a look at the worst andbest of your new operating system.Start with the interface in "Eight Ways to Work in Windows 95,"where you'll learn about eight typical work patterns of Windows95 users and how to adapt them to your own style. "Lock YourWindows" shows you how to plug several major security flawsin Win95. We've also compiled a Top 10 list of the best theOS has to offer, along with a Bottom 10 list of features thatcould use a little help-which we provide in the form of tipsyou can try right away. And finally, we'll take a look at theultimate tweaking machine, Win 95's PowerToys.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Cover Story: Eight Ways to Work in Windows 95 -- After studying the workhabits of dozens of Win95 users, we identified eight basicPC personalities. Which best suits your computing style?By:Mike ElganSome say the best thing about Windows 95 is its 32-bit architecture.Others claim Plug and Play is the operating system's hottestfeature. But it's the Win95 user interface that beats themall. There are so many different ways to launch programs andload applications-and switch from one to another-that you caneasily customize Win95 to suit your personal work style. Wedid some field research to identify the myriad ways users workwith the new interface. We surveyed readers and staffers, andsecretly observed the habits of random Win95 point-and-clickers,peering through office windows and over the shoulders of everyuser we could find. Our findings helped us identify eight Win95computing personalities. Each has a scientific name: KeyboardQuickie, Mouse Maniac, Command Line Commander, Shortcut Showoff,Start Menu Maven, Folder Fanatic, The Explorer and last (anddefinitely least) The Minimalist.But you probably know them as Carl, Mary, Colin-you may evenrecognize yourself among our personalities. To give you a firsthandlook at how each works, we'll let the experts speak for themselves.Then think about how you can adapt their on-the-job routinesto your own work style.Take it away, Carl.Carl the 'Keyboard Quickie'We spend fortunes on Windows PCs that are so fast users can'tkeep up with them. That's why the best way to work is the fastestway to work, and the fastest way-hands down-is with a keyboard.Nothing beats ripping through applications with eyes on themonitor and hands on the keys. No fumbling for the mouse. Lesschance of carpal tunnel syndrome.The downside, of course, is that we have to learn the keystrokes.But this is easy, thanks to my one-step program: Unplug yourmouse for a month. At the end of that time, you'll know Win95'skeystrokes like the back of your CTS-free hand. (If you don'twant to go cold turkey, unplug the mouse from your laptop only.)Here's the scoop on how to be a Win95 Keyboard Quickie.Coolswitching in Windows 3.x was great, but in Win95 it's evenbetter. You probably already know how to coolswitch (hold downthe Alt key, then repeatedly press the Tab key).Win95 showsyou all the running icons as you coolswitch through them. Becauseyou can see your target application coming, you can get iton the screen faster.Here are a couple of neat coolswitching tricks you can try:Press Alt+Shift+Tab to go backward (you can also do this inthe middle of a normal coolswitch). Or press Esc in the middleof a coolswitch to bail out.Here's a bonus tip for you Keyboard Quickies who want the fastestpossible task-switching. When you coolswitch, the first applicationor folder selected is the last one you had open. If that'sthe one you want, just press Alt+Tab and let go immediately.The icons won't even come up-you'll instantly switch to theapp or folder you had open.Then there's the Win95 power-user's coolswitch: Alt+Esc. Thiskeystroke instantly takes you from one open application orfolder to the next. Try it!There are several other new or essential keystrokes in Win95.Any Keyboard Quickie worth his or her salt should know theimportant ones:F2: RenameF3: Launch FindF4: Drop down the "Go to a different folder" menu on the foldertoolbarF5: RefreshAlt+F4: Close current application (if the desktop is the currentapp, Win95 shuts down)Ctrl+F4: Close current document but leave the application openAlt+Enter: Bring up Properties dialogAnother great new Win95 keyboard enhancement is the applicationof the Cut, Copy and Paste metaphors to files and folders.You already know that in a word processor or other text-basedapplication, pressing Ctrl+X, Ctrl+C and Ctrl+V cuts, copiesand pastes, respectively. In Win95, these techniques can alsobe applied to files and folders.'Mouse Maniac' MaryHa! Get with it, Carl. This is 1996. Graphical computing isn'tabout arcane keystrokes or commands that change with each application.Haven't you heard? DOS is dead! Graphical computing is aboutintuitively navigating the interface by pointing and clicking.Using Windows without a mouse is like eating without utensils.It's out of date and just isn't done in polite company.Win95 is a Mouse Maniac's dream system. Unlike Windows 3.x andprevious versions, which used just one of your mouse buttons(might as well use a Mac), Win95 makes good use of both mousebuttons.Every object on the desktop sports a Context menu that includes,among other things, the all-important Properties dialog. Youcan bring up the Context menu of any item by right-clickingon it. Right-click on the Recycle Bin to empty it. Right-clickon the taskbar to configure it or minimize all open applications.Right-click on the desktop or inside open folders to arrangeor view icons differently. Right-click on files to print them,create shortcuts to them and mail them using the Send To command.Right-click on everything.When you drag and drop files or folders, get in the habit ofusing the right mouse button. It'll give you the option tomove, copy or create a shortcut.Win95 sports some drag-and-drop enhancements that all MouseManiacs should know about. For example, if you're in the middleof a drag and change your mind, just press the Esc key.Mousing in Win95 is enhanced not only by the right mouse button,but also by keystroke/mouse combinations. When you hold downthe Shift key while dumping something into the Recycle Bin,Win95 deletes it. When you hold down the Ctrl key while doubleclicking on a folder icon, Windows temporarily reverses yoursettings for how folders should open. For instance, you canset Win95 to open a new, separate folder each time you doubleclick on a folder (select View/Options from the folder menu,then click on the Browsing Option of your choice). If you holddown the Ctrl key, you'll open the folder in the same window.You can also use keyboard/mouse combinations to enhance yourability to select files and folders. In Explorer, you can selectall items from the top of a list down to your target folderby holding down the Shift key, then clicking on the file orfolder at the bottom of the batch you want selected. Or clickon any file or folder, hold the Shift key and click on anotherfile or folder to select both items and everything betweenthem. To select any combination of items, hold down the Ctrlkey, then click on the files and folders you want.Once you've made your selections, you can right-click on anyof them and choose an action from the Context menu that willaffect them all.If you want to launch an application that needs switches orother command-line parameters, you can use drag-and-drop toget Win95 to type the path and filename for you. Click on theStart button and select Run. Then drag the application anddrop it onto the Run command line. You can do the same thingwith the MS-DOS Prompt. Once the path and filename are there,all you have to do is type in the parameters.Colin the 'Command Line Commander'DOS is dead, huh? Wanna race? I can type WORDPAD in the MS-DOSPrompt, press the Enter key and type "The quick brown fox jumpedover the lazy dog" in WordPad before you even find the WordPadapplet on the Start menu or by navigating folders.Instead of killing the command-line interface, Win95 gives itnew life. In older versions of Windows, you could launch onlyDOS applications from the command line, but Win95 lets youuse the command line to launch Windows applications and openfolders in Windows. Just type the filename (don't worry aboutthe extension) and press Enter to launch applications.In addition to its new ability to launch Win95 apps and itsold ability to act on DOS commands, the MS-DOS Prompt addsa brand-new command: Start. To open a folder, just type STARTfollowed by the folder path. For example, by typing START C\WINDOWS, you'll open the Windows folder-not in DOS but inWindows. You can also use the Start command to customize whathappens to apps and folders when you launch them. For a listof options, just type START /? at the prompt.If you're a true Command Line Commander, you'll want to makethe MS-DOS Prompt window as available as possible. Check outmy friends the Start Menu Maven and the Shortcut Showoff tolearn how to make the MS-DOS Prompt launch automatically atstartup and instantly when you press a shortcut key.'Shortcut Showoff' SteveThe Keyboard Crazies and Command Line Kooks talk about speed,and the Mickey Mouse Maniacs brag about computing intuitively.But there's an easier and faster way to do all that. Win95'snew shortcut feature combines the speed of one with the intuitivepointing and clicking of the other. And when you talk aboutcustomization in Win95, you're talking about shortcuts. Youcan use shortcuts to do other neat things as well-for instance,you can e-mail a shortcut to a network document as an attachmentto a colleague, or you can send a shortcut to a Microsoft Networksite to a friend who also uses MSN.You've heard of "information at your fingertips." Well, Win95shortcuts can help you achieve that. Create shortcuts to allthe applications and documents on your system, as well as thecompany network and the Internet. Then place them just a doubleclick away on your desktop.Here's how to set up a desktop that puts everything at yourfingertips.First, navigate My Computer to find any applications or documentsthat you normally open more than once a week. Drag them ontothe desktop with the right mouse button and choose Create Shortcut(s)Here. If you have folders with large numbers of documents thatyou want to access, create shortcuts for those as well.You may have already discovered Win95's cool Find utility. Itlets you search for any file, even if you don't know its nameor location. Using Find, you can set up a custom search that'salways on your desktop.A good custom search acts as an instant dragnet for all documentsavailable to you on your desktop and the network. To set itup, launch Find by pressing F3 or selecting it from the Startmenu. In the Named field, type in each of the extensions containingdocuments you use, preceded by an asterisk and a period, andseparated by a space. Your list might look something like this *.doc *.txt *.xls *.wri *.hlp *.fin *.msg. In the Look Infield, list all the drive letters available to you over thenetwork, each followed by a colon and separated from one anotherby semicolons. For example, you might want to type c:;s:;u;j:;k: (your drive letters may differ). Click on the Find Nowbutton, then on the Stop button. Finally, select Save Searchfrom the File menu to put a copy of your search on the desktop.You can rename it if you want.To use your new saved search, double-click on its icon, selectthe Advanced tab and type in words the document contains inthe Containing Text field. Note that you can modify the parametersfor each search any way you choose without permanently changingthe saved search. And you can set up as many unique saved searchesas you like.Shortcuts are also great for launching batch files. Create batchfiles that open several folders or documents at once, movefiles around or otherwise get them to do whatever you needthem to do. Then create shortcuts for your batch files andput them on the desktop (naturally, you should give 'em distinctiveicons and names)Make sure you tell your batch file shortcuts to clean up afterthemselves. Open the Properties dialog of each batch file shortcut,select the Program tab and click on the Close on Exit box.This tells Win95 to close the MS-DOS Prompt box when the batchfile has run its course.Of course, batch files are just DOS programs. You can use shortcutsto launch any DOS program or command from the desktop witha simple double-click. In Win95, shortcuts replace the oldWin 3.x PIF.Shortcuts can also help organize your forays online. If youhave the Microsoft Network or a Web browser that supports shortcuts,you can simply drag your favorite sites from the online serviceor Web window and drop them onto your desktop for quick access.But wait! There's more! Shortcuts let you take advantage ofthe slick Win95 Send To feature. Right-click on any item andnotice the cascading Send To item in the Context menu. Allthose items in the Send To folder are just shortcuts in theSend To folder, which you'll find in the Windows folder. Createshortcuts-using the same method: Drag and drop with the rightmouse button and select Create Shortcut(s) Here-to your mailapplication, the desktop, the Recycle Bin, the network, yourfavorite application or anywhere else you'd like to be ableto send files instantly. Experiment and see what works bestfor you.Shortcuts are highly customizable. Most of this customizationtakes place in the Properties dialog under the Shortcut tab.First thing you'll want to do is give your shortcuts uniqueicons. Just click on the Change Icon button and pick an iconthat suits your purpose. You might want to check out Win95's"secret" icons, which you'll find in a file called PIFMGR.DLLin the System folder. And, of course, the old Windows 3.x iconsin the files PROGMAN.EXE and MORICONS.DLL are likely stillliving in your Windows folder.Your next step is to change the names of your shortcuts. Getrid of all those "Shortcut to" labels that Win95 put there.Then decide if you want each shortcut to open the item fullscreen, normal window or as an icon. To do so, select an optionfrom the Run box.There are two advantages to putting shortcuts on your desktoprather than scattering them all over your hard drive. The firstis ease of access; they're right there when you need them.But what happens when they're all covered by open folders andapplications? Enter the second advantage: You can launch shortcutson the desktop with shortcut keys. Click once in the ShortcutKey box of the Properties/Shortcut dialog and type a key combinationyou'd like to use to launch the shortcut (don't spell it out,just do the keystrokes). If the shortcut key is already taken,Win95 won't let you use it. Once you've assigned keys to yourdesktop shortcuts, you can launch them instantly, anytime,regardless of what's on your screen. (Shortcut keys not onthe desktop or Start menu work only if the item is alreadyopen.)Simon the 'Start Menu Maven'Been there. Done that. All that stuff is old. The taskbar, alongwith its Start button and menus, is the only real interfaceinnovation in Win95. It's also the best. You just need to knowhow to use it.The default size of Start menu items is too large, and you can'tfit enough stuff in there. We'll fix that. Just right-clickon the taskbar and choose Properties. Then select the ShowSmall Icons box and click on OK.It's important to understand the Start menu and how it works.Items on the Start menu are just shortcuts in a folder: theStart Menu folder within the Windows folder. Removing and addingStart menu items is as simple as removing and adding filesin a folder.A great way to give yourself quick access to your most-usedapps, documents and folders is simply to drag them from whereverthey are and drop them onto the Start button. Doing this willplace them on the first level of the Start menu.When you installed Win95, it made all your program groups cascadingmenus under the Programs item. When you install new Windowsprograms, they'll likely add things to your Start menu. Makesure you remove all unwanted items to make room for those youdo want.The Start menu itself is a cascading menu, meaning it opensup into a hierarchy of menu items. Some pundits say that tocreate a cascading Start menu item, you need to enter a bizarreand complicated series of letters and numbers. But it ain'tso! It's the easiest thing in the world.For example, here's how to create a cascading Control Panelitem. Right-click on the Start button and select Open. Nowopen My Computer, double-click on the Control Panel item andput the Start menu folder and Control Panel folders side-byside. Right-click on the white part of the Start menu and selectNew/Folder. Name it Control Panel. Now select all the ControlPanel items and drag and drop them onto the new Control Panelfolder. (You might want to open the new folder and get ridof all the "Shortcut to" text that Win95 puts in front of allyour new shortcuts.) That's all there is to it. You can createas many custom cascading Start menu items as you want.Keystrokes can launch Start menu items as well. In fact, youcan navigate to any Start menu item using just the keyboard.Ctrl+Esc brings up the Start menu. Pressing an underscoredletter (such as "D" for Documents) brings you to that item.Navigate the cascading menus with the arrow keys (note thatif you're at the top of a menu, pressing the up arrow bringsyou to the bottom, and vice versa). And here's a secret techniquemy friend Carl taught me: You know those most-used items youplaced on the first level of the Start menu? Right-click onthe Start button, select Open, select each item in turn andgive it a unique number from 1 to 10 (for example, change "WordPerfect"to "1 WordPerfect"). By pressing Ctrl+Esc and then a number,you can quickly open the item associated with that number.'Folder Fanatic' FrankSure, keystrokes are fast, mice are intuitive, shortcuts arecool and the Start menu is innovative. But the important thingis how you organize and think about your work. The Win95 interfacelets us think about our work by projects-it's all based onnested folders. Combine that with shortcuts, and we're no longerlimited by the old DOS directory structure.Here's what I mean. I mentally divide my work into three majorcategories: projects I'm working on; management responsibilities;and regular tasks like meetings, business trips and budgetmanagement that aren't really projects and aren't really aboutpeople management. Win95 folders let me organize my computerto mirror the organized way I think about my work. As you'veprobably already guessed, I have three folders. One is called"Projects," the second is called "People" and the last is called"Other Stuff I Gotta Do" (what the heck, it's my desktop)In my Projects folder, I've got a folder for each project I'mworking on. Each has e-mail messages about the project (justdrag and drop from Exchange), links to budget information,links to documents listing my goals, lists of people involvedand a shortcut to my contact manager.In my People folder, I've got one folder for each person whoreports to me. In each of those folders, I've placed key email I want to keep, confidential information on each person,links to the projects we're collaborating on and more linksto my contact manager. Some of the people on my staff havestaffs of their own. In their folders, I have one folder foreach person who reports to that manager.My third folder contains everything else.That's how I've arranged my system. But you might want to setyours up differently. For example, you could create a foldercalled Backup, where you place all your documents and otherthings you'd like to back up. In fact, you can put entire foldersthere. When you want to back up your system (highly recommended,by the way), you just have to back up that folder and everythingin it.I like to give my folders unique icons. The way to do this isto create a folder called, er, Folders anywhere on the C: drive.Put all the folders for which you want unique icons insidethis folder. Create shortcuts to the folders and place theshortcuts wherever you want them. Then, using the instructionsabove, give each shortcut a unique icon.I'm also using a fake Recycle Bin. That's where I put itemsI think I want to throw away. The fake Bin sits on my desktopin the lower right-hand corner next to my real Recycle Bin.When I'm sure I want to dump something, I put it into the genuineRecycle Bin; when I'm not sure, I put it into the fake one.Once every couple of months, I open the fake Bin and trashor save the items in it.'Explorer' EdComputing is an adventure. And the best way to conquer yourcomputer is with the Win95 Explorer. It's File Manager, ProgramManager, Win95 folders, shortcuts and all the rest rolled intoone awesome, intuitive and powerful interface.What's so great about Explorer? Well, it gives you a familiarDOS-style hierarchical view of every resource available toyou (everything on your desktop, peripheral drives such asyour CD-ROM drive, network resources, printers and more). It'sall in one expandable list on the left side of your screen.At the same time, Explorer shows the contents of the currentlyselected item on the right. If you want to look at the contentsof two folders at once, just launch another instance of Explorer(launch as many as you like!). The interface looks simple,but you can use it as a command-and-control center to do allyour file management and other tasks.You can quickly slice and dice the on-screen folder view byclicking on one of the View buttons on the toolbar. If youselect the Details button, you'll get heading bars above yourlist of files. By clicking on each, you'll toggle between the"most" and the "least" properties for each bar (for example,if you click on the Modified bar, you'll toggle between themost recent files on the top or the oldest on the top). Ifyou're viewing a folder full of files and select Tools/FindFiles or Folders, the Find utility will open and default tothe current folder. That'll help you find what you need withoutsearching your entire hard drive.Enough about how great Explorer is-let's get this incredibleutility onto the desktop. Right-click on the Start button,select Explore and double-click on the Programs folder in theright pane. Drag the Windows Explorer icon from the windowusing the right mouse button and drop it onto the desktop,then select Copy Here.If you're not in an Explorer view for a particular folder, youcan get there by clicking once on the folder you want to open,then pressing and holding the Shift key while you double-clickon the folder (you have to click once to select it; otherwiseyou'll select and open that folder plus all the others betweenit and the top of the list)You can customize folders using a Win95 convention called "Explorerswitches." Give the folders on your desktop an Explorer viewby bringing up the Properties menu, selecting Shortcut andtyping Explorer /e, in front of the path in the Target line(make sure you include the comma and a space after the comma)You can also use an Explorer switch to select a file withoutlaunching it. Right-click on a shortcut and select Propertiesfrom the Context menu. Click on the Shortcut tab. Type Explorer/Select, in front of the path in the Target line (make sureyou include the comma and a space after the comma) and addthe full filename to the end of the path. Then click on OK.Now, whenever you double-click on that shortcut, the file willbe selected but not opened.If you want to keep things simple, create shortcuts that openinto "rooted Explorer" views. Right-click on the desktop andselect New/Shortcut. In the command line of the New Shortcutsdialog, type Explorer /e, /root, c:This will make the folder the root-in other words, it willsit at the top of the hierarchy and you won't see anythingin that view except the folder and its contents.Carl told me how to rip through Explorer with keystrokes: Thespacebar moves down the drives in Explorer. The Backspace keymoves up the Explorer tree. The left arrow key shrinks theExplorer tree. The right arrow key expands the Explorer tree.The up and down arrow keys move up and down one folder at atime. The Home and End keys move you to the top and bottom,respectively. Pressing a letter moves you to the nearest folderthat starts with that letter. Press F6 to switch between panes.And you can select all the files in the right pane by makingsure at least one of the files in the pane is selected or thatthe directory in the left pane is selected, then pressing Ctrl+A.Michael the 'Minimalist'I'll keep this short.I need to stay organized. All the methods above are fine, aslong as these techniques are used to impose order and not clutter.You can create a desktop that's free of debris, and still haveall the power of keystrokes, mouse navigation, the commandline, shortcuts, the Start menu, folders and Explorer--alllurking just beneath the surface, out of sight and out of mind.I'll show you how to combine many of the techniques and approachesused by my seven counterparts, and still sport a clutter-freescreen. But first, let's clean up that desktop!Right-click on the taskbar, then select Properties/Auto Hidefrom the Context menu. This will keep the taskbar invisibleuntil your mouse pointer gets near the bottom of the screen.Okay, let's create a workspace. Open My Computer, then the C drive. Create a folder called Workspace (or whatever you'dlike to call it). Now drag and drop it with the right mousebutton onto the desktop and select Create Shortcut(s) Here.Give the new shortcut the name and icon of your choice (usinginstructions above)Now use Ed's Explorer switch to make this new shortcut openinto an Explorer view. In the Workspace folder, use Frank'sfolder-centric approach to create folders that open to broadcategories such as Info, People, Projects-whatever makes sensefor the way you like to work. And, of course, you'll want topopulate these folders with the appropriate shortcuts and files.Get rid of all the icons on your desktop that you don't need.Bury them. The end result should be a desktop that containsMy Computer, Network Neighborhood, the Recycle Bin, your Workspaceshortcut icon and perhaps an Inbox.It's an uncluttered desktop, but all the power is there. Checkout Carl's keystrokes. Learn Mary's mouse tricks. Bring upthe command line with one of Steve's shortcuts and fire offsome of Colin's MS-DOS Prompt commands. Finally, master Simon'sStart menu tips-but whatever you do, keep it simple! You'llbe as productive as you can be with Win95.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Cover Story: Lock Your Windows -- Here's how to plug seven common Windowssecurity holes.By:Fred LangaIf you're like me, the most important parts of your computinglife hinge on Windows. At work, there's Windows-based e-mail,general communications and information sharing via Windows,and Windows word processing, database activity and spreadsheets.At home, Windows probably handles your tax information, familybudget and home-office data. In fact, all my critical computerbased information depends on Windows-and I'll bet yours does,too. Unfortunately, with the exception of NT (which does havegood safeguards), Windows' overall security has not kept upwith the increasing value of the data we entrust to it. Allthe other versions of Windows, including Win95, have one ormore gaping security flaws that can put your data at risk fromboth intentional snooping and accidental access. Nothing cancompletely secure anyone's data against a determined attackby skilled computer criminals. But there are steps you cantake to provide reasonable basic protection against some ofthe most notorious security flaws in Windows and in key Windowsapps:1. The Boot Bypass. Even if you know only a little about computers,you can make a boot floppy disk and use it to get your systemrunning. If your computer security depends on safeguards thatload and run after the initial boot (such as a password-protectedscreen saver), you're vulnerable. Solution: Prevent unauthorizedphysical access to your machine (lock the room it's in); usethe keyboard lock and remove the key; use the BIOS settingson newer machines to prevent booting from a floppy or to enablea power-on password.2. The Password Is 'Cancel.' Most people don't realize this,but by default Win95's log-on password offers absolutely nosecurity. (If you have a log-on password, try pressing Cancelor Escape the next time you start Windows-the password dialogwill close, and you'll be placed on the default desktop justas if you'd typed the correct, secret password you set up.)Solution: In Control Panel's Passwords applet, click on theUser Profiles tab, and then click on the "Users can customizetheir preferences" item. This will allow you to give your logon settings and access privileges that are different from thoseof the default Win95 log-on. Next, use Win95's Policy Editorto define what each user of your system can and cannot do.Each log-on can have its own set of privileges, access to differentfiles and so on. You can severely limit what a default logon can do. You'll find the Policy Editor and the complete Win95Resource Kit (which can answer almost any security-relatedquestion) on the CD version of Win95 in the ADMIN/APPTOOL/POLEDITdirectory, or you can download the files from Microsoft's WorldWide Web site at http://www.windows.microsoft.com/windows/software.htm.You can also find more complete instructions for enabling thelog-on password in my December editorial (Start, December 1995)3. Private E-Mails Are Really Open Letters. In Windows 95, bydefault, anyone can walk up to your system, use his or herown log-on and potentially gain full access to all your supposedlyprivate e-mail stored in Exchange, the "universal inbox" thatcomes with Win95. (It looks like the programming team thatwrote Exchange expected Win95 to provide basic security, whilethe Win95 team expected Exchange to provide security for itself.)Even if you entered a password to convert your old e-mail toExchange, you're still vulnerable. Solution: Enable Win95'sbase security as described in item 2. Then go to Exchange'sTools/Services menu, select the Personal Folder file (or whateverit's named on your system) and click on Properties. Then clickon Change Password and enter a password different from yoursystem password. Now both your e-mail and your basic desktopare safe from at least casual snooping.4. Take My Files, Please. When you installed Windows 95, youmay have enabled the "I want to be able to give others accessto my files" option, as well as the TCP/IP networking protocolto access the Internet. If you did, you may inadvertently besharing your files with people all over the world. (To Microsoft'scredit, its own Internet Explorer Web browser looks for thiscondition when you install it, and offers to turn off Printand File Sharing for the TCP/IP protocol.) Solution: Examinethe TCP/IP properties via Control Panel's Network applet, andmake sure Print and File Sharing is unchecked in the Bindingstab dialog. In Explorer, right-click on each drive and usethe Sharing menu to set up passwords for each.5.  While You're At It, Take a Few More Files.  There's a flaw in Win95'sPrint and File Sharing software that, in relatively limited circumstances,also can result in a wider sharing of files than you intended.  (The lengthyfull details are available on the Web athttp://www.microsoft.com/windows/software/w95fpup.htm.)  Solution:  Downloadthe free, updated version of Print and File Sharing services from Microsoft'sWeb site at http://www.microsoft.com/windows/download/vservupd.exe.6. Word's Extra Baggage. Starting with Word 6.0 for Windows,Microsoft set Word's default Save behavior to "Allow Fast Saves."This saves some time because only the changes from one versionof a document get written to disk. But it also means some orall of your original drafts ride along with the final version.Anyone viewing the final .DOC file with a plain-vanilla fileviewer-Notepad, for instance-can see this original draft materialin all its glory. At the least, it's embarrassing. At worst,if your early drafts contained intemperate, sensitive or confidentialinformation you didn't want in the final draft, it could bedisastrous. Relatedly, by default, Word chooses the first fewwords of your first draft as the description on each document'sProperties Sheet. Solution: In the Tools/Options menu, turnoff Allow Fast Saves and turn on Prompt for Document Properties.7. "OLE" or "Oh, No"? A flaw in Microsoft's OLE (Object Linkingand Embedding) technology can result in similar behavior toitem 6, but for a completely different reason: Parts of filesyou thought were deleted can reappear in later document files,where they can be viewed via programs like Notepad. Solution Watch for bug-fix updates, which should be available whenyou read this.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Cover Story: The Win95 Top 10 List -- Explorer, folders, drag and drop: Here'sa list of our 10 favorite Windows 95 features, and tips onhow to take advantage of them.By:Mike Elgan10. Right-mouse-button support. Finally, we get to use thatright mouse button. Right-click on any item to bring up a Contextmenu, where you'll find the all-important Properties item.Empty the Recycle Bin in a flash by right-clicking and selectingEmpty Recycle Bin. And to open a document in an app other thanthe one it's associated with, press Shift+Right-click to addthe Open With command to your Context menu.9. Folders. Win95 transformed Windows from the least flexibleOS to the most. Folders are a great example. You can set updeeply nested folders and make Windows look like a Mac, oryou can imitate Program Manager by creating a few folders onyour desktop and putting shortcuts in them. Other operatingsystems have had nested folders for years. Now Win95 has 'em!8. The MS-DOS Prompt. Some say DOS is dead, but what they meanis that many of the annoying qualities of DOS are extinct.The Win95 implementation of DOS is actually pretty cool. Win95runs DOS apps natively, rather than in emulation, which maximizesperformance. Win95's DOS sports new features (such as the abilityto launch Windows apps) without losing any of the old ones.And unlike the DOS of yore, PIFs have been killed. Good riddanceto them!7. The Find utility. Here's a quiet little gem. If you knowhow to use it, the Find utility can retrieve files across yournetwork and the Microsoft Network, even if you don't know thefilename or location. Bring up Find by pressing F3 or by selectingFind/File or Folders from the Start menu. The Win95 Find utilitysupports wild-card capabilities beyond the standard asterisk.For example, a question mark before a character or string findsthe character or string anywhere in the filename (except atthe beginning). Find will also search for folders and filesthat contain characters in the order you typed them. Find'smost powerful features are in the Advanced tab. Here you cantype in a text string that you know is in the file, selectthe type of file you're looking for and narrow your searchby file size.6. Drag-and-drop support. Drag and drop in Windows 3.x was prettygood, but it's even better in Win95. If you have an applicationor folder minimized or hidden behind other windows, for example,you can drag a file over the button on the taskbar, hold itthere for a second, and the app opens on top, allowing youto drop the file there. Create shortcuts on your desktop toyour floppy drive, printers and folders on the network so youcan easily drag and drop files to any of these. In addition,you can drag and drop pieces of documents, known as scraps,as well as entire files.5. The taskbar. The taskbar is deceptively simple. This thingray rectangle lets you open and configure the Start menu,view everything that's running, see and change the time anddate, switch between applications and folders, adjust the volumeof your sound, and minimize, restore, tile or cascade openapps and folders. You can drag and drop the taskbar anywhereon your screen, keep it visible at all times or hide it automatically.4. Disk compression. Out-of-the-box disk compression in Win95is stable, safe and useful. But take our advice and buy MicrosoftPlus for Windows 95-if for nothing else than the CompressionAgent and DriveSpace 3. You'll be able to UltraPack files yourarely use, HiPack those you use occasionally and leave filesyou don't want to squeeze alone.3. The System Agent. Here's another must-have Microsoft Plusitem. The System Agent lurks silently in memory, waiting todo your bidding. Tell it to perform hard-disk maintenance,alert you with pop-up reminders, run batch files at scheduledtimes, or do backups in the background. The kicker is thatthis utility is super-easy to use; you can set up a customscheduled event in less than a minute.2. The Send To menu. With a click of your mouse, the Send Tocommand lets you blast any file to any location on your systemor on the network-or to any application. Right-click on anyfile, select Send To and the location, and the file is as goodas there.1. Explorer. And the number-one Win95 feature ... Explorer!Actually, Explorer is a mixed bag (it's also on the Bottom10 list). But its good features are really good. It shows yourcomputing universe in the left pane, and the currently selectedfolder in the right. Slice and dice the view to sort by sizeor date last modified, and use the toolbar to map network drives.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Cover Story: The Win95 Bottom 10 List -- Nothing is perfect, and that includesWindows 95. So, we compiled a Bottom 10 List as a counterpointto our Top 10 List. But instead of just griping, we came upwith a few solutions that you can work into Win95 on your own.By:Jim Boyce10. Technical support. Windows 95 technical support is gearedprimarily toward hand-holding to help users overcome setupproblems and difficulties with various features. If you'rea power user with a tough technical question, you'll sometimeshave trouble just explaining the problem to the technicianon the other end of the line. Solution: There are alternativesto telephone support. Explore the wide variety of online forumsdevoted to the subject, starting with Microsoft's Win95 WorldWide Web site at http://www.microsoft.com. In addition, allthe major online services have Windows areas where other usershave most likely posted similar questions that were answeredby people in the know. You should also get and use the Win95Resource Kit. It's available free on the CD version of Win95in the ADMIN/APPTOOL/POLEDIT directory, or you can downloadthe files from Microsoft's Web site at http://www.windows.microsoft.comwindows/software.htm. If you're completely on your own fortech support, or if others rely on you for guidance, considera subscription to Microsoft's CD-based TechNet service (800344-2121), which contains most of the same information availableto Microsoft's own support technicians.9. The Recycle Bin. Recycle Bin is a safety net you could drivea truck through. If you delete a file from an application orthe command line, it's gone. The Recycle Bin also needs betteroverflow support. You can specify the amount of disk spaceto allocate for the Recycle Bin on each drive, but when thatlimit is reached, those deleted files go to binary heaven withno warning. And if you push the Recycle Bin capacity sliderto zero by accident, everything in the Bin is history. Solution You can partially overcome these shortcomings with a thirdparty product like Norton Utilities, which adds extra goodiessuch as chronological emptying of the wastebasket. But evenwith these add-ons, your best line of defense is abundant backupsand careful work.8. Shortcuts. Shortcuts are actually one of the best featuresin Win95, but many users see room for improvement in theirappearance. Solution: Do you find the arrows in shortcut iconsannoying? Check out the Tweak UI tools in the sidebar "In aWord, Wow!" on the next page.7. Microsoft Backup. We're glad Microsoft included a backuputility with Win95. Unfortunately, it doesn't support a verywide range of tape drives. It also doesn't reset the archivebit by default, so incremental backup doesn't work unless youwade through menus and read the instructions very, very carefully.Solution: Check out the Colorado Memory Systems BBS (970-6350650) for updates to Win95's Backup. (CMS wrote the originalapplet for Microsoft, and should be releasing an updated versionsoon.) Also, all the major tape backup vendors have promisedWin95 versions "any minute."6. My Computer and NetworkNeighborhood. The problem with My Computer is its lack of allbut the most basic customization capability. For example, MyComputer always opens folders using the Open view rather thanan Explorer view. Network Neighborhood also needs better featuresfor customization. Solution: If you don't like My Computeror Network Neighborhood, ignore them and create a custom viewerthat gives you the capabilities of both. Create a folder onyour hard disk, then drag it to the desktop with your rightmouse button. Select Create Shortcut(s) Here. Right-click onthe new shortcut and bring up the Properties dialog. Changethe icon by clicking on the Change Icon button, selecting anicon and clicking on OK. Now type Explorer /e, in front ofthe path in the Target line (make sure you include the commaand a space after the comma). Click on OK. Whenever you doubleclick on that shortcut, you'll get the full Explorer view.5. Help. The new Help looks good, but we need much more content,especially since Microsoft did away with all but the most basicpaper documentation. Solution: Try the Resource Kit and theTechNet CD mentioned in item 10.4. The Microsoft Network. MSN is the not-ready-for-prime-timenetwork. Although the content is improving, the service isstill weak overall. MSN lacks an off-line forum reader andis generally slow. Solution: Just say no to MSN for a while.Keep your eye on WINDOWS Magazine, and we'll tell you whenit gets better.3. Explorer. Some of the better features of File Manager aremissing from Explorer, which cannot display file attributesand the "last accessed" property. Support for multiple Contentpanes would also be a plus. Solution: If you don't like Explorer,keep your eye out for a replacement package that supports thefeatures you need. Don't be afraid to pop open File Managerwhen you need to (Run: Winfile)2. Plug and Play. Plug and Play works well even on legacy systems,assuming your hardware is relatively common. But the hardwaredetection seems to take forever, and Windows 95 sometimes forgetsto tell you that the device you're installing is already installed.Solution: Don't buy any hardware that isn't PnP-compatible.If PnP isn't working well on your system, consider a BIOS upgrade.And make sure your next system is fully PnP-compatible.1. Exchange and Microsoft Fax. The idea of an integrated messagestore is great in theory, but so far Exchange falls flat. Youcan't create a single address entry for multiple address types(Microsoft Mail and Fax, for example), there's a noticeablelack of security, and the address book integrates poorly withapplications. Microsoft Fax takes most of the heat for itslack of features, its bugs and an inability to live in thesame profile with Microsoft's own Internet Mail provider. Anotherglaring shortcoming is the Microsoft Mail provider's inabilityto work with Microsoft Mail Remote, forcing system administratorsto add a remote access server to support remote Exchange users.Solution: If you want, you can stick with your current e-mailand messaging system until Exchange is ready for prime time,or embrace a third-party solution that meets your needs. ButExchange won't go away anytime soon, so it's worth exploring.Keep your eyes open for pitfalls. If you're ready to give ita try, see this month's article "Kill Your Fax Machine!"Serdar Yegulalp and Robert Lauriston contributed to this story.Contributing Editor Jim Boyce is the author of Inside Windows95 (New Riders Publishing, 1995). Contact Jim in the "GettingStarted" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Onlineand CompuServe, or care of the editor at the addresses on page18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Cover Story: In a Word, "Wow!"By:Fred LangaWant to get rid of shortcut arrows? Or permanently ditch the"Shortcut to ..." phrase that keeps getting added to the namesof shortcuts you create? Want to adjust menu pop-up speed?Change resolutions on the fly? Painlessly browse and extractfiles from within .CAB files? Or make any CD play automatically?All that and much more is available in the free PowerToys utilitycollection from Microsoft. The PowerToys were written by theWindows 95 UI team to solve many of the annoying little glitchesand inadequacies of Win95's interface, but the utilities weredeveloped too late to be part of the official software release.As a result, these are unsupported applets: They seem to workjust fine, but you can't call tech support for help if yourun into a snag. We use them here at WINDOWS Magazine and feelthey're a must-have addition for any power user.Browse to http://www.windows.microsoft.com/windows/softwarepowertoy.htm on the World Wide Web and download one or moreof the following little gems:Tweak UI: The crown jewel of PowerToys, this is an additionto the Control Panel that lets you change menu speed, mousesensitivity, window animation and sound, shortcut appearanceand default names, and much more. A definite thumbs-up.CabView: Lets you examine .CAB files as if they were ordinaryfolders-you can see the contents and easily drag files in andout.CD AutoPlay Extender: Makes autoplay work even on non-audioCDs so you can gain faster access to your CD-based programs.Contents Menu: Lets you examine the contents of folders withouteven opening them.Explore From Here: Open a "rooted" Explorer from anywhere, evenon remote network resources.FlexiCD : An instant-access, taskbar-window audio CD control.QuickRes: If your video card and drivers allow it, this toollets you change your screen's dots-per-inch setting and bitdepth from the taskbar without having to reboot.Round Clock: This is simply a round analog clock sans the usualsquare window.Shortcut Target Menu: Examine the properties of a shortcut'starget by right-clicking on the shortcut itself.XMouse: X Windows users will like this utility, which makesthe active window focus follow the mouse cursor without clicking.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Kill Your Fax Machine -- Dump the office fax machine for thesuperior combination of your fax modem and Microsoft Exchange.By:Rich LevinI'm sitting at my desk, sipping some day-old java and checkingout the racing form, when the door swings open. A guy in anout-of-date getup shuffles in. Boy, is he past his prime, Ithink as I reach for a Camel. He just looks at me while I lightup and take a deep drag. Neither of us says a word. Finally,my new client clears his throat. "Mister Narlowe, they're outto get me."Somehow I'm not surprised. He has the look of someone on theskids. "Well, why don't you tell me about it, Mister ""Call me Fax," he says, in a rusty voice. "Fax Machine."An alarm bell goes off in my head. I'd read about him in thetabloids. Sad case. Nothing I could do for him."Sorry, I can't help you," I reply, with some regret. It killsme to turn down any business. "You're history, pal. Windows95 is gonna punch your ticket. Exchange is the new game intown, and it's making hay with fax modems."Fax slumps against the wall, muttering something that soundslike, "I knew I was a goner."I don't say a word. What is there to say? He's right. Him andhis breed are old news. Gonzo. Kaput. Windows 95 has seen tothat.The Fax on the CaseFax modems and software have been around for several years.But Windows 95's integral support of the new TAPI (TelephonyApplication Programming Interface) standard for communicationshardware greatly simplifies the way you exchange information,including the way you send a fax.Before TAPI, every fax modem was an island. There was no offthe-shelf fax software that allowed users to share fax modems,address books or data files. It was every faxer for himself,and every file for itself. Fax documents, like e-mail messages,were a unique data type, married to the programs that managedthem. E-mail was e-mail, documents were documents, faxes werefaxes, and never the three would meet. Worst of all, for corporationsseeking to achieve proper desktop fax capabilities, each computerrequired a fax modem, fax software and an extra telephone line.Lack of workgroup functionality, harsh economic realities andunfriendly side effects limited the growth of desktop faxing.It was cheaper and easier to stick with conventional fax machines,or to deploy dedicated network fax servers to provide workgroupfax services to the enterprise.Insufficient standards, along with a single-user focus, alsoprevented mass-market fax software from integrating tightlywithin the enterprise. Users had to deal with separate addressbooks for mail messages, fax documents and external e-mailservices like CompuServe. With no published standards to follow,software developers had a free hand in designing fax programs.The result: One fax program couldn't use another's addressbooks, cover sheets or fax files. While a few de facto standards(such as Intel's DCX file format) emerged, the situation wassimilar to the chaos that accompanied electronic mail beforethe advent of the Mail Application Programming Interface (MAPI)Today, we take it for granted that virtually any two PC e-mailsystems can exchange mail, but it wasn't long ago that manyWindows-based e-mail systems were segregated. This changedwith the introduction of MAPI, which dictates how e-mail programstalk to each other. And what MAPI does for e-mail, TAPI doesfor faxing.Tap into TAPIMAPI has been around since 1993, but TAPI is a new-and evolvingstandard. Only one fax program designed for Windows 95 currentlysupports TAPI. The good news: The program is Microsoft Fax,and it's bundled with Windows 95.TAPI lives at the operating system level, so any program canuse it. That's why, under Win95, you need only configure yourmodem, telephone numbers and other setup data once. TAPI-compliantprograms retrieve setup information through TAPI, which takescare of all the configuration details formerly handled by individualprograms. This means you can drop in a new TAPI-compliant telecomapp and it will automatically recognize your COM ports, modemcommands and telephone numbers.TAPI also manages access to your COM ports and attached devices.As a result, you can have multiple comm apps running at thesame time without worrying about port conflicts. TAPI-compliantapps know when a COM port is in use and simply wait their turn,which means no more system lockups or error messages like "COMport X is in use." When a call is received, TAPI directs theconnection to the appropriate communications software.Microsoft Fax and TAPI allow Windows 95 to see faxes as anotherform of e-mail. That's why Microsoft Fax is tightly coupledto (and dependent on) Microsoft Exchange, Win95's universale-mail client.The Times, They Are Ex-Changin'Microsoft Exchange is not exactly new. Remember Microsoft Mail?How about Microsoft At Work Fax? Exchange is the offspringof these two applets. Double-click on your Desktop's Inboxicon, and behold MS Mail and At Work Fax, dressed in new 32bit duds complete with a TAPI makeover and a new name for Win95.(For installation instructions, see the sidebar "The RightWay to Set Up Microsoft Fax.")The philosophy behind Exchange is simple: Everything that entersor leaves your computer is part of the "media stream." MAPIand TAPI direct media traffic in and out of your computer.The software simply dumps information into and out of the mediastream, using unchanging API calls. The APIs handle all thedirty work that was previously delegated to discrete programs.This explains why every major Microsoft app features a Sendcommand on the File menu after you've installed Exchange. Thatone button allows you to reach many destinations.It shouldn't matter whether the person to whom you're sendinga document is using e-mail, an online service or a fax. WithMicrosoft Exchange, you simply look up the person's name andsend the document. The recipient's address tells Exchange thenature of the transmission: e-mail, binary data or fax.Suppose you're sending a document to five people: one on interofficee-mail, one on CompuServe, one on the Microsoft Network, oneon the Internet and one using a fax. Exchange packages thedocument and dispatches it to all five destinations. The interofficeaddress is routed to the network post office, while the CompuServe,MS Network and Internet mail are sent to their service providers.With faxes, however, things get really interesting. When Exchangedials the fax user, it queries the recipient to see if it'srunning Windows 95 and Microsoft Exchange. If it is, Exchangesends the mail as a binary file, which can be opened and editedwithout using OCR (optical character recognition) to firstconvert the file to text.If the fax recipient isn't running Windows 95, Exchange sendsthe mail as a standard 200-dot-per-inch fax. So, with a singlemouse click you can send one document to several addresses,each using a different form of electronic document transport.In other words, faxing under Win95 is essentially a point-topoint form of e-mail-with attachments!-unless there's a faxmachine at the other end. The sender doesn't have to worryabout the recipient's setup. For the first time, the receiverof electronic messages using the fax protocol doesn't needa third-party e-mail account or a fax machine. Your faxes effectivelybecome a form of binary data transfer. You can send a singlee-mail message (again, with attachments) to a whole bunch ofpeople at once; some of them can have various types of e-mailaddresses, and some fax machines, but all can receive yourmissive. Without Microsoft Exchange and MS Fax, you'd haveto send the document five times, using five different programs.You'd also have to check five times for replies.Even more importantly, you can use Windows 95's built-in networkingto share a single fax modem with every computer in the enterprise.Open up Control Panel's Mail and Fax applet, then activateSharing; your fax modem becomes a network resource. Other userscan then connect to it through the Network Neighborhood anduse it to send and receive faxes. You don't need any additionalhardware or software.Think of the possibilities. You can use a single line for enterprisewideor workgroup faxing. You can forward received faxes to theappropriate parties, including outside e-mail and fax addresses,and attach notes and comments. Also, the single interface allowsfor simple procedures to be made even simpler without automation.You can create libraries of commonly faxed materials-such asspec sheets, literature and credit references-to fax-on-demandin a few short steps. Received faxes can be stored in organizedfolder hierarchies, either locally or on the server, for fastshared access by all employees.The fax is no longer merely a way to deliver documents quickly.Rather, it's become an exciting form of point-to-point electronicmail, inheriting the same handling, routing and communicationsstrengths that e-mail has provided for years.The only kink in Exchange's otherwise graceful interface isinstallation. Getting Exchange running takes too many stepsand can involve up to four different programs. If you installfrom the wrong entry point (for example, launching Inbox insteadof Control Panel's Add/Remove Programs applet), the setup processmay end with a resounding thud.Microsoft would do well to integrate Exchange Setup under asingle Setup Wizard. Users should have to do nothing more thandouble-click on the Desktop's Inbox icon. Exchange should controlthe rest.That's not the case, unfortunately. Depending upon how you installedWindows 95, Exchange may not be there. Even though every copyof Win95 features an Inbox icon on the Desktop, key Exchangecomponents may be missing.It's a good idea to check the status of your Exchange installationbefore trying to fax. Once you've confirmed that your Exchangestation is ready for use, it's not much farther to fax city.Simply select Microsoft Fax as your printer in any program'sPrint dialog, and the Microsoft Fax Wizard will hold your handuntil the fax is sent.Don't worry if the recipient's e-mail address isn't a fax number.Exchange automatically sends your documents using the correcttransport protocol, provided you have the appropriate servicesinstalled in your Exchange Profile (a list of Exchange's transportservices)For example, fax, the Internet and CompuServe are all transportservices. Each of these can be assigned to your Exchange profile,found through the Inbox under Tools/Services. You can alsoadd intracompany mail or any other supported service. Thatway, when you send a document, every listed service is available.If you're using Exchange for fax only, you don't have to dealwith Profile; just set up Microsoft Fax and be on your merryway. But if you plan to send documents to both fax and e-mailrecipients, you'll have to make sure the appropriate servicesappear in Microsoft Exchange.Microsoft has evolved PC faxing from a monolithic, cantankeroustool to an elegant e-mail derivative. The ease with which userscan integrate Microsoft Fax into their overall communicationsstrategy is impressive. As software becomes easier to use,however, its underlying technologies become proportionatelydenser and more complex.Within Microsoft's own applications, ease of use is representedby a humble Send command on your applications' File menu. Clickon it, and the most advanced communications processes everto grace a PC operating system steam into action. MAPI, TAPIand other exceptional operating system features are the complexstructures that make this ease of use possible. Set aside sometime and explore the new frontiers available with Exchange.You'll never return to your old faxing ways.You can go ahead and kill your fax machine now-with Exchange'sadvanced capabilities, there's not a court in the land thatwould find you guilty.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. The Right Way to Set Up Microsoft's FaxBy:Rich Levin Step 1See if Microsoft Exchange and MS Fax are installed Double-clickon My Computer, then Control Panel, then Add/Remove Programs.Click on Windows Setup. Scroll down the list and see if Exchangeand Fax are checked. If they are, you're ready to go-skip toStep 3. If not, proceed to Step 2.Step 2Install Microsoft Exchange and MS Fax Check the boxes besideExchange and Fax. Click on OK. Setup will copy the requiredfiles and start the Inbox Setup Wizard. After you completea few forms, the Wizard will ask you to select the informationservices you want to use with Microsoft Exchange. When Setupis done, it will have automatically identified and initializedyour modem, installed Exchange's default phone book and Inboxdatabases, configured Microsoft Fax and installed shortcuts.The information you entered will be available to all MAPI- andTAPI-compliant programs, so you'll never have to key it inagain. Click the Start button, select Shut Down and restartyour computer.Step 3Send a test fax Click on the Start button, then on Programs.Select Accessories and activate WordPad. After WordPad loads,type some text and click on File, then Print. Click on theName drop-down list and select Microsoft Fax. Click on OK.The Microsoft Fax Wizard will activate and help you preparethe outbound fax.Step 4Finishing touches and notes To fax a document from any Windowsprogram, simply select Microsoft Fax from the program's Printdialog, and the Microsoft Fax Wizard will appear. If you wantMicrosoft Fax to answer your phone and handle faxes automatically,double-click on the Inbox icon on your Desktop and minimizethe window. When you use File+Send, or the Microsoft Fax printerdriver, to send a document, you'll have an opportunity to chooseaddresses from your address book. Feel free to mix and matchaddresses for fax, e-mail and binary-data recipients; they'reall the same to Exchange.To view received faxes, double-click on the Inbox icon. Newfaxes will appear in the Inbox. If you want to share your faxmodem with other users, run Control Panel's Mail and Fax program,go into Microsoft Fax Properties and click on the check box Let other people on the network use my modem to send faxes.If you make a mistake while adding a service or completing itssetup screen, click on Cancel to undo your errors. To updateservice settings, run Control Panel's Mail and Fax programagain, select a service and click on Properties.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. The Fax on the CompetitionBy:Rich LevinMicrosoft Fax may be the only 32-bit, TAPI-compliant faxwarefor Windows 95, but it won't remain so for long. Every majorfax software developer is providing 32-bit upgrades. See the"Fax Features" chart for an overview of the next generationof Windows faxware.We anticipate the major desktop players will pack their Windows95 offerings with features you won't find in Microsoft Fax,such as Database import and export -- Every major fax program providesa way to import names and numbers from other programs. Mostsupport data translation to and from dBASE and ASCII-delimitedformats. Import/export makes it easy to share address bookswith other users. Export your current address book to a dBASEfile, import the information within your fax program and you'reready to go.Microsoft committed a major oversight when it neglected to addimport/export functions to MS Fax. Unless you manually enterevery name and number, it's impossible to import contact information.Integrated telecommunications apps -- Dedicated fax softwareis quickly becoming a thing of the past. The trend is towardTAPI-compliant suite packages that bundle basic communicationscapability, terminal emulation, remote access, Internet connection,fax handling and even pager support into a single mega-app.The component applications can share data and provide a singlecommunications interface.Integrated telephony -- Some communications suites now delivervoice mail, autodial, speakerphone and, in some cases, personalpager support. Computer voice mail, in particular, was oncethe domain of telecom experts peddling high-end dedicated workstationsand expensive add-on hardware. Now these features can be yoursfor little more than the cost of a modem. PC voice mail performswell and interacts with your other telephony apps, includingfax."Three-dimensional" fax -- New data-representation technologieslet you send a fax that contains program and data files. 3DFax, a fax-software enhancement from InfoImaging Technologies(800-966-1140), converts file data to a high-density bar-codelike image. It uses your existing fax software and hardwareto send the image to any standard fax machine or PC fax modem.When the resulting document is decoded by the receiving computerusing the 3D Fax software, the document's binary contents emerge.You can send virtually any type of on-disk data to any typeof fax machine.While Microsoft Fax can send documents as editable text andbinary data as embedded OLE objects, it's limited to communicatingwith other MS Fax users. Through bar-code scanning, 3D Faxcan transmit binary files using PC fax modems or old-fashionedfax machines.You can download 3D Fax from America Online or the World WideWeb (or InfoImaging will send you a copy for $6.95 shipping).The program is designed to work with any fax software compatiblewith Windows 3.x or Windows 95.Fax annotation -- Kind of a Post-it note for received faxes,fax annotation lets you mark 'em up and send 'em back. It'sbetter than an e-mail message or MAPI fax message because itallows comments to be affixed directly to the fax image.Automatic printing -- You're out to lunch, and your computer'spassword-protected. Unfortunately, your PC is also the faxserver, and the big cheese is waiting for a fax. When automaticprinting is activated, the problem ends. The phone rings, thefax arrives, the fax prints out and the boss never noticesyou're an hour late.Fax preview -- This can be a lifesaver. How many times haveyou sent a fax, only to realize you clicked the wrong person'sname in your address book? Fax preview lets you see the documentbefore it's sent. This prevents embarrassing misfires and givesyou a glimpse of how well (or badly) a scanned document willreproduce by fax.Improved cover-page editors -- MS Fax's cover-page editor barelydoes the job. Delrina's cover-page editor is still the best,with Hayes a close second.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Features We'd Like to SeeBy:Rich LevinMAPI and TAPI support in every Windows 95 fax program The daysof the standalone fax machine, and standalone fax software,are over. If it doesn't support MAPI and TAPI, don't buy it.The ability to reject faxes from certain telephone numbers Mostfaxes contain the sender's telephone number in the fax dataheader.It would be easy for fax software developers to add a featurethat captures this number and adds it to a "Rejection List"on request. Whenever a call comes in from a number on the list,the fax software would simply disconnect the call.Standards for cover-page file formats Right now, if you changefax software, you'll have to re-create all your cover pages.If fax software vendors were to standardize on a single fileformat, users could easily share cover pages.True mail-merge broadcast fax capability Almost every popularfax package can replicate a document to a list of names, butonly Microsoft Word and Exchange allow you to customize eachdocument with merged information.Color faxes Need I say more?Automatic printer selection It's about time fax software automaticallyreturned the "real" printer to the Windows default after sendinga fax.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. How To Buy a ... Pointing Device TypeIt used to be that mice were the only game in town. But nowyou're confronted with myriad choices, including trackballs,touchpads and more esoteric designs like pointing sticks. Trackballsand touchpads are the two most popular mouse alternatives.Trackballs offer a high level of precision and take up lessdesktop space than a mousepad. Touchpads provide a flat inputmechanism similar to those on many notebook PCs. However, miceremain at the top of the list-they still account for about80 percent of all pointing devices sold.ButtonsThe average mouse has two buttons. However you can buy micewith up to four buttons that can be programmed as shortcutsfor more complex functions like double-click or Alt+Tab. Considera mouse with extra programmable buttons if you work with programsthat go heavy on complicated keyboard commands (such as desktoppublishing or CAD)PriceA high-quality mouse costs anywhere from $39 to $69, thoughyou can get lower-resolution units with less-sturdy mechanismsfor as little as $10. Trackballs cost more, from about $65to $110, while touchpads are priced at about $79 to $99.ConnectorsYou can hook your pointing device to your PC using either aPS/2 or a serial connector. Older computers use a serial connection,notebook computers need a PS/2 connector, and newer desktopPCs allow both PS/2 and serial connections. Ideally, your deviceshould have a converter that's compatible with either typeof port.Perhaps the trusty mouse you've been using for years has finallygiven up the ghost. Or your new system came with a mouse youjust don't like. Whatever sent you searching for a new pointingdevice, you'll find dozens of replacement options on storeshelves. You're sure to find a device to suit your needs andstyle-some manufacturers are even offering designer hues thatlet your true colors shine.Once upon a time, you had to be concerned about your mouse'sresolution. But today's better rodents offer resolutions ofabout 200 counts per inch (cpi), and most good-quality trackballshave resolutions of between 200 and 400cpi. Touchpad resolutionsoften meet or exceed 1,000cpi. You probably won't notice asignificant dip in precision unless you buy a device that featuresa resolution of less than 200cpi. You may also see resolutionquoted in the more familiar dots per inch (dpi), but thesenumbers mean the same thing as cpi.Before you commit to a particular model, visit a store witha demonstration section where you can try each pointing device.Ask about warranties; some companies offer only a year or twoof coverage, while others offer five years or more.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Tracking Input TrendsThe touchpad has already become a familiar item in many notebookcomputers, and it looks as if these devices will continue tostorm the market. BIS Strategic Decisions predicts that touchpadswill account for 70 percent of all integrated pointing devicesby 1998. Manufacturers like Alps and Cirque are introducingdesktop touchpads, and are integrating touchpads into all-inone desktop keyboard units.These flat pads have a variety of advantages over other pointingdevice technologies. The pad is a sealed unit that keeps dirtout. Touchpads have become popular in notebooks because oftheir extremely light weight. They also take up less desktopspace than mice or trackballs. For example, Cirque estimatesthat its GlidePoint Desktop, which measures 4.4 by 0.4 by 4inches, takes up about 70 percent less space than a mousepad.Touchpad technology is based on electrical capacitance ratherthan pressure. The pad contains two layers of electrodes (onevertical and one horizontal) that are connected to an integratedcircuit within the unit. When you touch the pad, you changethe capacitance of the layers. By coordinating the intersectionof the two layers, the unit moves the cursor precisely. Thistechnology is extremely intuitive-instead of clicking on amouse button, you merely tap on the pad. For those who findold habits hard to break, most touchpads now on the marketcome with two clickable buttons.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: The Sound & the Fury: Multimedia Upgrades -- Is Installation Easier with Win95? It Can Be-If You Get the Right HardwareBy:Marc SpiwakIf you bought your PC a couple of years ago, you're probablymultimedia-challenged-sans sound card and CD-ROM drive, butlonging to run the terrific CD-ROMs coming on the market. Soyou hike to the computer store, and there they are: brand-newmultimedia upgrade kits with everything you need. Do they work?Are they easy to get up and running? Good questions.Installing multimedia hardware under Windows 3.1 used to bean adventure fraught with conflict and peril. Then vendorsgot the kinks ironed out, and upgrading was a comparativelystraightforward affair. Now, with Windows 95, things shouldbe even easier, right? Well, not always.In theory, Plug and Play and Win95's installation wizard shouldmake installation a snap. In practice, we found that some upgradesare indeed smooth as silk under Windows 95. But other multimediakits-Plug and Play or not-are difficult to install. Apparently,some vendors don't have Plug-and-Play multimedia upgrades readyjust yet, and others rushed to put Plug-and-Play hardware onstore shelves without thoroughly testing it.It's clearly worthwhile to make sure you upgrade the easy way.To save you from a downer of an upgrade experience, WindowsMagazine took seven upgrade kits for a test run to see whichlive up to the promise of easy installation and great multimediaperformance in Win95. Our review criteria called for a minimumquad-speed CD-ROM-the de facto standard today. Most of thekits had 4X drives, although one had a 6X and one-which iscovered in the sidebar on the next page-had an 8X.The good news is that once they were running, all the kits workedfine. Even better, two of the kits worked like a charm fromthe outset. But, as you'll see, it took some trial and errorto arrive at that point with the other products.The sample here includes upgrades that will at least supportWindows 95: Some are Plug-and-Play systems, while others arenot. As is often the case, some upgrades support Windows 95better than others.All of the cards we tested had built-in IDE ports. On all buttwo of the cards, they proved to be useless, because our testcomputer system could not recognize the CD-ROM connected tothem.The majority of multimedia upgrades today come with IDE CD-ROMdrives, and the sound card will usually have an IDE controllerbuilt into it. This makes more sense than proprietary systems,where the CD-ROM drive must use a particular controller. Sucha drive could not be installed in another machine without usingthe original (or a compatible) controller. On the other hand,an IDE CD-ROM drive can be installed in nearly any computerand use the motherboard's IDE controller(s). I was very fortunatethat this was the case, because otherwise I would not havebeen able to test the majority of these upgrades.One additional note: If you have an older video card (with perhaps1MB of DRAM for the video memory or an early SVGA type), youmay want to get an updated card to play videos without droppingframes. The card in the Gateway 2000 test bed was an ATI mach32,which played all the videos we tried with no frames dropped.Similarly, the sound cards in the upgrade kits played videoclip sound without breaks.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Aztech Labs Stellar 6XBy:Marc SpiwakAztech Labs provided the one 6X package in this review. A 6Xdrive spins the disc 50 percent faster than a 4X drive. Althoughthis speed improvement is noticeable, it is not necessary.After installing the Aztech upgrade in our Gateway 2000 DX266, powering up the system and running the Install softwarefrom within Windows 95, I found that I still had no sound andno D: drive (the IDE CD-ROM). I manually installed the hardwarewithin Win95 and had it load default software. The sound cardworked-but there was still no D: drive. Connecting the CD-ROMdrive to the motherboard IDE controller solved that problem.Aztech's upgrade exhibited very ordinary sound quality. Audiocontained static at times, and the speakers had a shrill qualitywith the treble boost turned on and somewhat flat sound withit off. The speakers didn't have much oomph even with batteriesinstalled.The Aztech upgrade is an average package, and even its helpingof bundled software leaves a bit to be desired. With only twomultimedia titles included, it had the least software of anykit tested. But if the 6X speed is more important to you thanhaving a wealth of software titles, you might like this upgrade.The speed of the drive tends to place this upgrade kit at thehigh end of the spectrum, but its nonwavetable sound card,unimpressive speakers and small software selection puts itat the low end. A 6X drive should be strapped to a much bettersound card and speakers. If you're buying only a CD-ROM drive,then by all means go for a 6X drive. But if you're buying acomplete upgrade package, a better sound card and speakerscontribute much more to overall performance than a speedierCD-ROM drive.--Info File--Aztech Labs Stellar 6XPrice: $379In Brief: This kit has a slight performance edge with the only6X drive in the bunch, but is short on accessories and bundledsoftware.Aztech Labs800-886-8859, 510-623-8988Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4xBy:Marc SpiwakOne advantage of a Sound Blaster sound card is that most software,including Windows 95, recognizes it. This package includesthe Sound Blaster 16 PnP, and Plug and Play it does. This kitwas a breeze to install. Both the sound card and its secondaryIDE controller worked without a hitch in the test-bed Gateway2000 DX2/66 computerOnce I had the Discovery CD 4x upgrade working, I installedits handy assortment of utility software, which can be loadedfrom included disks or a CD-ROM. Choose the latter: It's easier,and it gives you a chance to do something productive with yournew CD-ROM drive.The speakers included with this Discovery CD 4x upgrade areof average quality. They can be connected to the line outputon the sound card with batteries installed or to the amplifiedoutput with or without batteries. An AC adapter is optional.General sound from these speakers is fairly full, but audioCDs sound flat unless you install batteries in the speakers.These speakers can be used with or without batteries. If batteriesare not used, the speakers must be connected to an amplifiedsound-card output or else nothing will be heard. With batteriesinstalled, they can be connected to either an amplified outputor a line-level output. They sounded much better and more powerfulwith batteries installed and connected to the amplified output,although the sound tended to break up at higher levels. Trebleand bass boost controls on the speakers worked, but both controlsshould always be turned on, as the sound was missing some qualitywithout them.While this kit's sound quality and amplification power are notgoing to knock anyone's socks off, a setup like this is certainlyadequate for most multimedia applications, especially if it'syour first multimedia setup. On the other hand, the easy timeI had installing this kit more than made up for any sonic shortcomings.And for the multimedia newcomer, nothing is more importantthan getting the equipment to work.--Info File--Creative Labs Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4xPrice: $369.99(street)In Brief: The Sound Blaster Discovery CD 4x is a good entrylevel upgrade with lots of bundled software. It's one of onlytwo Plug-and-Play systems that worked as advertised.Creative Labs800-998-LABS, 408-428-6600Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance 4xBy:Marc SpiwakOf all the kits tested, the Performance 4x is the one that Iwould most like to have in my computer because of its superior32-bit wavetable Sound Blaster sound card. It gave no installationtrouble at all, even to the point that I was able to use theIDE controller on the sound card. This was the case only withthe Creative Labs upgrade kits.While the speakers that come with this upgrade were not thebest of the lot, they were certainly adequate, and the bettersound card more than makes up for them. (If you are lookingto save a few dollars, you would probably be just as happywith the Creative Labs Discovery CD 4x.)The Performance 4x lacks Plug-and-Play capabilities, sofirst I tried running an installation program from DOS. Afterthis program ran, the computer could access the CD-ROM drivethrough the sound card, but there was still no sound. I hadWindows 95 do an auto search for new hardware. The OS "found"the sound card and its game port, and configured both properlywith default drivers. The reward I got was beautiful sound.The Performance 4x is the only upgrade tested that includesa 32-bit sound card, a Sound Blaster 32 to be exact. This wavetablecard is hands down the best sound card in this review. Andwhile the speakers are not the most powerful in the group,they are much better than the low-end ones packaged with someof the other kits. An AC adapter is included. In general, anyspeakers powered by an AC adapter will sound better than batterypowered speakers, and you'll never have to buy batteries. Anaudio purist might want speakers with a little more power andperhaps even a subwoofer. That aside, anyone should be veryhappy with this kit. A very complete utility software collectionrounds out the package.--Info File--Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance 4XPrice: $429(street)In Brief: This is the upgrade I'd buy with my own money. Itcomes loaded with software and has a 32-bit wavetable soundcard.Creative Labs800-998-LABS, 408-428-6600Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Diamond Multimedia Kit 4400By:Marc SpiwakDiamond Multimedia is perhaps best known for high-end products.We can't argue with that, especially since it was the onlycompany to submit an 8X upgrade "Speed Demon").  But both the 4Xand 8X Diamond upgrades were the fussiest in terms of gettingthem to work in Windows 95.When I first powered up the Gateway 2000 with the 4400 upgradeinstalled, I had no D: drive, which was the normal situationwith these upgrades, and there was no sound.Eventually the 4400's sound card worked, but only when it wasset for non-Plug-and-Play operation and after running Diamond'sinstall program from DOS. And that wasn't all. Back in Windows95, an automatic search failed to detect any of the new hardware.Manually installing the drivers from within Win95 brought thesound card to life, but I still couldn't control the CD-ROMdrive from the IDE controller on the sound card. Thankfully,the controller on the motherboard worked, which generally provedto be the rule in this review.The Diamond 4400 produced average sound quality. The sound cardis a 16-bit, non-wavetable type, and the speakers are probablythe least expensive in the lot we tested. These speakers mustbe connected to an amplified output on a sound card becausethey are not amplified at all. There's no way to use batteriesor an AC adapter, so all of the amplification must come fromthe sound card. Although the sound they produce is clear, there'sjust not enough of it. Most people would not be happy owningthese speakers, and would probably replace them with somethingbetter soon after installing the upgrade. For the person whowants to hear only an occasional sound effect or warning beep,they would suffice, but there's a lot more to multimedia.--Info File--Diamond Multimedia Kit 4400Price: $299(street)In Brief: The kit has plenty of goodies for a very reasonableprice. It had one of the fussiest installations, though.Diamond Multimedia Systems800-468-5846, 408-325-7000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Kiss Technology Super EditionBy:Marc SpiwakThe Kiss Technology Super Edition multimedia upgrade includesa Pioneer 4X IDE CD-ROM drive, a Plug-and-Play sound card,a pair of very basic speakers, some generic utility softwareand eight assorted CD-ROM titles. You set a jumper on the soundcard to Plug and Play if the system is being installed underWindows 95 or to Disable Plug and Play if it's being installedunder DOS or Windows 3.11. The sound card also has a builtin secondary IDE controller for the CD-ROM drive.Documentation for this package was somewhat sparse. Parts ofit pertain to installing under Windows 95 and others don't.When I installed this upgrade in the Gateway 2000 DX2/66, thesound card would not play immediately. I had to have Windows95 search for the new hardware, which it found and set up properly.I could not get the sound card's IDE controller to work inthe Gateway 2000, so I had to plug the drive into the IDE controlleron the motherboard, which worked.The speakers can be used without batteries if they are connectedto the sound card's amplified output. In this configurationthey sounded fine, though somewhat "hollow." With six C batteriesinstalled and the speakers connected to the line output onthe sound card, they sounded about the same, but now I coulduse the speakers' volume and bass-boost controls. With batteriesinstalled and the speakers connected to the sound card's amplifiedoutput, the sound was much fuller and louder. You can plugin a 9-volt AC adapter, but none is included with this kit.This upgrade's utility software bundle is generic. In addition,it does not have an applet that will play audio CDs, so I hadto install the CD-player option as part of Windows 95's MediaPlayer. That worked just fine, but you have to wonder why thispackage lacked a CD player.In addition, this would be one more hitch for the Win 95 novice,and perhaps one more reason to call technical support.--Info File--Kiss Technology Super EditionPrice: $289 (street)In Brief: The Super Edition is a basic package with price andfeatures in the mainstream.Kiss Technology301-216-1300, fax 301-216-1212Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad Elite XLBy:Marc SpiwakThe Quad Elite XL is the upscale version of the two Reveal kitssubmitted for review. It has essentially the same hardwareas the lower-end kit, except that it has much better speakers,a joystick and tons of multimedia software.After I installed the Elite hardware, I ran the Win95 Installprogram. This provided sound, but, of course, the old "no D drive" problem cropped up once again. Not being too quickto abandon the sound card's IDE controller, I tried to haveWindows 95 autodetect the new hardware. Supposedly, the OSfound and configured the new IDE controller, but the machinewas then very slow to reboot and, alas, still no D: drive.As usual, I had to connect the CD-ROM drive to the motherboardIDE controller before we could spin any discs. An unexpectedwrinkle appeared with this upgrade kit, too. All the otherdrives in this review were set as slaves, but this one wasset as a master, which meant that I had to move the jumperto the slave position. Then it worked like all the others.Although this was not something to worry about, had I not madethe switch, I would have spent a lot of time wondering whythe drive wasn't responding.As far as sound quality goes, this upgrade kit can really putout the sound. The AC-powered speakers pack quite a punch with40 watts per channel. Only a subwoofer would make the soundany fuller. The trade-off for that power is space: The speakerstake up a lot more room on your desktop than the others reviewed.This was the only upgrade I tested that can transform yourPC into a home stereo (for CDs at least), and it's also theonly one that might cause coworkers to yell, "Turn down thatcomputer!" The wavetable sound card, while not 32-bit, producesclear, realistic MIDI sound and good FM synthesis. The powerfulspeakers coupled with the wavetable sound card make for a verypleasing multimedia setup that you could live with for a longtime.--Info File--Reveal Quad Elite XLPrice: $549(street)In Brief: The Elite XL is the most feature-filled package wetested, loaded with software, accessories, wavetable soundand the most powerful speakers of the lot.Reveal Computer Products800-REVEAL-1, 818-704-6300Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Reveal Quad UltraBy:Marc SpiwakThe Reveal Quad Ultra upgrade is loaded with accessories, includingmany software titles, a how-to-install videotape, a microphoneand headphones. The speakers included with the Quad Ultra couldeasily find a long-term home on your desk. They're not highend, but they look nice, sound very good and come with an ACadapter.The Reveal upgrades include some of the best documentation ofany of the kits I examined. For example, a neat little supplementexplaining IDE controllers was thrown in. The supplement showshow IDE conflicts can occur, how to test for IDE controllerson your motherboard and so on. It provided substantial backgroundmaterial on what might cause problems with an IDE installation.But even with its excellent documentation, the Reveal Quad Ultraupgrade presented the most bizarre installation problem ofall. After I installed the hardware and connected the CD-ROMto the sound card, the Gateway 2000 DX2/66 wouldn't even boot.After much experimentation, I found that the machine wouldboot if I first entered the CMOS setup and then simply exitedit. Then the computer booted just fine but, as usual, gaveno indication of a D: drive connected to the sound card.The computer also failed to boot after shutting down Windows95 and turning off the power; it needed the little CMOS setuptrick. Strangely, if I merely had Win95 restart itself (nopower down), it would boot up again just fine. This dilemmacontinued as long as I left the CD-ROM drive connected to thesound card's IDE controller. Disconnecting the CD-ROM drivesolved the problem, as did using the motherboard IDE controller.(Apparently, the Gateway 2000's BIOS strongly disliked somethingabout this upgrade!)Once the hardware problems were straightened out, the Quad Ultraupgrade was trouble-free. The Install disks worked properlyfrom within Windows 95, and I soon had sound. Overall, thisupgrade's sound quality was good compared to some of the otherkits tested, due to the better speakers and the wavetable soundcard. The card produces realistic sound, and the speakers reproducethat sound clearly. The speakers, while not earthshaking, aremore than adequate for most business multimedia applications.But again, audio purists will want more power.You'll be happy with any of these multimedia upgrades once youget them working properly in your computer. And it's quitepossible that you would have no trouble installing any oneof them in your computer. It's also possible that you mighthave trouble with one of the ones we liked. It depends greatlyon your computer setup, and at this point anything could happen.Whatever you do, don't let our cautions ruin your appetitefor multimedia. There's an exciting new world of software outthere, and it's just waiting for you to get the right hardwareto run it.--Info File--Reveal Quad UltraPrice: $449(street)In Brief: The slightly higher price of this 4X package reflectsthe abundance of software and accessories, better speakersthan most upgrades, and a wavetable sound card.Reveal Computer Products800-REVEAL-1, 818-704-6300Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Speed Demon -- Fast is great, but easy is better.By:Marc SpiwakSpeed-people can never get enough of it. Not in amusement parks,not in cars and certainly not in CD-ROM drives. The first CDROM drives would spin a disc at the same speed as an audioCD player, which was unbearably slow. Next came double-speeddrives that transferred data at double the speed of ordinarydrives. You could buy triple-speed drives briefly, but theyvanished soon after quad speed drives became available-whichseemed like only days after the 3X drives came out.Quad-speed drives are fairly standard today, as they are quitefast (at least compared to 2X) and very reasonable in price.It should come as no surprise that 6X and even 8X drives arenow available. While a 6X drive spins a disc 50 percent fasterthan a 4X, an 8X is twice as fast! That would make for a reallyslick multimedia upgrade. We reviewed one 6X kit (an Aztech),and an 8X kit almost made it.The Diamond Multimedia Kit 8000, with an 8X drive included,is a rather expensive upgrade (about $599 street), but it'salso probably the fastest one around. Although I spent thebetter part of a day trying to make it work, it never operatedcompletely on the test-bed system. Diamond said it was busyworking on new drivers and Install disks that should clearup the problems I experienced.While awaiting the new software's arrival, I tested the 8X IDEdrive by itself connected to the motherboard's IDE controller.By CD-ROM standards the drive cooks, transferring data at 1.2Mbper second. I copied a huge file from the 8X drive to the harddrive in about half the time of the 4X drives tested, whichwas pretty much what we expected.The new drivers didn't make installing the upgrade in the Gateway2000 DX2/66 test-bed machine any easier. While the 8X upgradenever worked in that machine, all the other kits eventuallydid. The 8X upgrade kit did work in a brand-new Pentium 133with a working Plug-and-Play BIOS, installing in this machinewith no problems at all. That was very satisfying, but it'shighly unlikely that anyone would be installing new multimediahardware in a new computer.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Installation Tips -- First, you have to make it work.By:Marc SpiwakI ran into many problems getting these multimedia upgrades towork, apparently because installation software has not yetbeen thoroughly tested under Windows 95, and Plug-and-Playdrivers often aren't available. But there are a few tricksthat can be helpful in getting new multimedia hardware to workin Windows 95.IDE ProblemsThe upgrade kits all include IDE CD-ROM drives and have secondaryIDE controllers on their sound cards. IDE controllers are easyto use, except when they conflict with another IDE controller,or the BIOS thinks there's another controller or the Installsoftware fails to configure the new controller properly. Mostly,the sound-card function worked correctly, but the CD-ROM driveswere unresponsive.Controlling the CD-ROM drive as a slave from the motherboard'sIDE controller solved the problem. Tech support suggested this.Disabling the sound card's IDE controller leaves the computerin its original configuration. You can't do this if the motherboardhas only one IDE controller installed with two hard drivesconnected to it. But if you need only one hard drive, it'sbetter to have only one controller operating. Unnecessary controllerseat up memory.The ribbon cable connecting the hard drive to the motherboard'sIDE controller had a spare connector. If this is not the case,you'll need a new ribbon cable with two connectors, not a bigdeal, but certainly a hassle. Had the Gateway 2000 test computeralready had a slave drive connected to the primary IDE controller,I would have had to connect the new drive to the motherboard'ssecondary IDE controller.Try, Try AgainThe instruction manuals mostly discussed installation in Windows3.11; the same procedure often doesn't work in Windows 95.Check your documentation for specific Win95 installation instructions,and follow them. Sometimes you just have to boot Windows 95,and it will automatically detect and configure your new hardwarewith its own default software. This ideal situation did notoccur often.If the instructions tell you to start the Install procedurein DOS, then you should start your computer in Win95's DOSmode and try running Install from there. If that doesn't work,try using the Run command line in Windows 95. When you haverun all the install procedures available and the new hardwarestill isn't responding, try having Windows 95 automaticallydetect the new hardware.Should Windows detect the hardware, it might configure it automatically.Or it might ask you to insert a manufacturer's disk containingdrivers or information about the new hardware. First insertany disk that might be an obvious choice. Or, you could tryhaving Windows look at each disk one at a time.Your new hardware must be configured manually if Windows failsto detect it. At this point, you must notify the Add New HardwareWizard that you will tell it what to look for.Last ResortIf you have tried everything you can think of but still cannotget the hardware to work, you can uninstall Windows 95, goback to 3.11, install the hardware from there, and then reinstallWin95. The new OS sometimes sets up hardware better while itis installing itself. It simply copies the earlier, workableinstallation setup.Finally, Windows 95 can install properly and have all hardwareworking, only to reconfigure some device automatically lateron so that it no longer works. So, if you upgrade to Windows95 and all your hardware is working correctly, disable the"Make settings automatically" box for all system hardware.This means Windows won't be able to juggle around those "locked"resources in the future, but as long as they are properly doledout today, you're okay! Should problems persist, try disablingeach statement in your CONFIG.SYS file, and then reenablingonly what you need to get everything to work reliably.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. How We Tested: The Multimedia Microscope -- It's a question of installationease, sound quality and drive speed.By:Marc SpiwakWe decided to test the Plug and Play upgrades in an older machinewithout a Plug and Play BIOS, so that we would duplicate thesituation that most readers would have. We first tried an oldAST 33MHz 486. After experiencing various CD-ROM install problemswith the first three upgrades, we decided to try a slightlynewer Gateway 2000 DX2/66. Ironically, the first three Plugand Play sound cards all worked fine in the AST, but not inthe Gateway 2000. We had no better luck with the sound cardIDE controllers in the Gateway 2000, either. By this time werealized that the problems were caused mostly by the upgrades,and not by our computers. So we decided to stick with the Gateway2000.To ensure that the upgrade kits started on level ground, wetested each in a clean installation of Windows 95. That way,nothing remaining from a previous test would interfere. Todo this, we ran a batch file that renamed the old Windows subdirectoryand then completely reinstalled Windows in a new subdirectory.That left us with a fresh, bare-bones installation of Windows95 every time.After we had an upgrade working properly (the main focus ofthis article), we simply loaded the included software and listenedto what it could do. Our opinions on the overall sound qualityof these upgrades are purely objective. Although you mightnot agree with them, you can use them as starting points. Forthe performance aspects, we did identical tests for each upgradeand measured the time it took for each one to complete.We ran a program that played an AVI file from the CD-ROM driveincluded with the upgrade kit and counted the number of framesdropped while the video played. Our tests indicated that ifyou have a 486 or better computer and are installing at leasta 4X CD-ROM drive (our minimum speed requirement for this review),you will have no video frames dropped from AVI files. Noneof our test systems dropped frames.We also tested CD-ROM drive speed while searching and transferringdata to another drive. For each upgrade kit, we searched forthe same information (Open GL and Windows NT) on the MicrosoftDeveloper Network CD-ROM and timed the operation. In addition,we copied the Weezer video on the Windows 95 CD-ROM to thehard drive. On a 4X drive, the copy time averaged about a minute.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Report Card: RecommendationsBy:Marc SpiwakThe Creative Labs' upgrade kits are the only way to go at thistime for painless compatibility. This is the primary reasonthat they garnered the WINDOWS Magazine Recommended seal. Thesewere the only upgrades that worked as advertised right outof the box, and contained the only CD-ROM drives that couldbe driven from the sound card's built-in IDE controller. Eitherof them would be fine. However, if you want wavetable synthesis,which can deliver more realistic sound depending on the sourcematerial, opt for the Creative Labs Sound Blaster Performance4x upgrade. The Performance 4x package includes the Sound Blaster32 which, in addition to being a wavetable synthesis card,delivers better overall sound quality with its 32-bit operation.One minor complaint with this upgrade is that we would haveliked more powerful speakers, or perhaps a subwoofer, attachedto the Sound Blaster 32. That sound card is certainly worthyof high-end speakers. If we could have mixed and matched components,we probably would have used the Reveal Quad Elite speakerswith the Performance 4x upgrade.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: A Gaggle of Gigs That Won't Break the Bank -- Add Big Storage for Only a Few BucksBy:Serdar Yegulalp and Philip Albinus"A gig for a grand" was a catch phrase for PC buyers as littleas a year and a half ago. Now a gigabyte drive is de rigueurfor new PCs. And users looking to upgrade their current systemsare gravitating toward these drives as well, drawn by retailprices that have dropped into the $350 range.In this review, we examine four 1GB EIDE hard drives from thebigger players in the field: Seagate Technology, Western Digital,Quantum and Fujitsu Computer Products of America. Conner Peripheralsalso sent us a drive, but we didn't include it because Connerprovided us with only volume OEM pricing information.Each drive was tested on a 100MHz 486 Pentium equipped withan Award Plug-and-Play BIOS. We used WINDOWS Magazine's brandnew Wintune 95 to test the drive's cached and uncached performance.We also placed approximately 300MB worth of text files ontothe drive and indexed them with Microsoft Office 95's FindFast Indexer. We then used Microsoft Word 7.0 to perform acontext search for the word "and." Since the index itself tookup several megabytes, the drive's own hardware-level cachingand retrieval speed got a thorough testing.You may wonder why, with costs dropping the way they are, wedidn't review even larger drives than 1.2GB. We could have,but users who opt for such monster drives running under Windows95 could wind up having too much of a good thing.Virtual File Allocation Table (VFAT), Windows 95's souped-upversion of the old DOS FAT file system, limits the maximumsize of individual drive volumes to 2GB.The problem isn't fatal. If you buy a 4GB drive, for instance,you can use all of it properly under Windows 95 by partitioningit into at least two drives, each of them 2GB or less in size.By comparison, NTFS, the file system incorporated into WindowsNT, has a maximum individual volume size of 16 billion gigabytes.(Yes, 16 billion!) That's surely large enough for most Windowsapplications.So if you find yourself routinely working with volumes largerthan 2GB, and you are dealing with data that requires a fairdegree of fault tolerance (mirroring, striping and extendedpartition data), you're better off switching to Windows NT.NTFS has many safety, redundancy and large-volume handlingfeatures that may make it the OS of choice in that situation.Also note that EIDE drives larger than 528MB may not be recognizedby a computer with an old BIOS. Some of them require softwaredrivers to handle this problem, such as Ontrack's Disk Manager.(See sidebar "Enhancing Your Hard Drive" for more on this.)Other computers may simply need a BIOS upgrade. Contact yourmachine's manufacturer to get the straight dope. And know yoursystem's limitations before spending money for something youcan't use.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Fujitsu M1614If a hard drive can be called sexy, then the Fujitsu M1614 deservesthe description. Housed in a sleek black case that dramaticallycomplements the chrome-finished hard-drive mechanism, the FujitsuM1614 was the least expensive hard drive we tested. However,this low-priced drive is still a worthy performer.Fujitsu has apparently not paid as much attention to the drive'sinsides as it has to its "come hither" exterior. It's truethat the unit finished last in the Microsoft Word search, withan average time of almost 9 minutes, but in the Wintune 95tests, the Fujitsu M1614 scored a 6.8MB per second in the cachedtest and a flat 2MB per second in the uncached test, whichwere average numbers in this review. All told, the M1614 finishedsecond in the Wintune testing, bested only by Quantum. It earneda "B" for performance.The Fujitsu M1614 has screw holes on the side and bottom portionsfor easy side- and flat-mounting.Because Fujitsu did not send a manual with the unit, we wereunable to review the documentation.--Info File--Fujitsu M1614Price: $235In Brief: Fujitsu's drive is the least expensive in this review,putting a speedy gigabyte within the grasp of most users.Fujitsu Computer Products of America800-626-4686, 408-432-6333Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Quantum Fireball 1080Quantum's excellent Fireball line of drives is well representedby the 1080, which features stellar performance and solid support.It was the only drive in the bunch rated for a 500,000-hourmean time between failures. Jumper settings are printed onthe drive's faceplate, although the jumper itself is on thedrive controller board (and consequently a little hard to findat first glance). The drive design has the controller placedentirely outside the chassis, connected to the drive mechanismvia a detachable ribbon cable. This allows easy removal andreplacement of the controller in the event it fails. Both horizontaland vertical mounting are supported.Quantum's spiral-bound manual is excellent and thorough, althoughit desperately needs to be updated: The revision we receivedwas dated November 1994 and didn't have specific data for theFireball 1080. It was easy enough to get the drive installedand running, however, and the manual is still full of usefulinformation, right down to the part numbers for the correctscrews to use when mounting the drive horizontally or vertically.The Fireball's performance scores were consistently high whenit came to cached performance (6.7MB per second); when dealingwith uncached data it only delivered 2.1MB per second on theaverage. It performed spectacularly well in the word-searchtest, raking through the data on the disk in an average of7 minutes flat.--Info File--Quantum Fireball 1080Price: $265In Brief: Quantum provides a good, solid performer all around,with easy configuration and detailed, complete instructions.Quantum Corp.800-624-5545, 408-894-4000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Seagate Medalist 1080slSlimmer and lighter than the other drives we reviewed, the SeagateMedalist stands out in many ways.The full itinerary of jumper settings is spelled out on thedrive's faceplate, making it easy to get the drive hooked upand talking to your system. Screw holes on the drive's sidesand underside facilitate side- and flat-mounting. The gasketaround the drive's edge is sealed tightly with tape as an extraprecaution against contamination. Apparently, this also hassome noise-abatement value: The drive's noise rating is a veryacceptable 30dB.The manual contains a wealth of illustrations that spell outdrive installation and configuration in plain terms. Despitethe simple language, the manual is also quite technical. Theback is chock-full of tables on such esoterica as low-levelPIO mode programming, but the overly technical informationdoesn't hamper learning how to hook up and prepare the drive.In Wintune 95, Seagate's uncached performance registered a 2MBper second, and it scored a respectable 7.1MB per second incached performance. However, it came in third in the word-searchtest, with an 8-minute, 42-second average.--Info File--Seagate Medalist 1080slPrice: $345In Brief: This is the smallest, lightest, least noisy and mostpower-efficient of the bunch.Seagate Technology800-468-3472, 408-438-8111Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Western Digital Caviar AC21000Accept only the finest," reads the slogan on the faceplate.Western Digital's Caviar certainly lives up to that motto bybeing one of the finest hard drives on the market today.Open the box for Western Digital's hard drive kit, and you'regreeted with goodies that simplify the chore of installinga new hard drive. Along with the instructions, a wall chartspells out every stage of the installation procedure with clean,straightforward, captioned illustrations. The manual itselfis every bit as good, written in clear English and also illustrated(and the chart's not simply a rehash of the manual's illustrations).Troubleshooting, variable hardware setups and multiple operatingsystems are all covered.The jumper settings aren't spelled out explicitly, but the exposedcircuit board traces for the jumpers have the letters CS, MAand SL (for cable select, master and slave) etched on them.The drive's gasket is also sealed with tape all the way around(and emblazoned with the stern warning "Warranty Void If Removed").Screw holes in the chassis allow the drive to be mounted horizontallyor vertically, depending on the computer's case.The Caviar's cached and uncached performance were both averagefor this review: 6.7MB per second and 3MB per second, respectively.The Caviar's handling of the word-search test was second best,rating 8 minutes, 30 seconds, slightly ahead of the Seagate.Also included are Ontrack Computer Systems' Disk Manager andDriveRocket utilities. Disk Manager provides compatibilityfor 1GB drives with older system BIOSes, and Drive Rocket enhancesdrive performance through caching. Windows 95 users shouldnot use Drive Rocket, since it interferes with Windows 95'sown disk caching.--Info File--Western Digital Caviar AC21000Price: $300 (street)In Brief: The Caviar drive comes with a poster that detailsevery step of the installation. It also is equipped with Ontrack'sDisk Manager (for those of us with older, less compatible systems)Western Digital Corp.800-832-4778, 714-932-5000Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: The Easy Way to Install a Hard Drive -- A step-by-step approach to upgradingBy:Serdar Yegulalp1. Check your system. Check your machine's manual to find outwhere internal drives get mounted and make sure there's room.If there isn't, consider temporarily removing one of the otherdrives, especially if you can consolidate your data. For instance,the data on a pair of 250MB drives could fit comfortably intoa 1GB drive with room to spare.The power supply should have at least one free four-wire lead.If it doesn't, your local computer store sells splitters which,like extension cords for wall outlets, can be used to maketwo power leads out of one. Also, make sure you're not overloadingyour supply. Each device connected to the power supply, andthe supply itself, should have a wattage rating printed onit. For safety's sake, the connected devices' power ratingsshould not be more than about 90 percent of the supply's rating.It's not likely that you'll even get close unless you havean older machine with a small power supply (less than 200W)and lots of peripherals installed.2. Take precautions. Static electricity, which builds up inyour body constantly, can destroy computer equipment. Harddrives are among the most static-sensitive devices. You candefeat static buildup by running a humidifier, wearing antistaticgloves or working on an antistatic computer mat. Or simplytouch a piece of exposed metal on the computer's case everyfew minutes during the installation. This will ground you outand drain static away.3. have the right hardware. Mounting rails and/or brackets shouldbe shipped with the drives, but are needed only if you're puttinga 3.5-inch hard drive into a 5.25-inch bay. If your drive didn'tship with the necessary hardware, contact the manufactureror call a computer parts warehouse, most of which stock hardwarefor various drive brands. Also, make sure you use the correctsized screws. A screw that's too large will go too deep andmay damage the drive.4. Get connected. Power cables plug in only one way, but somehard drive data cables (multiconductor ribbon cables) are notindexed. Fortunately, the cable always has a red stripe indicatingwhere to match the first pin on the drive's connector.If you're attaching a drive to an IDE chain that already hasa drive on it (there are two connectors per cable), make sureyou set one drive as a master and the other as a slave. Consultyour drive's instructions about how to do this; usually, itrequires a jumper setting. If there's only one drive on a chain,it should be set to a neutral setting (often called "cableselect" or "jumper storage"). Setting it wrong may cause yourmachine to fail to boot or to give inaccurate drive readings.Leave the cover off the first time you power up again, in casethere's a problem.5. Configure it right. Each computer has a different methodfor identifying a new hard drive. Some machines require youto force detection in BIOS setup; some handle it automatically.Any machine that can accept an IDE drive off the motherboardshould have some kind of autoconfiguration.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winlab Product Comparisons: Enhancing Your Hard Drive -- You may need more stuff to make it all work.By:John GartnerIf you've got an old PC, adding a fast, spacious hard drivemay require some additional hardware and software. Unfortunately,trial and error is the only sure way to find out if your PCis ready for one of these Enhanced IDE drives. If after formattingit and updating your BIOS, your new drive works as expected,great. If not, then your system was probably manufactured beforethe summer of '94, when new drivers and controllers becameavailable.EIDE, or Fast-ATA drives as they are also called, should havean EIDE disk controller. EIDE extends the original IDE interfaceby supporting drives larger than 528MB (an old DOS and BIOSlimitation), and faster data transfers of up to 16.6MB persecond, in what are known as PIO Modes 3 and 4.The 528MB limitation (see Power Windows, February 1995) is aresult of the way the operating system (DOS) and the hardware(through the system BIOS) store and communicate data basedon the sector, head and cylinder location. New systems thatinclude an updated BIOS and EIDE drive controllers no longerhave this limitation. To work with legacy systems, drive manufacturersbundle driver software (such as EZ-Drive or Disk Manager) thattranslates the larger drive capacities into a format that DOSand older BIOSes can understand.To get the faster speed on a non-EIDE system, you'll need somenew hardware. An ISA-bus EIDE card will let you attach largerhard drives and ATAPI CD-ROM drives, but data transfers arelimited to IDE speeds of 3.3MBps, which is really a limitationof the ISA bus. For the best performance, look for a PCI orVL-Bus EIDE controller (depending on the type of slots in yoursystem). If your PC doesn't have local bus slots, it mightbe time to consider upgrading.One note about adding a second hard drive under Windows 95:New hard drives must still be partitioned and formatted beforethey can be used. You partition the drive by running Fdiskfrom a DOS window; this sets the size of the logical volume(s)that you want on the drive. After Fdisk finishes, you mustformat the drive, either by running Format from the commandline or right-clicking on the drive icon and selecting it.Hard drives are not listed in Add New Hardware (under ControlPanel)This sounds complicated, but take heart. Some drive manufacturersbundle these functions into a utility that handles all thesteps automatically.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Report Card: Recommendations The race was tight all around, but the clear performance winneris the Quantum Fireball. With both its performance and its500,0000-hour MTBF rating, it's no surprise more and more OEMsare bundling it with their systems. And at $265, its priceis comparable to just about any other drive out there.The other drives had a lot going for them, too. We especiallyliked Western Digital's step-by-step installation poster. Seagate'slight, compact, efficient and noise-reducing design shouldappeal to those who need a utilitarian system design. Fujitsu'sdrive is a great buy for someone who needs a gig for under$250.Performance: How well does the drive perform against the othersreviewed here?Construction/design: Is the drive well constructed? Are thejumper settings difficult to change? Is the drive configurationonly explained in the manual, or is it also on other installationaids?Support: Is the documentation clear and precise? Does the drivecome with all the necessary materials (rails, brackets, screws,jumpers and so forth)? Does the manufacturer stand behind itsproduct (toll-free support, BBSes, Web or ftp sites, informationservice forums?Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Optimizing Windows: Explorer Gives You the Big PictureBy:John WoramSTILL NOT SATISFIED with Explorer? Here are a few more waysto coax it into doing what you want.In last month's explanation of the Explorer /n command, I notedthe /n switch opens a new window each time you execute thecommand via the Start menu's Run option. (If you don't seethe subsequent windows opening, drag the top window around.The others are hiding underneath it.) You may or may not seea similar effect if you open an Explorer window by double-clickingon the My Computer icon and opening additional folders withinit depends on how you've configured the Folder tab. Open Explorer'sView menu and selectOptions to view the tab, which appears ahead of View and FileTypes. When you execute Explorer via the Run command withoutthe /n switch, you'll see only the View and File Types tabs.The Folder tab offers multiple- and single-window browse options.The former opens a new window each time you open a new folder;the latter shows a single window whose panes change as youopen each new folder.I'll use the multiple-window option to present an overview ofsome Explorer features, and show how they compare with theold File Manager and the still-older DOS directory tree. Forcomparison, I'll use the Start menu's Run option. If you wantto follow along, open the following Explorer view window:explorer /e, /root,With no object following the /root switch (but don't overlookthat comma), the All Folders pane shows the Desktop as itsroot. Click on the plus sign next to My Computer to see thebeginnings of a "directory tree" that shows all your disk drives.Click on the plus sign next to any drive letter and the treeexpands by one level. Then click on the plus sign next to anyfolder on the selected drive, and the tree expands by one morelevel, and so on. As you open more folders, the highest levelof the tree disappears off the top of the pane, so that youcan see each new folder as it's opened.The All Folders pane in the sidebar "A Tree Grows in ExplorerLand" shows a seven-level tree, with some folders removed soyou can see the entire tree. The Contents pane shows the seventhlevel-the half-dozen shortcut icons in the highlighted openfolder you see in the All Folders pane. The title bar at thetop of the window shows the equivalent DOS prompt that wouldtake you to the same level of the tree.Explorer /n, /root,If you remove the /e switch, Explorer opens in single-pane Openview mode. Now open Explorer with /n, /root, and select theSeparate Window radio button from the folder tab in the ViewOptions menu. From there, double-click on the My Computer icon.From this window double-click on the drive C: icon, and fromwithin that window double-click on the Windows folder. Fromthere double-click on Start Menu, then Programs, then any folder.Resize/reposition each window so that when you're done, youcan see all seven windows.Now, with all these Explorer windows open, let's navigate fromone to another. Assuming you can see parts of all seven windows,the fastest way to get to the desired one is to move your mousepointer into that window and click once. Or, to go window browsing,use the Backspace and Enter keys to work your way in eitherdirection through all the open windows. Note, however, thatthe Backspace key won't take you all the way to the top. Ifyou press this key while the My Computer window is highlighted,a message warns you: You Are at the Top Level and Cannot GoUp Another Level. To See the Desktop, Minimize Any Open Windows.Well, if you're at the top level, what's that Desktop windowdoing one level above the top? No explanation comes to mind,but if you want that Desktop window, move the mouse pointerinto it, click once and you're there. You won't see this highestlevel Desktop window at all if you start the sequence by doubleclicking on the My Computer icon. In this case, My Computeris the highest-level Explorer window on the desktop, so themessage makes more sense. In either case, if you want to getback to a clean desktop screen, minimize or close all openwindows.To minimize all windows, right-click on an empty area on thetaskbar and select the Minimize All Windows option on the popup menu. You'll probably wind up with a taskbar filled withuninformative C:\WIN ... buttons. If so, expand the taskbarso the buttons take up two or more rows, with a bit more informationin each one. Or, move it to either side of the screen and expandit horizontally so you can see the entire button text. Bothalternatives are space-wasters, though, so you may prefer toleave the taskbar at its default size. Then, just move themouse pointer over the taskbar's button and the full text popsup immediately above it.To restore all open windows, again right-click on any emptyarea of the taskbar, and this time you'll find an Undo MinimizeAll option on the menu.You can, of course, close selected windows by clicking on theclose button in the upper right corner of the appropriate window(s).Or, you can close any window and all higher-level windows byholding down the Shift key when you click.Explorer /n, /select,\\My Computer, C:This Explorer window should look familiar. It's what you seewhen you double-click on the desktop's My Computer icon, exceptin this example the drive C: icon is highlighted. If you'vealready opened My Computer, execute this command to open asecond copy of that window. If you execute this command first,opening My Computer doesn't open a new window. This is becausethe /n switch used here applies to this command line only.To verify this, try opening My Computer more than once. You'llfind that only one window with that name appears, but a newwindow opens each time you use the Run option to execute theExplorer command. Again, each new window opens on top of theprevious one. If you drag one to the side, though, you'll seethe previous window hiding beneath it.Once you're reasonably familiar with all these Explorer switches,you can drag a few Explorer icons onto the desktop and customizeeach one to suit your needs. For example, if you regularlywork within the Windows folder, and especially in the Startmenu area, Alt+click on any Explorer shortcut icon, selectProperties and click on the Shortcut tab. Now type the followingstring on the Target line:Explorer /e, /root,C:\Windows,Start Menu\ProgramsFor further customization, click on the Change Icon button andselect the open-folder icon, or whatever icon suits you. Thenclick on the OK button, on the Apply button and again on theOK button to close the dialog box. As a final touch, renamethe shortcut as Windows Folder.The next time you double-click on this customized shortcut icon,the Explorer Folders pane will show an open Programs folder.If you scroll to the top of the pane you'll see that its rootobject is the Windows folder. In this case, the All Folderslegend at the top of the Folders pane is misleading, becauseall folders are not available in the pane. You can access onlythe C:\Windows folder and its subfolders. If you try to backspaceyour way to a higher level, nothing will happen.In doing these experiments, you need only type the word Explorerfollowed by whatever switches you want. When you press theApply button, Windows 95 rewrites the line as C:\WINDOWS\EXPLORER.EXEbut leaves your switches intact. Note that the first switchis separated from EXPLORER.EXE by only a space, and that acomma follows each switch. In some cases, you can omit thecomma after the final switch. If you encounter a meaninglesserror message while experimenting, it's probably the resultof a punctuation error. Also remember that an object and subobjectare separated by a comma, not a backslash.Once you get the hang of it, you'll find it's reasonably easyto create one or more Explorer windows that open to show justwhat you want to see. After you find the right switch combination,just create a shortcut and enter the desired command stringin its Target line area.If you miss the good old days when File Manager could show multipledirectories within its window, open multiple Explorer windowsand tile them horizontally or vertically. You'll find thesetiling options on the taskbar's Shortcut menu. This isn't ashandy as the old File Manager technique, but it's not necessaryonce you get used to the Explorer way of doing things.Remember too, that File Manager is not dead; it's just sleeping.To wake it up, just execute winfile via the Start menu's Runoption. And you may want to do just that from time to time,because the older applet has a few nice features that didn'tmake it into Explorer. For example, File Manager gives everyfile's actual size, while Explorer reports file size by roundingup to the nearest 1KB boundary. Thus, Explorer reports filesfrom 1 to 1,024 bytes as 1KB and a 1,025-byte file as 2KB.Also, Explorer doesn't reveal file attributes. If you highlighta single file, Explorer reports its actual size on the statusbar. But if you want to see file attributes, you need to highlightthe file and right-click to display its Properties dialog box.It's all very elegant, but in this case I think the older stylewas more user-friendly.Spend a little time flipping Explorer's switches, and you mayfind less and less need to sneak back to File Manager.Senior Contributing Editor John Woram is the author of WindowsConfiguration Handbook (Random House, 1993). Contact John inthe "Optimizing Windows" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areason America Online and CompuServe, or care of the editor atthe addresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Getting Started: Whither Goeth, Oh Nobel File?By:Jim BoyceAH, THE GOOD OL' DAYS! Pardon me as I reminisce about the daysof yore when DOS was king and the usurper, Windows 1.x, waslittle more than a fumbling court jester. Long dead are thedays when noble, nerdly knights stout of heart and long inthe tooth did battle against the demons of Lost Data and FileCorruption. Oh, to return to those days of magic and wonderwhen only the most cryptic of commands would unlock the mysteriesof your computer's hard drive and let you sift through thefile treasures buried within.Okay, maybe those good ol' days are best left in the Dark Agesfrom whence they came. Once I cast off that shroud of fondremembrance, I recall that using DIR, COPY and SORT to managea load of files was as much fun as riding a tired nag intobattle with a broadax and pike, sans the titanium long johns.In today's battle of the files, Explorer and File Manager arethe only weapons you need. Each makes quick work of copying,moving and deleting groups of files. For the uninitiated, theytransform file management from an incomprehensible task intoa point-and-click breeze. This month, I'll explain a few waysyou can make File Manager and Explorer easier to use.Q: I was able to customize the toolbar in Windows for Workgroups'File Manager, with buttons for displaying files in Size, Date,Type and Name order. I miss that feature in Windows 95's Explorer.Although I can do the same thing from Explorer's View menu,it seems like so many unnecessary steps. Is there another wayto do this?A: It's certainly helpful to be able to sort files based onthose properties. If you need to free up some space on yourhard drive, for instance, it makes sense to sort files by size.With the biggest files on top, you can find and delete thefattest ones first. Unfortunately, Explorer doesn't includebuttons for each option in its toolbar. But there is a quickway to sort.First, set Explorer to display a detailed list by choosing ViewDetails. The Contents pane changes to show a column for eachof the four fields. To sort by a particular characteristic,click on that field's header. To switch between ascending anddescending order, just click on the header again. If you'restill longing for File Manager, click on the Start button,choose Run, enter winfile in the Run dialog box and click onOK.Q:I'm not sure I understand how Explorer and File Manager decidewhether to copy a file or move it. If I drag a file from theC: drive to the D: drive, for instance, I've copied the file.How can I control how the file is handled?A: In File Manager and Explorer, you can copy and drag fileswithin the same drive or from one drive to another. In FileManager, you can drag a file onto a directory in the tree (fromthe right pane to the left pane) or onto a drive icon in thetoolbar. In Explorer, you can drag files from the contentspane to the same drive or a different drive in the tree. Bothprograms use the same criteria to determine whether to copyor move the file. If you drag the file from one place to anotherwithin the same drive, Windows moves the file. Drag the fileto a different drive, and Windows copies the file.It's easy to control the files you drag in both File Managerand Explorer. Hold down Shift while you drag files if you wantto move them. Hold down Ctrl as you drag files if you wantto copy them. The same principles apply when you're workingwith single-pane windows (folder windows) in Windows 95. Forexample, if you hold down Shift and left-drag an object froma folder to the Desktop, you move rather than copy the itemto the Desktop.Q:How can I select more than one file at a time? Each time Iclick on a different file, the one I previously selected becomesdeselected.A: This is one of those basic Windows techniques Microsoft tendsto assume you know, but which isn't obvious. To select a singleobject (such as a file), just click on it. To select multipleobjects, hold down Ctrl and click on the objects one at a time.To deselect an object, hold down Ctrl and click on the objectagain. To select a range of objects, select the first one inthe range, hold down Shift, and select the last one. All theobjects in between the selections will then be highlighted.Now the tricky part: What if you have multiple items selectedand also want to choose a range? Just hold down Ctrl and clickon the first object in the range. Then, while still holdingdown Ctrl, hold down Shift and click on the last object inthe range. The original set of objects will remain selected,and the new range will also be selected.After you've highlighted the items you want to work with, releaseCtrl and Shift, click on any one of the selected objects anddrag it to its destination. The other selected objects willfollow.Q: I've noticed that in Explorer and in file dialog boxes (likethe Open dialog box), filenames are sometimes spaced widelyapart. The spacing seems to change from one folder to another.Why is that?A: When you use the Small Icons or List view in a folder orin Explorer, the spacing between one column of filenames andthe next is defined by the longest file or subfolder name inthe folder. Windows 95 allocates enough space in each columnto hold the longest name in the folder. So, if the filenamesare short, the columns are close together. But name a filewith a long filename, and the columns get further apart. Unfortunately,there really isn't anything you can do to bring the columnscloser together other than shorten the longest filenames.Q: When I open File Manager, most of the directories appearempty. I know the files are there, because my programs arestill working. What's wrong?A: File Manager probably is trying to display files only witha particular file name or extension. Choose View/By File Typeto open the By File Type dialog box. Type *.* in the Name textbox, then place a check in each of the check boxes in the FileType group. Choose OK or press Enter, and the files shouldreappear.Contributing Editor Jim Boyce is the author of Inside Windows95 (New Riders Publishing, 1995). Contact Jim in the "GettingStarted" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Onlineand CompuServe, or care of the editor at the addresses on page18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Power Windows: Data Backups to Make Mom ProudBy:Karen KenworthyMost Moms Today won't let their kids watch TV until they backup their computer data. As grown-ups, we have to be carefulnot to ignore this lesson ourselves.Hardware failures are rare, but when hardware goes, it oftentakes computer data with it. Everyone knows software is fallible,too. I'm sure at some point you've watched helplessly as anerrant program consumed several days' hard work. And don'tforget fire, theft and computer viruses. You may even haveheard the rumor about the hapless user who made a mistake anddestroyed data all by himself. It's probably an urban legend,but it's scary just the same.Fortunately, storing a recent copy of your computer data safelyaway from your computer enables you to recover from all thesedisasters with minimal inconvenience and only a slight elevationin blood pressure. Backing up also has other benefits. Whenyou copy your data at specific times and save it permanently,you have an accounting audit trail. Also, copying backups totape (or another high-capacity medium) provides a fast, convenientway to move large amounts of data between computers. A single6 gigabyte tape sent via overnight mail transfers data as quicklyas a 1 million-baud data link, and is probably more reliable.Mind your mediaAs a mom, you may have taught your kids to make backups, butwhen it comes to picking a backup medium, you're on your own.To decide which is best for you, remember your four Cs: compatibility,cost, convenience and capacity. For most of us, there's nosingle right medium, because our backup decisions usually involvea set of subjective trade-offs that vary from one situationto another.Diskettes are no longer the medium of choice. Compared to othermedia, they're slow and expensive. Their only remaining advantageis the near-universal availability of drives that can readand write them.Companies like Iomega and SyQuest Technology offer several typesof high-capacity, removable disks that are cheaper and fasterthan diskettes, but slower and more expensive than tape. Magnetooptical disks are now entering their second generation. Thefirst round of products were mostly 128MB or less, but now256MB and larger disks and drives are appearing.Removable disks have one big advantage: Most programs can readdata directly from a removable disk.Once far too expensive, hard disks are now surprisingly affordable.Plummeting prices have made backup hard disks reasonable choices.Backing up to a second hard disk has drawbacks, though. First,most hard disks aren't removable. This makes it tough to protectbackup hard disks from fire, theft and other hazards that threatenthe original data. In addition, hard disk controller failuresand other hardware problems may also corrupt backup, as wellas original, data.DAT's greatTape is currently the most convenient and affordable backupmedium. QIC (Quarter Inch Cartridge) drives and tapes are inexpensiveand store fairly large amounts of data. QIC tape drives typicallyattach to your computer's diskette controller or to a parallelport.If you have lots of data, DAT (digital audio tape) may be yourbest choice. These drives are fast, and the tapes hold a lotof data (4GB or more) at a modest cost (1 to 2 cents per megabyte).Almost all DAT drives are SCSI devices, so if you don't alreadyown a SCSI adapter, it'll add $100 to $200 to the cost of thedrive.Finally, we come to CD-R (Compact Disc-Recordable) discs. Althoughyou can't write to a standard CD-ROM disc, you can write toa CD-R disc-once. (Some CD-R devices permit multiple recordingsessions until the disc is full.) After that, you can readfrom it using any standard CD-ROM drive. This option is expensive,though. Several vendors are reportedly working on drives thatwill sell for about half the price of current models, but thatstill won't close the cost gap between CD-R and tape.By the way, don't forget that convenience and capacity workhand in hand. A backup medium with a capacity at least as largeas your biggest hard disk partition makes backing up your datamore convenient. It also makes possible entirely unattended,timed backups.If you're using Windows or Windows for Workgroups 3.x, you havelots of software choices. MS-DOS versions through 6.22 includea simple program that allows you to store data on diskettesor other devices that behave like hard disks (such as removabledisks). The most recent versions of this software include advancedfeatures such as cataloging and compression, and even run underWindows.You have lots of third-party choices, too. Almost all tape drivescome bundled with custom backup software designed to work witha particular drive.If those programs don't suit you, Symantec offers Norton Backup3.0. This supports a variety of QIC and DAT drives, as wellas diskettes and other drive-like media. Even some SCSI adapterboard driver software kits, such as Adaptec's EZ-SCSI and CorelSystems Corel SCSI, include useful Windows-based backup software.But if you've already made the jump to Windows 95, your backupsoftware choices are more limited. If you're backing up todiskette or another disk-like device, the backup software shippingwith Windows 95 may do the job. That software also supportsseveral popular QIC tape drives connected via a diskette drivecontroller. But Windows 95's built-in software doesn't supportSCSI or IDE tape drives. If you're using either of those devices,you have only two choices as of this writing.Hewlett-Packard recently released Colorado Backup for Windows95, which supports all current Hewlett-Packard and ColoradoMemory Systems tape drives. If you're currently using ColoradoBackup software, you're eligible for a free upgrade to theWindows 95 version through April 1st. You can download it fromHP's BBS (970-635-0650) or its ftp site (col.hp.com/dist/hpcolorado; on the BBS and ftp site, download file CBW95.exe).The company will also ship you the upgrade for $7.95 (800-4695150)The third-party tape backup software on the market is Arcada'sBackup for Windows 95. This program marks the company's firstappearance in the small-network and standalone PC markets.In addition to supporting almost all SCSI tape drives, Arcada'sWindows 95 software supports most QIC drives (connected viaa diskette controller or parallel port) and IDE tape drives.You may be wondering why Win95 users need their own backup software.Why not continue using your trusty DOS and Windows 3.x software?Most older software appears to work under Windows 95. The programwill run, write data to tape or disk, even compare the dataon tape to the original data on disk, and report success. Butwhen the time comes to restore that data to your hard disk,you'll discover that two pieces of vital information are missingor corrupt.First, older software can't see or store Win95's long filenames.So, when you restore a file, you lose the original long filename.Even if you personally don't use the long filename feature,Windows 95 itself does. Many important system files and directoriesbear long names that older software can't preserve.The Windows 95 Registry poses another problem for Windows 3.xbased backup software. While Windows 95 is running, this fileis a bit exotic. As you probably know, Windows 95, and applicationsdeveloped for it, treat the Registry as a central informationdepository. What you may not have heard is that some of thatinformation is kept in RAM, while other information is generatedon the fly in response to requests.Programs that aren't aware of the Registry's special naturewill copy the portion of the Registry currently on disk. Thiswill appear to work, but will result in a file that corruptsthe real Registry when you restore it. By using special Windows95 API calls to read and write the Registry, backup softwaredesigned for Windows 95 is able to avoid this mistake.Old backup utilities aren't the only programs that can't seeor preserve Windows 95's new long filenames. Pre-Windows 95defragging, directory sorting and other low-level disk utilitieshave this blind spot, too. Fortunately, the utilities thatship with Windows 95 make most of this older software unnecessary.However, in a few cases, the new utilities may not do the job.The current Windows 95 backup utilities may not support yourbackup device. Or you may be using a mass storage device that'sincompatible with Windows 95's standard disk utilities.If you find yourself in one of these rare situations, take alook at Windows 95's LFNBK.EXE. This utility allows you touse your old software and still preserve long filename information.Contributing Editor Karen Kenworthy is the author of VisualBasic for Applications, Revealed! (Prima Publishing, 1994)and the manager of WINDOWS Magazine forums on America Onlineand CompuServe. Contact Karen in the "Power Windows" topicof these areas, or care of the editor at the addresses on page18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Power Windows: The Best of Both Worlds -- Have your old software and long filenames, too.By:Karen KenworthyIf you must use an old disk utility that doesn't see or preserveWindows 95's long filenames, don't despair. LFNBK.EXE allowsthose programs to run safely.It works its magic by stripping all long filename informationfrom your disk. It also converts a filename's lowercase lettersinto uppercase. Once that's done, the disk will look exactlyas all disks looked before Windows 95-every filename will conformto the familiar DOS 8.3 filename convention. It's now safeto run your old software because there's no long filename informationfor it to lose.When the old utility is finished, you'll need to restore theoriginal filename information. Fortunately, LFNBK.EXE tuckedaway the needed information in a file (LFNBK.DAT) in the disk'sroot directory before stripping it. On request, LFNBK.EXE willput those original filenames back where it found them, makingthe disk ready for Windows 95 again.To save long filename information in order to make it safe fora pre-Windows 95 disk utility, follow these steps:Disable Long Name Preservation for Old Programs "Build a Tunnelto Long Filenames")Close all running applications (LFNBK can't process open files)Open a Windows 95 DOS box, and enter this command: LFNBK /B Restart your computer. If your old disk utility is a DOS program,restart your computer in MS-DOS mode.To restore long filename information, once your pre-Windows95 disk utility has finished, follow these steps:If necessary, restart your computer to load Windows 95.Open a Windows 95 DOS box and enter this command: LFNBK /RReenable Long Name Preservation for Old Programs.Restart your computer.For more information about LFNBK.EXE, read the accompanyingLFNBK.TXT file. You'll find both files on the Windows 95 CDin the \ADMIN\APPTOOLS\LFNBACK directory. To install it, copythe LFNBK.EXE to your \WINDOWS\COMMAND directory.If you have the diskette version of Windows 95, you'll needto download a copy of the program. You'll find it in the WinMagforums on America Online and CompuServe, and on the Web athttp://download.windows.microsoft.com/windows/download/lfnb.exe.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Power Windows: Build a Tunnel to Long FilenamesBy:Karen KenworthyTunneling, a remarkable quantum mechanics phenomenon, occurswhen a particle passes from one quantum state to another withoutpossessing the energy to leave its current potential energywell. In effect, the particle tunnels through the potentialenergy barrier rather than climbing over it.What does this have to do with Windows? Tunneling is also aremarkable trick from Windows 95's developers. This trick allowsold DOS and Windows programs to update files with long names,without losing the original long filename information.When applications software updates an existing file, it usuallyperforms three steps:1. It gives the old file a new, temporary name.2. It creates a new file with the old file's original name.3. It removes the old file, which now sports a temporary name.If the application program understands and maintains Windows95's long filenames, all is well. The new file it created instep 2 will bear the same long filename as the original.But if an application program doesn't know about Windows 95'slong filenames, something could go awry in step 2. Insteadof long filenames, older programs only see the substitute,truncated 8.3 filename that Windows 95 assigns. When creatingthe new file, the older application will specify the truncatedname instead of the longer version.But Windows 95 is not so easily fooled. It knows how applicationprograms behave, and watches for the rename/create/remove sequence.When it detects this pattern it automatically transfers theold file's long filename to the new file.The long filename appears to "tunnel" from one version of thefile to the next.This feature is useful most of the time. Butit can defeat the operation of LFNBK.EXE, which tries to removelong filename information. That's one reason Windows 95 letsyou disable and reenable tunneling.To disable tunneling, follow these steps:1 Double-click on Control Panel's System icon.2 When the System Properties dialog appears, select its Performancetab, then click on the File System button.3 When the File System Properties dialog appears, select itsTroubleshooting tab, then select the Disable Long Name Preservationfor Old Programs check box.4 Click on OK and restart your computer when asked.To enable tunneling, follow the same steps but in step 3, removethe check in the box labeled Disable Long Name Preservationfor Old Programs.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Networking Windows: System Policies Keep Users in LineBy:Eric CarrI KNOW YOU. You think User Profiles are great for keeping noviceusers out of trouble, and for preventing more experienced usersfrom getting in and mucking things up. But you want a morefundamental level of control-say, at the system level.You want System Policies. Think of System Policies as overridesto the local machine's Registry. Stored on the server, SystemPolicies are downloaded into the local machine's Registry duringlog-in. They overwrite the local machine's settings, enforcinga consistent set of rules for every user who logs into thenetwork. Whereas User Profiles can make changes to the desktopsettings in the Registry, System Policy settings can alterthe desktop's properties (USER.DAT) as well as the log-in andnetwork-access properties stored in SYSTEM.DAT. In essence,System Policies define what properties the user can set.You create System Policies with the System Policy Editor (SPE),a graphical tool that presents system settings in a tree format,much like the hardware components in Control Panel's systemfolder. The Editor uses a template file to display (and change,when necessary) the contents of the Registry. (Mastering templateprogramming is complex enough to be a university-level course.See the sidebar "So You Wanna Be a Systems Programmer.")What price power?The SPE provides some powerful facilities for controlling whatyou can accomplish on a Windows 95 desktop. But this powerdoesn't come cheap: You can inadvertently destroy the user'scurrent configuration if you're not careful about what youchange and what you leave alone. For example, if you suddenlydecide to put a bitmap on users' desktops without warning,I guarantee you'll get feedback-and it won't all be positive.Although some power is good to keep chaos in check, you've heardthe saying about absolute power. It's probably not a good ideato destroy users' efforts to customize desktops unless youhave considerable management backup.The check boxes in the Policy Editor (in Policy File mode) operatea little differently than normal. If they're checked, the policywill be implemented; if they're empty, the policy won't beimplemented. If they're shaded, the setting won't be changedfrom the current setting, and Windows 95 won't make any changesto the existing policy.For instance, if you suddenly decide everyone should be usingthe Microsoft Client for NetWare to connect to your NetWareserver, be sure to select the options to use the Client forNetWare, as shown in the left-hand screenshot in the sidebar"Make It Your Policy to Be Shady." That would ensure that everyonewas using the client. Later on during the session, when yourealize not everyone is set up to use this method of networkattachment, your first instinct may be to go back and clearthe check marks, as shown in the center screenshot.Don't do it. When you clear the check marks, you indicate thatClient for NetWare shouldn't be used; therefore, all the userswho already employ this method of attachment will have theirconfigurations destroyed the next time they log in and downloadthe policy into their Registries. Whoops!The correct response is to click on the boxes until they becomeshaded, as shown in the right-hand screenshot. This indicatesthe policy remains unchanged from the current setting (thesetting in force when you invoked the Policy Editor)The moral of the story is: When you have to decide whether toimplement or remove a policy, tread carefully and think aboutthe ramifications of your actions.You'll find many more goodies like the SPE on the CD versionof Win95. If you're serious about getting and using all thefeatures I discuss here, get the CD. You install the PolicyEditor via Windows 95's Add/Remove Programs applet in the ControlPanel. Run the applet, select the Windows Setup tab and clickon the Have Disk button. In the dialog box, choose Browse andthen enter the path to the \ADMIN\APPTOOLS\POLEDIT directoryon the Win95 CD. Click on OK and then on OK again. In the HaveDisk dialog box, check the System Policy Editor option. Itwouldn't hurt to install the Group Policy capability at thispoint, so you may as well check that box, too. Group Policiesare applied to Windows 95 users and machines included in oneor more network groups-either NetWare or Windows NT. Later,you can install Group Policies using these same instructions.Restrict accessFinally, click on the Install button. Microsoft recommends yourestrict SPE installation to a small number of users. It'spowerful and could be potentially damaging if used by a lotof people. Think carefully about who should have access tothis application.Fire up the Policy Editor to see what's going on by runningthe POLEDIT application. The editor operates on each part ofthe Registry-the user portion and the computer component-butnot both simultaneously. I don't have the space here to detailall of these settings, so I encourage you to do some exploring.Start by selecting File/New. When the default user and computericons appear, double-click on either to see the categoriesof policies.You can use the Policy Editor in one of two ways. In Registrymode, the editor operates directly on the local computer'sRegistry. When you open the Registry, you'll note the editorinitially shows only the local user and the local computer.(I'll deal with remotely connected computers in a future installment.If you can't wait, read Chapter 16 of the Microsoft Windows95 Resource Kit to see how to set up and manage remote controland administration.) When you use the Policy Editor in Registrymode, just click on the portion of the Registry you want toset policy for-either the user or the computer. Changes youmake become effective after you restart the machine. Use thismode with caution, because you could end up making changesthat will affect your machine.Use the SPE to create policy files you store on the server anddownload whenever a user or member of a group logs into thenetwork. This mode is sometimes called Policy File mode. Itdoesn't directly affect the Registry-rather it creates thefile containing directives that are downloaded into the Registryduring the log-in process. I used the Policy File mode in myearlier example. It permits you to explore the capabilitieswithout making changes to your Registry. Don't save the filewhile you're getting used to the Policy Editor. When you'reready, though, save it as CONFIG.POL.Apply the changes to many usersAdding policies for specific groups is a snap. From the Editmenu, select Add Group. To get a pick list of the availablegroups, click on the Browse button and stand back. We did thison our server in San Mateo and got a huge list of users, groupsand print queues.You can define only those groups that have been previously definedwithin the network operating system. As you might expect, GroupPolicies look exactly like User Policies, because groups aremade up of multiple users. To ensure Group Policies are enforced,install GROUPPOL.DLL on each participating computer in thegroup. Do this when you first deploy Windows 95 in a custominstallation script. Or, you can go around to each computerand do it individually, just as you installed the SPE.To activate the new policy that you've constructed, copy theCONFIG.POL file to the server. For Windows NT, place the filein the NETLOGON directory; NetWare users should place the filein the PUBLIC directory. Once again, you'll need to be runningthe 32-bit client to make this work automatically, but thereare workarounds if you're running another type of client, aswith User Profiles. To configure for manual downloading ofSystem Policies, edit the local Registry of the machine usingthe SPE, as shown in the sidebar "Switch to Manual." Make sureyou specify the complete path and filename for the manual download.You need to install the SPE on every machine to make some ofthese changes. At the very least, you'll need a disk containingthe SPE that you can carry around as you visit different desktops,or the editor loaded in a secure area of the network that onlyyou can access. Although these approaches will all work, there'sa more elegant method of managing and controlling remote computers'Registries-and that's what I'll show you next month.Contributing Editor Eric Carr is owner of F1, a Mountain View,Calif.-based consultancy. Contact Eric in the "Networking Windows"topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online and CompuServe,or care of the editor at the addresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Networking Windows: So You Wanna Be A Systems ProgrammerBy:Eric CarrAlthough the System Policies supplied with Win95 are comprehensive,they don't address the needs that could crop up when you'redeploying a custom or in-house-developed application. For theserequirements, you may need a customized version of the SystemPolicy template. You can create one using a text editor. Thisis not for the faint of heart, but it can be done. The textbelow-from the \WINDOWS\INF\ADMIN.ADM file-shows what it takesto create two small policies. So, dust off your books on structuredprogramming, bone up on object-oriented terminology and you,too, can become a systems programmer.CATEGORY !!LogonPOLICY !!LogonBannerKEYNAMESoftware\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\WinlogonPART !!LogonBanner_Caption EDITTEXTVALUENAME "LegalNoticeCaption"MAXLEN 255DEFAULT !!LogonBanner_DefCaptionEND PARTPART !!LogonBanner_Text EDITTEXTVALUENAME "LegalNoticeText"MAXLEN 255DEFAULT !!LogonBanner_DefTextEND PARTEND POLICYPOLICY !!ValidatedLogonKEYNAME Network\LogonVALUENAME "MustBeValidated"END POLICYEND CATEGORYBack to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Windows NT: NT's Future Looks BrightBy:John D. RuleyI'VE POLISHED OFF my crystal ball just in time for the New Year,so I can bring you the first-ever State of NT report. I'vedrawn from Microsoft's public statements, Deep Dark's and otherconfidential sources' whisperings, and other industry information.It's guaranteed to be as accurate as possible-meaning somewherebetween blind guesswork and gospel truth.Let's start with 1996. First, we'll see public demos of thenext NT product, Microsoft's Shell Update Release (SUR). Microsofthas already shown it at Networld/Interop, and I'll bet thatby now we've seen more of it at Fall Comdex. Aside from theWindows 95-style Explorer interface, we'll see other featuresin the SUR (see "The Big SUR")Once Microsoft releases SUR, we'll see new NT/Back Office productsfrom the company. Among these will be the Gibraltar Internetserver, maybe Microsoft's Catapult Firewall, the much-anticipatedExchange messaging server and a new version of Systems ManagementServer (SMS) with secure remote control for NT clients. (DeepDark tells me this may turn up in a Service Pack to SMS 1.1).These pieces will be integrated into the obligatory new versionof Microsoft's Back Office bundle, which should appear aroundthe third quarter. By that time, developers should see Cairorelated developmental betas: Network OLE, Object File System(OFS) and Distributed File System (DFS)Further ahead: 1997Here's where I go out on a limb. Look at the calendar, considereverything I've just mentioned and think about something DeepDark once said ("If we can't ship a new release by Comdex,we can't ship it by the end of the year!"). I can't see Microsoftshipping even a beta version of Cairo this year. Developerswill get an early peek, but even they won't get a full operatingsystem beta until January 1997. It may take that long justto merge OFS and DFS into a single file system.Slipping to 1997 means Cairo should have no trouble integratingall the anticipated major features: Plug-and-Play support (whichwill make possible a new spate of hot-swappable peripheralsfor network servers), Kerberos networkwide security and clustersupport integrated directly into the NT kernel (jointly developedby Microsoft and Digital). By then, the Windows 95 team willhave a new version of its OS with Network OLE support in placeto act as a Cairo client. There should be another round ofnew server-side products by then, but I have no idea what they'llbe.A look back at 1995It's interesting to look back at what seemed important lastJanuary. The PowerPC topped everyone's list. Even Microsoftcalled NT 3.51 the PowerPC version. What impact has the PowerPCmade on NT to date? CompuServe provides an interesting answer.Since August, users have downloaded a minuscule percentageof files for this and other RISC platforms.Lesson: PowerPC, and RISC platforms as a whole, represent aninsignificant percentage of NT desktops (Shell Technology Previewis a desktop-oriented file). They represent a greater portionof NT Servers, but they're still a minority. PowerPC has merelysplit the already small RISC pie among three players insteadof two. The big loser in that split has been Mips Technologies,which was the first RISC architecture NT supported.This is a pity. Many people-including me-had high hopes thatNT's RISC platform support would bring some badly needed competitioninto the microchip market, but it didn't happen.Something else that didn't happen in 1995 was the expected floodof 32-bit Windows applications for both Windows 95 and NT.Microsoft could point to its InfoSource CD-ROM, which listsmore than 4,000 Back Office-compatible products-75 percentof which run on NT and are presumably 32 bit. But most of thoseare specialized-looking for word processors and spreadsheetsstill turns up only two products each. (I'm writing this beforeFall Comdex, so there could be a surprise batch of end-of-theyear products. If that's the case, vendors are being awfullyquiet.)WINDOWS Magazine's senior technical editor Dave Methvin foundout why while he was working on Wintune 95 (downloadable fromour areas listed on page 18 and available on the WINDOWS MagazineCD-ROM). This test and tune-up kit is a Win32 application targetedat Windows 95 and designed to run on NT as well. Dave foundWin32 development to be more difficult than he expected. Thecurrent Win32 SDKs are buggy, and the documentation is incomplete.Many incompatibilities exist between NT and Win95, and as Iwrite this, Microsoft is still changing guidelines for Win95developers-a good two months after Win95 shipped. I'm hopingthese problems will be cleared up in 1996.In other newsThe NT 3.51 Resource Kit is finally about to ship and shouldbe available by the time you read this. I still haven't gottena copy. I'm expecting NT script support for both PERL (thescripting language used by World Wide Web servers) and REXX(popular with OS/2 folks), along with improved versions ofseveral popular NT utilities, which I hope include a betterDNS implementation. Multiprotocol Router might ship in theresource kit, but I doubt it. Microsoft is also offering ServicePack #2 for NT 3.51, which fixes yet more bugs. The companyhas released to manufacturing Back Office 1.5 (NT Server 3.51,SQL Server 6.0, MS Mail 3.5, SMS 1.1, SNA Server 2.11) andit should be available by now. Microsoft is also offering MicrosoftDevelopers Network (MSDN) level III, something new for BackOffice developers. This is basically everything from levelsI and II (all SDKs and access to early Win95 and NT betas),plus a Back Office suite developmental test version. It's alsoa good tool for IT departments.How not to A correspondent who prefers to remain nameless recently pointedout something I'm not too happy about: Microsoft's Repair Disk(RDISK) utility for NT doesn't save security information-includinguser accounts-when you use it after you install NT. There'sa difference of opinion about whether this is a bug. Deep Darksaid the development group told him this behavior is by design,but TechNet yielded a product support item (PSS ID Number:Q126464) that reports it as a bug. Both groups agree on theworkaround: Use NT's built-in backup (NTBACKUP) app, with theoption to save/restore Registry data.Sorry, Deep, but this time I'm with the product support folks.It's a bug. Users who create an emergency disk on setup, andthen regularly update it using RDISK, ought to expect all theirRegistry settings would be restored, including security anduser accounts. Otherwise, what good is it? With the currentsetup, using the emergency disk to recover after a server failsto boot will give you just one account:Administrator.Because this information differs from what I wrote in my firstNT Question and Answer file, and in my book, Networking WindowsNT 3.51, I've posted corrected files (NTQA02.ZIP and NETNT02.TXT).You'll find both in the NT and Windows 95 section of our filelibrary on CompuServe (GO:WINMAG), AOL (Keyword:WinMag) orftp.winmag.com. These files also include answers to the mostcommon questions, as well as updated information since thebook went to press.Brilliant and bogusI recently spent a day at Arbor Software's (408-727-5800, fax408-727-7140) annual meeting for ESSbase users. This multidimensional,nonrelational database is aimed at On-Line Analytical Processing(OLAP). It's expensive-an entry-level setup runs around $43,000but it can turn trend analysis at a big company from a taskthat takes weeks to one that can be completed in minutes. UsersI spoke with, including representatives from ARCO, May Co.stores, the U.S. Navy, Intel and Microsoft, had nothing butgood things to say about the database. The only bad commentI heard was from some IT folks who worry about end users tryingto do too much, which is what IT folks usually say. Arbor originallywrote ESSbase for OS/2, but now supports it on UNIX and NTplatforms.In the bogus department I hate to do this, but I can't let IBM'sWarp Server beta pass without comment. I haven't spent muchtime with it myself, but our assistant technical editor SerdarYegulalp did, and his reaction was far from positive. In fairness,we have to tell you that he did eventually get it installed,but he described the experience as an "ugly bloody mess." IBM's"Easy Start" code name seems like a bad joke.We're also not impressed by the feature set-Warp Server seemsto be a basic bundle that includes file-and-print servicesfrom the old LAN Server product line, Warp itself, LAN Distanceremote access, SystemView system management, a basic backupapplication and a print spooler IBM pretentiously refers toas "Advanced Print Services." Compared with NT Server, thebundle lacks Macintosh client support and isn't nearly as wellintegrated. We were hoping to see IBM bundle in some form ofNotes server, but it's not in the beta Serdar installed. Prettybogus, IBM!Book of the month-and a surpriseThe book of the month is A History of Knowledge by Charles VanDoren (Ballantine Books, 1992, $12.50 softbound). This isn'ta computer-related book, but the final chapter contains someof the most profound thinking I've ever seen about the computer'simpact on our society.Now for the surprise. If you haven't already done so, look atthe Info File sidebars in this month's Software First Impressions.We're reporting platform compatibility for all versions ofWindows, including NT. This is information many of you haverequested. Some of you have also asked for more specializedhigh-end coverage. Later this year, you'll find a new sectionin WINDOWS Magazine that's aimed at the world beyond the PCdesktop. I'll have a column there, in addition to my usualWindows NT column. It's going to be a great 1996 for NT.Editor-at-Large and resident Windows NT expert John D. Ruleyis the principal author of Networking Windows NT 3.51 (JohnWiley & Sons, 1995). Contact John in the "Windows NT" topicof WINDOWS Magazine's areas on America Online and CompuServe,or at the addresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Windows NT: The Big SUR -- Here are some of the features you should seein Microsoft's Shell Update Release and companion products.By:John D. RuleyGraphics Device Interface (GDI) integrated directly into theNT kernel. This is Dave Cutler's last shot at making NT runin 8MB. I don't think he'll make it, but this will improveperformance, so it's worth doing anyway.An Internet browser built directly into the SUR's shell. Thiswill be an NT version of Microsoft's Internet Explorer browserfor Win95, which is currently on beta at Microsoft's Web site(www.microsoft.com). You may still want to keep Netscape handy,but having a browser built right into the shell is convenient.The long-awaited Windows 95-style Telephone API (TAPI) and associatedmodem driver. We'll finally be able to use NT as a client tothe Microsoft Network. The modem driver will be either Unimodemor a hack using NT Remote Access Services to give NT equalcapabilities.A new Multiprotocol Router either built into NT Server or availableas an add-on. As I write this, it's in public beta on the MSNETforum on CompuServe. It fills in one of the last places whereNetWare has a feature NT lacks. Combined with RAS, it shouldsignificantly enhance NT Server's capability in WAN environments.(Editor's Note: At press time, Microsoft released a versionof the Multiprotocol Router for NT Server in NT 3.51 ServicePack #2.)NetWare file/print emulation (FPNW) and a NetWare DirectoryService Manager (DSMN). The former is now shipping as an addon for NT Server 3.51; the latter is in beta. Together, theseproducts facilitate bringing NT Server into a NetWare environment.They enable you to use existing NetWare client software withoutany modification, and administer both NT Server and NetWareservers from a single graphical interface. Microsoft is alsoexperimenting with dedicated telephone support for users convertingto NT Server from NetWare (800-833-9264). The promotional priceis $75 per call.Microsoft's new DirectX low-level game API and other Win95-specificAPIs for NT Workstation. Future Win95 versions will get moreof the NT APIs. In the short term, this means DOOM for Windows95 should run on NT as well. In the long run, it means a newgeneration of high-performance graphics in business applicationslike videoconferencing and presentation graphics can be developed.Unified administration tools in NT Server. This one's chancy.It's based on an off-the-cuff comment from a Microsoft contact,but NT's administration tools are due for a face-lift. I'mhoping for something similar to the Starfighter tools introducedin SQL Server 6.0-a single, integrated management interfacewith OLE Automation support. That would allow an administratorto use Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) as language to writemanagement scripts.We'll get this eventually, but maybe notin the SUR.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Programming Windows: Better the Devil You KnowBy:Martin HellerIN PARADISE LOST, Milton tells the tale of a rebellion in heavenled by Lucifer, one of the brightest archangels. The revoltfails, and when the rebel and his followers are cast into thepit, he reflects:"Here at leastWe shall be free Better to reign in Hell,than serve in Heav'n."Now, you may not agree with me, but I've long thought Lucifergot a bad rap. Think about it: How much free will does an angelhave? Could Lucifer have opposed God if it hadn't been God'swill? Didn't Lucifer's opposition cause God to kick Adam andEve out of that stifling Paradise and into the world wherethey belonged? Wouldn't it all have been too boring for wordsotherwise?Although he's certainly the archetype, Lucifer isn't the onlycase of demonization on record. Take Microsoft-and more specifically,Bill Gates. Many imagine Bill to be Satan, reigning in hellwith his 12,000-odd minions, instead of a nerdy Harvard dropouthacker with a strong sense of competition, an ability to seethe obvious, and a lot of good luck and perseverance. Theyview Microsoft as a unified demonic hierarchy, operating witha single malicious mind, instead of a mixed collection of fairlybright, underpaid people all with different agendas, tryingto operate as well as they can in a state of ever-changinggoals and e-mail overload.These same people buy Microsoft products-sometimes with justification,sometimes without. It's as though the old adage about nobodylosing his or her job buying IBM has shifted to refer to Microsoft.I wouldn't lose my job talking about word processors and spreadsheets,but what I really know about are development tools. Usually,when I ask Win32 programmers which C/C++ compiler they useand which they want tools for, they say "Microsoft."I'm not as sure. Readers, especially beginners, often send mee-mail requesting advice. After "What's the best language fora beginning programmer?" (Answer: "It depends"), the most commonquestion is "What's the best C++ compiler?" That answer isalso "It depends," although the parameters are slightly different.I currently recommend four C/C++ compilers for Windows platforms,from Microsoft, Borland, Watcom and Symantec. One salient pointis that all but Borland's come with essentially the same classlibrary, MFC (Microsoft Foundation Class). So if you hate MFC,or love Borland's Object Windows Libraries (OWL), buy Borland.If you love MFC, buy one of the other three. Typically Microsoft'sMFC version is slightly newer than Watcom's and Symantec's,but that only matters when something you need right away isadded to the class library.In addition, Microsoft offers the only compiler that's supportedon RISC platforms for Windows NT. That cross-platform strategyappeals to a lot of people, and certainly convinced me forawhile. But I no longer think it's terribly important. Exceptin specialized areas such as engineering, software sales onIntel platforms far outweigh sales on RISC platforms like Mips,Alpha and PowerPC. Because Windows 95 is Intel-only, Intel'sdominance will most likely continue. In addition, the powerof the P6 processor will make it awfully hard for the othersto continue to compete on performance, despite all the advantagesinherent in RISC designs-small dies, low cost and so on. I'mnot saying you should ignore the market for Win32 applicationson RISC machines, but it isn't a life-or-death consideration.From a performance standpoint, Watcom has consistently beenmy pick among compilers. There are always specific things eachcompiler does a little better than the others. I haven't hada chance to do a scientific comparison, but Watcom still appearsto hold an edge on code optimizations. On the other hand, Watcom'sprevious reliance on cryptic command-line interfaces has historicallyproduced an overall development package only a seasoned hackercould love.Keep it simpleThat's changed in Watcom C/C++ 10.5. The company has cleanedup its development environment a bit and added Visual Programmer,an excellent visual development tool that generates MFC code.Visual Programmer is a stripped-down version of WindowsMakerProfessional, licensed from Blue Sky Software. Symantec hasalso shipped Visual Programmer with its compiler.Visual programming has its pros and cons. It's flexible, andit's productive if the user interface is the most importantpart of the application. On the other hand, visual programmingcan isolate you from the underlying code, and sometimes thesimpler approach is just as effective. For 90 percent of theprograms I've worked on, I've found generating the application'suser interface with Microsoft's wizards or Borland's assistantsworks well and gets me to the meat of my programming in underan hour.In its latest compiler, Visual C++ 4.0, Microsoft has made anumber of productivity improvements that raise the bar forits competitors. The most important involve code reuse. Thenew Component Gallery is a stab at a code repository. The abilityto create and use OLE controls complements the ability to createand use C++ classes. Resource templates let you reuse dialogdesigns and other resources. The ability to create custom AppWizardsallows you to capture and distribute your own experience andstandards. Finally, for those of you who like to prototypein VB, the VC++ dialog editor can now import Visual Basic formswithin limits.Microsoft has addressed many of VC++'s shortcomings. The latestversion's development environment offers the option to rebuildonly files really affected by a header change. It also sportsmore convenient debugging, a beefed-up editor, incrementalcompilation and improved incremental linking. You no longerneed to compile to browse your code by classes and functions.You can finally create an OLE control container as well asan OLE control. The memory allocator-the cause of the "outof virtual memory" problem first made public in this columnlast July-has been completely rewritten.Many enhancements have been made to MFC. For example, the classesfor OLE controls have been integrated with the rest of theframework-there's no longer a separate OLE control developmentkit. And the support for OLE controls and their containersis built right into the CWnd class. An OLE control in a windowis treated as a special kind of child window. You can createan OLE control dynamically using CWnd::CreateControl or staticallyfrom a dialog template, with support in the dialog editor forplacing OLE controls in dialog templates just like any otherkind of controls.Along the same lines, two new classes encapsulate the OLE commondialogs for setting up printed pages and modifying the propertiesof OLE objects-CPageSetupDialog and COlePropertiesDialog. Similarly,new classes are provided for all the Windows 95 common controls(see "A Glossary of Common Controls")The list, tree and rich edit classes are a bit complicated touse by themselves, so the following view classes have beenadded: CListView, CTreeView and CRich- EditView. What's thesample program for the CRichEditView class? WordPad!The common controls aren't the only Win32 enhancements to MFC.It finally has real support for multithreading, in the formof synchronization object classes, to supplement the existingthread-creation functions and classes. Synchronization objectclasses provide an interesting alternative to separate synchronizationobjects. You can add the synchronization objects a class needsas data members, add the synchronization code needed to theclass member functions and have a thread-safe class ready todrop in place without further ado. This ease of use, however,sometimes comes at a cost to runtime speed.Database heavenMFC has finally gotten new classes for Data Access Objects (DAO)in other words, classes to allow C++ programmers to use thesame Jet database engine as Visual Basic and Access. Untilnow, the MFC database classes have been limited to using ODBCdrivers, and until now the ODBC drivers have been slower thanmolasses in January.The claim is that ODBC drivers are now much faster. I haven'thad a chance to test them, but there was certainly plenty ofroom for improvement. The DAO classes are reputed to be fasterthan ODBC classes when using MDB (Access format), dBASE, FoxProand Paradox databases; Excel and Lotus spreadsheets; and textfiles for data. The DAO classes-and the underlying Jet enginecan also use ODBC drivers, but this generally adds overheadand slows things down. The only advantage of using DAO is thatthe Jet engine can perform heterogeneous joins, which can bea big help when you're trying to build a table from multipledata sources.Building a DAO application with VC++ works much like buildingan ODBC. You start with AppWizard, select DAO database supportand pick a database. AppWizard knows only about MDB files,so if you want to use another kind of database at this pointyou need to attach it to an Access database. You have the optionof selecting a snapshot, dynaset or table for your recordset.You also have the options to detect dirty columns and bindall columns.Once you've generated your code you can use the dialog editorto design a data-entry form, and ClassWizard to bind controlson the form to fields in your recordset. You can use list boxes,combo boxes or grid controls to add browses, and you can populatethem from appropriately filtered and sorted recordsets.It'll take me awhile to absorb this, but at first examinationI'd say that DAO turns VC++ into a fairly serious databasedevelopment tool right out of the box, with no need for thirdparty libraries or drivers. I doubt Oracle is worried, butsome of the less-secure database tool vendors might well consider,to paraphrase Milton, wheth'r th' Almighty, who hath now builthere for his envy, might yet drive us hence.Senior Contributing Editor Martin Heller lives between heavenand hell in a place called Andover, Mass., with his wife, oneremaining cat and four children. In his spare time, Martinlikes to program computers. Contact Martin in the "ProgrammingWindows" topic of WINDOWS Magazine's areas on CompuServe orcare of the editor at the addresses on page 18.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Programming Windows: A Glossary of Common Controls -- New MFC classes for the Windows 95 common controls.By:Martin HellerControl Normal UseCAnimateCtrl This class displays successive frames of an AudioVideo Interleaved (AVI) clip during a lengthy operation.CHeaderCtrl This resizable button appears above a column oftext, allowing you to display more or less information in thecolumn.CHotKeyCtrl Create a hotkey with this window.CImageList Manage sets of icons or bitmaps.CListCtrl Display a collection of items, each consisting ofan icon and a label.CProgressCtrl This is a progress bar.CRichEditCtrl Include embedded OLE objects, and enter and edittext with character and paragraph formatting within this window.CSliderCtrl This is a trackbar.CSpinButtonCtrl Control up-down movement.CStatusBarCtrl This status bar resembles the MFC CStatusBarclass.CTabCtrl MFC class CPropertySheet is similar to this tab control.CToolBarCtrl This button bar resembles the MFC CToolBar class.CToolTipCtrl Implement a small pop-up text window that describesthe purpose of a toolbar button or other application tool.CToolBar This class implements its own tool tips.CTreeCtrl The Windows 95 Explorer uses this tree view.New DAO classes:CDaoWorkspace This class defines an open session, contains databasesand provides a mechanism for multidatabase transactions.CDaoDatabase Here, a single database connection is represented.CDaoTableDef This represents the schema of a database. Unlikethe ODBC classes, the MFC DAO classes let you manipulate yourdatabase schema. You can create and delete fields and evencreate and delete indexes.CDaoRecordset Select one or more columns from rows of one ormore database tables, as well as the field values for the currentrecord. A recordset is often the result of a query, representedby a CDaoQueryDef.CDaoException Handle unexpected conditions in the database.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Hot Picks: Stormy WeatherBy:Donna TapelliniThe wind whistles, trees bend and debris flies. Weather buffsand storm chasers will love the great storm videos in the EverythingWeather CD-ROM, created by the Weather Channel. View footageof blizzards and notorious hurricanes, including a 1938 NewEngland storm. Also on the CD are storm chasers' homemade tornadovideos, and full-color photos of lightning and other weatherphenomena. Customizable weather charts provide a variety ofclimatic data, from heaviest thunderstorm activity to highesttemperatures and most snowfall.$49.95 (street). Bureau of Electronic Publishing, 800-828-4766,201-808-2700 x152. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Hot Picks: Drive TimeBy:Eileen McCooeyLooking for new wheels, or just wish you were? Cruise throughPopular Mechanics Car Guide, 1996 edition, and get up to speedon more than 7,500 new and used cars, trucks, vans and recreationalvehicles. The CD has complete specs and pricing (includingdealer invoice), user satisfaction ratings, buying tips, pointerson loans and leasing, and more. Search for specific criteriasay, four-door sedans priced under $20,000-then compare theprospects side by side. And check out the car of your dreamsin a rainbow of colors!$30 (street). Books That Work/Hearst New Media, 800-242-4546,415-326-4280. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Hot Picks: Job Lists You Can Bank OnBy:Paul SilvermanIf you're tired of wading through the want ads in search ofthat perfect job, throw out the Sunday paper and boot up AdamsJobBank. This 10-diskette database includes more than 15,000employer profiles, placement agencies and job lines that yousearch by industry, state or position. Search results includecompany descriptions, benefits, contact names and phone numbers,common positions and required backgrounds for prospective employees.The program also offers interview, r sum and cover letter advice,as well as access to Adams' online postings and career center.$39.95 (street). Adams Media Corp., 800-USA-JOBS, 617-767-8100.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Game of the Month: Ready, Set, Go!By:Ian EtraSometimes the simplest ideas make the best games. It may bejust a simple card game, but Set has won seven best game awardsand recognition by Mensa. The "cards" in Set have symbols withfour features: shape, color, number and texture. The goal isto pick sets of three cards based on a single-but subtle-rule Each of the four features must be the same on all three cards,or different on each card. Think it sounds too easy? Set forcesyour brain to perceive patterns in a new way, and several variationskeep you on your toes. Play solo, against the computer, withanother player via modem or with up to nine others on the samePC. While Set may not have the glamour or visuals of the latestCD-ROM titles, it will keep you coming back for more (and it'llgive you a better mental workout than Minesweeper)$24.95. Set Enterprises, 800-351-7765, 602-837-3628. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Hot Picks: Tickle the IvoriesBy:Jim ForbesHelp a budding Beethoven learn music with the Piano DiscoverySystem. Bundled with a MIDI keyboard that attaches to yourcomputer, this CD uses activity-oriented software that teachesbasic music as well as fundamental keyboard techniques. Theinterface uses a town square, in which you visit various buildingsto learn and be entertained. You can also compose and recordyour own music. $199. Jump Music, 800-BUY-JUMP, 415-917-7460.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Hot Picks: Picture ThisBy:Diganta MajumderPhoto Op uses not just 350 photographs but numerous audio andvideo clips to document the work of Pulitzer Prize-winningphotojournalist David Hume Kennerly. The marketing on thisCD is a little overdone-even brief captions are accompaniedby lengthy sales pitches. Still, this is a vivid portrait ofthe past 30 years. It presents events ranging from the VietnamWar to the Simpson trial and personalities from Mikhail Gorbachevto Whoopi Goldberg. $24.95. Portland Software, 503-636-6026,fax 503-636-6039. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Hot Picks: Compelling RappellingBy:Tom PonzoAre you a rock-climbing daredevil? Are you challenged and awedby mountains and rock formations that make you question yourinner strength? Rock Climbing will ease the initial fears ofmaking that first climb, bringing you to the pinnacle of thisfast-growing sport in no time. Rock Climbing starts at themountain's base and takes you through the identification andproper use of the equipment necessary to get you to the top.Based on the book Mountaineering: The Freedom of the Hills,this CD-ROM provides eight to 10 hours of lessons on conqueringoverhangs, climbing steep faces, taking advantage of cracks,navigating cor- ners, rappelling, implementing safety techniquesand leading a climb.$49.95. Media Mosaic, 800-972-3766, 503-225-1988. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Book of the Month: Inside Windows 95By:Lori L. BloomerNo less than seven million copies of Windows 95 flew off theshelves in the five weeks after the operating system's release.Although some buyers are new to the Windows environment, othersare power Windows 3.x users looking to make a quick transitionto the new platform. It seems like most upgrade manuals arefor beginners-unless you count Inside Windows 95. Written byWINDOWS Magazine contributing editor Jim Boyce, this thicktome is geared toward the intermediate-to-expert user. It offershints and tips that experienced users will want, while sparingmany of the intricate explanations that populate beginner-levelbooks. It comes with a CD-ROM of Win95-compatible software.Boyce's book will help you quickly become the Windows pro youwere in the "old days."1,083 pages. $40. New Riders Publishing, 800-428-5331, 317-5815884. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. SnapshotsBy:Tom LaSusaFamous typing instructor Mavis Beacon will help you brush upyour typing skills for only a few dollars. Version 4.0 of MavisBeacon Teaches Typing adds a 3-D interface to the tutoringproduct, as well as content from classic books, power spellingand vocabulary, and enhanced artificial intelligence for betterskills analysis. $40 (street). Mindscape, 800-234-3088, 415897-9900. It's a bird it's a plane it's Comic Creator! Your kids can designtheir own comic strips using original heroes and villains,and the provided backgrounds. The software comes with characterhistories and story ideas, or kids can develop their own. Afterthey've created their masterpiece, they can even share theircomics on the Internet with a bundled Netscape Navigator. $39.95.Hearst New Media and Technology, 800-685-4026, 212-649-2818.SimIsle, Missions in the Rainforest is the latest member ofthe popular Sim games family. This time, you're working tosave the threatened sanctity of the rain forests and all itscreatures, great and small. You deal with everything from naturaldisasters to drug producers in order to maintain the exoticislands' delicate economic and ecological balance. Game playis enhanced with 3-D viewing, and actual tropical video andsound effects. $39.95. Maxis, 800-52-MAXIS, 510-933-5630. Midisoft Braveheart, the CD-ROM, explores both the recent movieand the actual struggle for independence in 13th-century Scotland.The program looks in-depth at the lives of the nobility, peasants,culture and art of the era. Follow animated reenactments offamous battles and view footage of warrior Mel Gibson fromthe motion picture. You can also assemble your favorite video,photos and artwork into a personalized slide show. $49.95.Midisoft Corp., 800-776-6434, 206-391-3610. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Here's How: Hire a Web-Building TeamBy:Julie R. BlumenfeldYou already know how to build your own World Wide Web site (see"Step-by-Step to a World-Class Web Site" in the July 1995 issueof WINDOWS Magazine), but you don't want to go through theexpense of buying a server or the hassle of finding an accessprovider.Internet presence providers are the answer. Yahoo has createda new section for them, and at press time the section alreadyhad 2,100 entries. You can get there by going to http://www.yahoo.comBusiness_and_Economy/Companies/Internet_Presence_Providers.Presence providers give you everything you need to get yourWeb site up and running, and they come in all shapes and sizes.Some work as consultants to help you build and market yoursite; others offer inexpensive server space rental and Webdevelopment; and some even furnish all of the above.With Yahoo's new list, you can browse the providers' sites tofind the one that best suits your needs. Most offer examplesof the pages and services with which they're affiliated. Youcan alsoe-mail the affiliated sites' Webmasters to see if they're satisfiedwith the provider. It's a great way to keep from getting tangledup in the Web.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. New on the Net: Go on a Virtual Job HuntBy:Julie R. BlumenfeldTired of pounding the pavement? Take your job search online.Employment sites are cropping up all over the Web to bringjob candidates and employers together. Here are some of theofferings:The Monster Board http://www.monster.comPost your resume or browse more than 50 job-listing categories.E-Span Interactive EmploymentNetworkhttp://www.espan.comThis searchable job library has more than 3,500 openings with1,700-plus employers.Career Mosaichttp://www.careermosaic.comAlong with its J.O.B.S. database, this site provides a Usenetsearch and an entry-level section.Tech Careershttp://techweb.cmp.com/techweb/techweb/careers/careers.htmlThis resource offers technical job listings, salary surveys,search engines and links to related sites.Intellimatchhttp://www.intellimatch.comFill out and post your structured resume, and employers willevaluate it using profile-matching software.Online Career Centerhttp://www.occ.comEnter your resume in HTML at this not-for-profit site. Includecolor, pictures, graphics and links.Winmag Online LocationsAmerica Online (Keyword: WinMag)CompuServe (GO: WINMAG)WWW (http://techweb.cmp.com/win/current/)Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Windows Online: Online NewsBy:Julie R. Blumenfeld- America Online has introduced Picture Place (Keyword: Pictureplace),a new service that lets users submit prints, slides or negativesfor digitization and delivery online within 24 hours. n TheWorld Yellow Pages Network (http://www.wyp.net) has placedthe Yellow Pages for the entire U.S. on the Web. Directoriesfor other countries are in the works. n CompuServe is testinga combination of online and wireless technologies that willallow members to send e-mail to other members' numeric or alphanumericpagers. n As part of its ongoing development, AT&T Interchangehas added Web access from within the service.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Windows Watch: Know What Works with Win95By:Julie R. BlumenfeldThinking of upgrading to Windows 95, but nervous that your currenthardware and software won't work? Before you buy, go to Microsoft'sWeb site (http://www.microsoft.com/windows/thirdparty.htm)to find out what works with Win95 and what doesn't. You candownload complete lists of hardware and software compatiblewith the operating system. The hardware list is 142KB; thesoftware list, 188KB. You'll also find information about theMicrosoft Plus Pack and products designed specifically forWindows 95.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Winmag Online: Have We Ever Covered ?By:Julie R. BlumenfeldYou no longer have to e-mail us to find out if we've coveredcertain products or topics; all you have to do is search ourissue library on the Web. We've implemented a search functionthat uses O'Reilly & Associates WebSite software. You'll findthe WinMag search engine at http://www.winmag.com/library/.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Recommended Downloads -- Superior SharewareAvailable on America Online (Keyword:  WinMag), CompuServe (GO:  WINMAG) andthe World Wide Web (http://techweb.cmp.com/win/current)Program Name/Description                    Registration        File InfoAMF Daily Planner and PIM 5.0:          $21.95 (upgrades $15)   WPIM.ZIPThere have been lots of changes to      Andrew M. Freeman       1.23 MBthis program since we last reviewed     P.O. Box 189it (Superior Shareware, January 1995).  Holbrook, NY  11741Its system-wide hotkeys, additionalfields, called ID and WinCIM e-mail support make it an affordable alternativeto retail power PIMs.Dear Diary 3.0:  You can record      $19.95 (+3.95 shipping)   DIARY.ZIP64KB of entries per day in this      Q&D Software Development    738KBdaily-journal program. It features   10B Sentinel Court          Requires:password protection, text search     Chatham, NJ  07928         VBRUN300.DLLand database compression. Viewa record for a specific day usingthe calendar window, or print arange of entries by date using this version's improved printing capabilities.Flute 1.5:  Record mouse and key-     Freeware             FLUTE.ZIPboard actions using a proprietary     Working Tile         692KBprogramming language that supports    59 Copeland Avenue   DDE and OLE automation. You can       Mirehouse, Whitehaventhen edit, rearrange or augment the   Cumbria, CA28 9HZ Englandresulting scripts with more sophis-ticated commands. Flute comes withseveral sample scripts to get you started.METZ Stop for Windows 95: Finish   $5 (+$5 shipping)        METZSTOP.ZIPwhat you start with METZ Stop for   METZ Software           141KBWindows 95. Click on this app in    PO Box 6699             Requires:the taskbar to shut down, restart   Bellevue, WA  98008     Windows 95log off or open a dialog box with the above options. METZ also accepts command-line argumentsfor controlling Win95 from a scheduler.Mr. Burns 1.0:  This app runs      $69.95                     BURNS100.ZIPdiscreetly in the background to    Esm Software c/o Mr. Burns 126KBmonitor which applications are     PO Box 176   launched and how long they've      Pierrefonds, Quebecbeen open. You can track your      H9H 4K9, Canadaown PC or online use, monitor unauthorized access to your machine or install the app on an employee's computer to encourage productivity.OsoSuite 1.1:  This shareware suite   $75                     OSOSUITE.ZIPcombines six oh-so-good OsoSoft       OsoSoft                 693KBprograms. It includes the latest      1472 Sixth Street       Requires:versions of AdMaker, an ad            Los Osos, CA  93402     VBRUN300.DLLdesigner; MultiLabel, a label designer; Rockford Professional,a business card creator; Filer, a File Manager replacement; Fonter,a font manager; and the WinClipclip-art organizer.PageMaster 1.6:  Go beyond          $49.95 (($69.95 for     PM32.ZIPsending basic pages to numeric or   e-mail support)         1.26MBalphanumeric pagers.  PageMaster    Omnitrend Software      Requires:lets you forward selected e-mail    15 Winchester Court     Windows NT orfrom any MAPI-compliant program     Farmington, CT  06032   Windows 95and send Microsoft Schedule+reminders. It will also notify you ifa phone line has rung and provide caller ID services.Private Cryptographer 1.25:  Private     $50                  ENCRYP.ZIPCryptographer uses a strong              Ivory Tower Software 172KBencryption algorithm to protect your     Richard Wagnerdata from prying eyes. It can view and   4319 West 180 Streetencrypt text files. Clipboard text or    Torrance, CA  90504entire directories using your chosen password.  One caveat: Keying in anincorrect password for decryption cancause data loss.WaveMaker 1.0:  Looking for that     $39                    WAVEMAKER.ZIPspecial effect for closing Windows?  Paul Keet              88KBWaveMaker lets you build sounds      12726 Southridge Drive Requires Windows 95from scratch by manipulating wave-   Surry, British Columbia  Windows NTforms. You can add harmonics,        V3X 3C6, Canadawhite noise and echoes for more complex sounds. The registered version can export your masterpieceto the WAV format.WebSpace Navigator 1.0 for Win32:    Freeware ($49 for support   WEBSPC10.ZIPWebSpace lets your Web browser       and online access)          4.16MBview Virtual Reality Markup Language Template Graphics Software  Requires pages on the Internet. You can explore  9920 Pacific Hts. Blvd.  Windows 95 and manipulate 3-D scenes and objects   Suite 200                or Windows with built-in links to other pages and  San Diego, CA  92121     NT, plus Web resources.  But you'll need a network                            browserconnection for browsing.--Compiled by Ian Etra.  Seen any cool shareware?  Contact Paul Silverman atthe addresses on page 18 and we'll send you a mug and T-shirt for each item wepublish.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Recycle Bin: Screen Saver O' the MonthTake the slopes to the office with the North American Ski AreaScreen Saver. This CD-ROM offers trail-map images from 25 majorski areas across the United States and Canada. There's alsoa foldout SkiData Guide with information for planning ski trips.To see the same data on screen, click on the resort name onyour wallpaper. You can also visit the company's Web site (http//www.lucky dog.com/skidata/) to hotlink to resorts for currentsnow reports, lodging rates and so on.$19.95. Cylogic, 800-CYLOGIC, 206-283-8800. Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Recycle Bin: This Means War!Hmmm, if this is the type of weaponry you can trade for a 386or 486, your new Pentium's probably good for a tank.Submitted by Alan Langley, Plano, Texas.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Recycle Bin: When is a CD-ROM Not a CD-ROM?When it's a tape backup drive, of course. Submitted by RomanRoytfeld, Brooklyn, N.Y., and J. Nelson McLean, Wenham, Mass.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Recycle Bin: A Miscreant MonitorRemove your rings before you set your fingers on this notebook'skeyboard. Submitted by Paul F. Murphy, Hinsdale, Ill.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Recycle Bin: Easter Egg O' the Month1) Start Excel 95.2) Scroll down to the 95th row of the spreadsheet.3) Click A95 (the first cell in the 95th row)4) Click the 95 row number button to select the whole row.5) Press the Tab key.6) Use your mouse to select Help/About Microsoft Excel fromthe menu.7) Hold down Ctrl and Shift and click on the Tech Support button.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Recycle Bin: EXPRESS ROUTE TO REDUCED PRODUCTIVITYSave your receipt. When you see how slowly your new Mac runsWindows 95, you'll want to trade it in for a PC. Submittedby Kenneth Ong, Bethpage, N.Y.Back to Headline List CopyrightWINDOWS MAGAZINE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Vol. 7  No. Give us a sign! We're looking for road signs or any signs thatGive us a sign! We're looking for road signs or any signs thatsay something funny and meaningful in a Windows PC context.If you see such a sign, take a picture of it and send the phototo Nancy A. Lang at the addresses on page 18. We'll send youa cool WinMag coffee mug and T-shirt for each item we publish.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-4IA059-000323-B029-40http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey16.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225518 text/html 79528HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:52:48 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:55 GMTContent-length: 79341Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey16.html Sample Issue Copyright 21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CAR TALK AUTOPSY REVEALS PERILS OF ENDEMIC DISTRUST (700 words) EPA'S 1996 AGENDA HOLDS A MIXED BAG FOR REFINERS AND MARKETERS (616 words) EAST COAST ROUNDUP RFG BENEFITS IN ATLANTA MAY BE OUTWEIGHED BY COSTS (293 words) NYMEX CUTS RFG OXYGEN SPEC TO 1.5 WT% YEAR-ROUND (245 words) STAR ENTERPRISE & SUBWAY CO-DEVELOPMENT STARTS IN PA & NJ (262 words) MIDWEST ROUNDUP ETHANOL ATTACKS CONCERN MINNESOTA ATTORNEY GENERAL (174 words) MARATHON EXPANDS RETAIL BUSINESS WITH KEIL BROS. (77 words) BRIMM SUPPLIES ETHANOL TO CIRCLE K IN IDAHO (65 words) COUNCIL OF GREAT LAKES GOVERNORS FUNDS ETHANOL RESEARCH (331 words) GULF COAST ROUNDUP DIAMOND SHAMROCK COMPLETES ITS TENDER FOR NCS CHAIN (181 words) TOTAL PETROLEUM PUTS ARKANSAS CITY REFINERY UP FOR SALE (255 words) VALERO CRITICIZES FLAW IN TOXICS RELEASE INVENTORY AND STUDY (328 words) WEST COAST ROUNDUP CALIFORNIA'S LATEST ESTIMATE SEES ADEQUATE RFG SUPPLY (252 words) GIANT SELLS E&P TO FOCUS ON REFINING AND MARKETING (271 words) CHEVRON REORGANIZATION COMBINES OFFICES & CUTS 130 JOBS (178 words) IN NEW TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY DEBATES EFFECTIVENESS OF OXYGENATES IN RFG (672 words) ALTERNATIVE FUELS UPDATE CALIFORNIA CHIPS AWAY AT ELECTRIC VEHICLE MANDATE (342 words) ILLINOIS PREPARES TO BEGIN VEHICLE INCENTIVE PROGRAM (225 words) NEVADA CERTIFIES WATER-BLEND AS AN ALTERNATIVE FUEL (286 words) NEW JERSEY FIRST TO EMBRACE NLEV, BUT RETAINS CONTINGENCY (389 words) WASHINGTON ROUNDUP API PETITIONS EPA FOR PHASE II NOX REPEAL (136 words) FIRST CAAA 1990 CHANGE PASSES HOUSE AND SENATE (199 words) EPA POSTPONES NOZZLE FLOW RATE DEADLINE FOR SIX MONTHS (199 words) ETHANOL WATCH ETHANOL WATCH (304 words) IN CNG MARKETS INTERNATIONAL JOINT VENTURE TO BUILD NGVS (520 words) MTBE WATCH MTBE WATCH (756 words) ETBE WATCH HOUSE RECONSIDERS TAX INCENTIVE (307 words) GASOLINE/DIESEL WATCH GASOLINE/DIESEL WATCH (420 words) SUPPLY/DEMAND WATCH SUPPLY/DEMAND WATCH (496 words) STATE INTELLIGENCE PROFILES STATE CLEAN AIR PROGRESS RANKED (630 words) ALTERNATIVE FUELS CALENDAR ALTERNATIVE FUELS CALENDAR (95 words) 21ST CENTURY FUELS - INDUSTRY SURVEY - SOME FUEL TAXES DROP AT START OF YEAR (125 words) Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CAR TALK AUTOPSY REVEALS PERILS OF ENDEMIC DISTRUST      President Clinton's October 1993 Climate Change Action Planestablished several projects, including "Car Talk," a collaborativeprocess that was originally designed "to develop measures tosignificantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions from personal motorvehicles, including cars and light trucks."        Unfortunately, Car Talk was marred by suspicion and distrustwhich eventually led to its failure, George Eads told an audience at arecent seminar, "Car Talk: An Autopsy Report," sponsored by Resourcesfor the Future (RFF).  Eads is a former Car Talk Committee member andis now an economic consultant for RFF.      Many of the groups participating in this failed effort are nowjoined in the Common Sense Initiative, the Ozone Transport AssessmentGroup and other co-operative ventures that are seeking cost-effectivesolutions to environmental problems.      One of the two committees with input into Car Talk was apresidentially appointed Advisory Committee of representatives of theauto industry, environmental community, state and local government and"others with potential solutions to offer."        In growing to include 29 members, that committee was an unwieldygrouping that included members with only tangential interest in theissue, said Eads.      The Advisory Committee was charged with developing"recommendations on sets of policies that would, if adopted, mostcost-effectively obtain a return to 1990 levels of greenhouse gasemissions from personal motor vehicles by the years 2005, 2015 and2025, with no return thereafter."      However, its efforts were hindered from the start by lack oftrust.   "This theme of lack of trust ran through the AdvisoryCommittee's entire existence," Eads explained.  "Many had beenadversaries for 25 years or more and were on opposite sides of manyissues even while the Car Talk process was going on."       This distrust was compounded by "actions large and smallthroughout the life of the Advisory Committee that helped destroy anyspirit of trust that might have begun to grow."       A three-way impasse developed that pitted automakers, thepetroleum industry and environmentalists/government officials.  Automakers refused to support any policy setting automatic "direct"actions, such as CAFE standards or "feebates."  The petroleum industryrejected any policy involving gasoline tax increases.  The thirdcoalition resisted "any policy that didn't support some `direct'instrument that would, in their view, have provided `certainty' offuel economy improvements," Eads said.      Although a draft final report was issued and members submittedcomments, no final report was produced.  Instead, two groups producedfinal statements:       (1) Automakers wrote a letter explaining why they could not agreeto the report and attached a version they would accept; and       (2) A group of 17 members put together a "majority report," whichthey asked the Interagency Steering Goup to submit to the president. Subsequently, it was "back to business as usual," Eads said.Roads Not Taken      According to Eads, three "roads not taken" could have achievedsome of Car Talk's early goals:      1. A voluntary commitment towards reducing fuel consumption,similar to the one set forth on March 22, 1995, in Germany to "reducethe average fuel consumption of passenger cars and multi-purposevehicles produced and sold in Germany by the year 2005 by 25%, basedon 1990 levels."      2. A pricing mechanism combined with a regulatory backstop, suchas a fuel tax or vehicle miles traveled, which could come into effectif deadlines were not met.  While this "absolute" form wasunacceptable to automakers, Eads claims that a "conditional" versioncould have been adopted.      3. An agreement to disagree, which outlined areas of generalconsensus while acknowledging that some members opposed certainpoints.  This did not materialize, however, because of the pervasivelack of trust among participants as well as member fears that signingthe document could lead to repercussions later on.      "Collaborative processes, especially ones involving long-timeopponents, require great attention to confidence building.  Confidencebuilding takes time and the right environment," Eads pointed out. Among his recommendations:      * Long-time opponents must resist temptations to take "cheapshots."      * Confidences must be scrupulously observed -- even minor ones.      * Opportunities must exist for private, off-the-record meetings      and for activities that are not really threatening but that      involve some minor degree of risk-taking.       * All parties must have interest in seeing projects succeed --      or, at least, not fail.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996EPA'S 1996 AGENDA HOLDS A MIXED BAG FOR REFINERS AND MARKETERS   Although U.S. EPA resounded its commitment to streamline andsimplify environmental regulations in its 1996 agenda published in theFederal Register, the agency will add new rules to its repertoire,including some that will cost refiners and marketers.     Some top items on the list curb heavy-duty vehicle pollution,finalize emissions trading and review national air quality standards.   Regulations that could be helpful to refiners include:   * Emissions trading:  The agency will advance its open-marketemissions trading intended to minimize transaction costs and harnessthe power of the marketplace to enhance air quality, the agency said. It will issue a final policy and model rule for open-market trading ofozone smog precursors, primarily volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and NOx by June 1996.   The program promises to provide more flexibility for companies totrade emission credits without prior state or federal approval, EPAreported.    * New source review: The agency will propose to simplify andstreamline the new source review program, which requires newly builtfacilities or those undergoing major modifications to obtain an airquality permit.  By excluding from the new source program activitiesthat have very little impact on air pollution, the program is expectedto save the industry at least $6 million per year, the agencyreported.    * Compliance-assurance monitoring program:  EPA is planning topropose a rule to introduce additional flexibility into itscompliance-assurance monitoring, expected to be completed by July1996.  A major departure from the agency's "command and control"tactics, the rule would shift the burden of performance monitoring toregulated sources, which would also "take proactive steps to minimizeemission exceedences."   However, other regulations may potentially require significant newinvestments by refiners and marketers, such as a national ambient airpollution review that will likely spark changes in either fuel orstationary source emission requirements, a more stringent diesel fuelspecification or changes in underground storage tanks.  Regulationsrefiners should look out for include:       * National ambient air quality:  The agency plans to review thestandards for sulfur dioxide, ozone and particulate matter (PM).  "Theozone and particulate matter reviews seek to incorporate newscientific and technical information that has become available sincethe last reviews," the agency reported.  Since 1987, when PM was lastreviewed, a growing body of scientific information associates PM withexcessive death rates, even at levels below the existing 24-hourstandard.  "The sulfur dioxide review...is intended to determinewhether further protection for certain exposed individuals is needed."   * Mobile heavy-duty engine emissions:  EPA expects to issue aformal rule proposal in February 1996, after issuing an advance noticeof proposed rulemaking Aug. 30 for public comment on requiringadditional nitrogen oxide, hydrocarbon and particulate matterreductions for heavy-duty highway engines, model year 2004 and beyond.   * 49-state car: EPA will issue its national low-emission vehicle(NLEV) program this month.  Tests are underway to determine whetherthe 49-state vehicle, modeled after California's, will also require aCalifornia-style fuel that is equally low in sulfur.  Some questionwhether the higher national fuel sulfur levels may impair thecatalytic converter and advances on-board diagnostics, such as theOBD-II systems now under development.   * Federal test procedures:  Will be developed for motor vehicleemissions.   * Toxics Release Inventory:  Expansion of the list of facilitiesthat must report under the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know law, including oil and gas producers and materials recovery,among others.     * Underground tanks:  Under the Resource Conservation and RecoveryAct, EPA expects to issue in December 1996 a final rule to exempt fromhazardous waste management requirements petroleum-contaminated soil,ground water and debris resulting from underground tank cleanups.  Atemporary exemption for such contaminated media is already in placeand has no sunset date.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996RFG BENEFITS IN ATLANTA MAY BE OUTWEIGHED BY COSTS   The debate over the use of RFG or low-Rvp gasoline in Atlantacontinued last month, as a BP Oil official noted that the areaconsidered the federal program but decided against RFG use.   "When Georgia was considering its fuel options in 1993 and 1994,two factors influenced its decision against RFG," said Kenneth Alfred,manager of clean fuels coordination for BP Oil.  "One was a concernover NOx increases due to oxygenate use, and the other was cost."   Concern remains that oxygenate use may increase NOx, said Alfred,even though the U.S. EPA recently changed its thinking on therelationship between oxygenate use and NOx emissions.  BP agrees withthe American Petroleum Institute that EPA has not proved that therewill be no NOx increases with increased summertime oxygenate use,Alfred said.  "EPA did not use the appropriate modeling techniques toreach its conclusions."   Alfred offered these arguments:   1.  Phase I Simple Model RFG has no NOx reduction requirement,giving no assurance that it would help the Atlanta market to cut NOx.   2.  Georgia air quality authorities recognized that Phase I RFGwould provide no NOx reduction benefits and only marginally more VOCreductions than Atlanta's summer 7.0 psi Rvp requirement.   3.  Carbon monoxide benefits are non-germane.  CO emissions are a wintertime issue, not a summer concern, and Atlanta does not have a COproblem.   While CO is included in modeling programs as an ozone precursor, itonly has a "minor impact" on ozone.  "It is a stretch to use it as aselling point for RFG in this market," said Alfred.  "The Atlantamarket would be far better served by evaluation and implementation oflocal stationary source NOx controls, which have been demonstrated tobe far more cost-effective than mobile source controls."Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996NYMEX CUTS RFG OXYGEN SPEC TO 1.5 WT% YEAR-ROUND   The New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) amended its futurescontract to 1.5 wt% for all 12 months beginning in March 1996.  FromNovember through February, NYMEX will allow delivery of RFG with anoxygen content of 2.0 wt%, to be designated "Oxygenated Program RFG,"but will not consider it a separate contract.   "In our research, we found the 1.5% minimum oxygen RFG cash marketto be extremely active in New York Harbor," said NYMEX President R.Patrick Thompson.  "These specifications will not only enable ourcontract to reflect retail demand beyond the New York metropolitanarea in the greater Northeast corridor, but also will make itconsistent with the predominant RFG standard nationwide."   The change will not affect NYMEX's dispute with the state of NewJersey over the attempt by that state to end its oxy-fuel season thisyear, spokeswoman Nachamah Jacobovits said.  New Jersey Department ofEnvornmental Protection officials attempted to "cancel" the season atthe last minute without prior EPA approval, which would have cutoxygen content to 2.0 wt% year-round instead of requiring 2.7 wt% inthe winter.  NYMEX won a suit against the DEP blocking the move, soNYMEX's higher standard will remain in effect through February 1996.   Several East Coast states have since ended their oxy-fuel programs,leading NYMEX to adopt the lower oxygen requirement.  "It will allowusers of the contract to avoid delivery risks associated with changesto the oxygenated fuels programs within the metropolitan area,"Thompson said.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996STAR ENTERPRISE & SUBWAY CO-DEVELOPMENT STARTS IN PA & NJ   Star Enterprise and Subway have entered into an agreement in thefast food company will lease space inside Star Enterprise owned andoperated Texaco-branded System 2000 stations in 26 East and Gulf Coaststates and Washington, D.C. The Subway franchisees will operate full-menu restaurants on-site.   Star also announced plans to open Taco Bell franchises in Floridaretail outlets this month.   The first co-developed outlets to open under the agreement will bein Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  A Subway linked to a Texaco brandedfood mart will open in Allentown, PA in January.  "We expect to openadditional Subway co-developed locations in the eastern part of thestate in the first quarter," said Jay Wetherby, Star Enterprisedistrict manager.   A Subway located in a Star Mart opened in November in Millville,N.J., with another opening in Mt. Laurel, N.J. at the end of December. Two additional Texaco-branded Star Mart/Subway combinations will openin Berlin, N.J. in the first quarter 1996.  While the Mt. Laurellocation seat for 20, other locations will only offer takeout food.   "New Jersey is a full-service state which means that customersdon't have to get out of their cars to gas up or pay," said JoeJantorno, Star Enterprise district manager.  "We, of course, want themto visit our Star Marts, so we had to find something to that wouldmotivate them to come inside, especially in the winter months wheneveryone would prefer not to leave the warmth of their cars.  We hopethat our alliance with Subway will be a good incentive to getcustomers inside."Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ETHANOL ATTACKS CONCERN MINNESOTA ATTORNEY GENERAL   Minnesota Attorney General Hubert H. Humphrey III expressed concernover radio spots sponsored by Minnesotans for a Fuel Alternative(MFFA) that questioned the safety and reliability of ethanol use insmall engines.   "What is in the best interest of the petroleum industry is notalways in the best interest of Minnesota," Humphrey said.  "What is inMinnesota's best interest is the air we breathe; the water we drink,swim and fish in; our economy; and the health of our children."   "Amoco's continued attack on the year-round use of oxygenated fuelsis a shortsighted attempt to increase Amoco profits at the expense ofMinnesota's clean air," said Jerry Orr, Executive Director of theAmerican Lung Association of Hennepin County, MN.   Although Minnesota does not require a specific oxygenate in its2.7% oxygenate blend law, ethanol has become the oxygenate of choicein Minnesota, according to a statement released by the AttorneyGeneral's Office.  Amoco claims that because there are no testing orblending tolerances in the Minnesota law, MTBE and ETBE cannot meetthe specification.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MARATHON EXPANDS RETAIL BUSINESS WITH KEIL BROS.   Marathon Oil Co. has signed a definitive agreement with Kiel Bros.Oil Co. of Columbus, IN, that increases Kiel's motor fuel business andextends the Marathon Brand presence in southern Indiana and Kentucky.   Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.  However, new purchase,lease and re-branding options to be exercised by Kiel Bros. will raiseits number of Marathon retail units to more than 150.  The supplyagreement between Marathon and Kiel Bros. took effect in December.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BRIMM SUPPLIES ETHANOL TO CIRCLE K IN IDAHO   Vancouver-based Brimm Energy Corp.  is now supplying ethanol-blended gasolines Circle K retail stations in Idaho on a year-roundbasis, Brimm said.   Circle K has 48 retail outlets in Idaho, and more than 2,500stations across the U.S.  Brimm energy also supplies ethanol to 20Circle K stores in Western Washington state.  Brimm Energymanufactures and distributes ethanol in the Northwestern and RockyMountain states.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996COUNCIL OF GREAT LAKES GOVERNORS FUNDS ETHANOL RESEARCH   Three ethanol research projects were among the ventures receivinggrants from the Council of Great Lakes Governors, the group said.  TheCouncil, through its Regional Biomass Energy Program (RBEP), will beproviding grants to a total of seven research projects focusing ondeveloping the region's renewable resources.   Ethanol research will receive more than 40% of the $323,800 givenby the group, according to Fred Kuzel, director of RBEP.  "Because ofthe amount of ethanol produced in this region, the [grants] SteeringCommittee has decided to make this research a priority," he said.  Theseven-state Great Lakes Region, which includes Illinois, Indiana andMinnesota, produces about 800 million gallons of ethanol per year, orabout 57% of the total U.S. production.  Ethanol research projectsfunded were:   "The Application of Waste Sugar Alternative Feedstocks to EthanolProduction" by Vienna Agricultural Research Center, IllinoisDepartment of Corrections.  This project, to receive $30,000 fromRBEP, aims to reduce the cost of ethanol production by supplementingthe primary feedstock (corn) with waste sugar from confectioners andbeverage manufacturers.   "Improved Alcohol Production from Corn Fiber Employing SSF withThermal and Ethanol Tolerant Yeasts" by the Laboratory of RenewableResources Engineering at Purdue University.  This project, to receive$60,000 from RBEP, will genetically engineer a strain of yeast culturethat can simultaneously ferment glucose and xylose sugars to ethanol. The project will also develop simultaneous sacrification andfermentation (SSF) technology in a multiple-stage fermentor system forrecycling yeast cells to improve ethanol yield from corn fiber.  Theproject is part of a larger on-going research sponsored by Amoco Corp.and the Consortium of Plant Biotechnology Research.    "Bioblended Fuel for Use in Light-Duty Compression IgnitionEngines" by the Automotive Engineering Technology Program at MankatoState University (MSU).  This project, granted $50,000 RBEP, willexamine the blending of biodiesel fuel with ethanol to form a bio-blended fuel for use in light-duty, compression ignition engines.   RBEP sends requests for proposals out in April.  For informationcall Kuzel at (312) 407-0177.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DIAMOND SHAMROCK COMPLETES ITS TENDER FOR NCS CHAIN   Diamond Shamrock, Inc. (DS) completed its purchase of  NationalConvenience Stores Inc. (NCS) on Dec. 18.  DS now owns the entireequity interest of NCS.  The company plans to integrate the operationsover the next six to nine months and to begin marketing gasoline underthe Diamond Shamrock brand at Stop N Go's gasoline outlets, with alllocations branded by fall 1996.   The merger agreement includes 661 Stop N Go convenience storesowned by NCS, for a price of approximately $260 million, or$27.00/share.  The merger has made DS the Number 1 gasoline marketerand c-store operator in Texas.   DS bought all validly tendered shares of common stock and warrantsto purchase NCS common stock on Wednesday, Dec. 13. Representing about94% of common stock, NCS security holders tendered 1,868,751 shares of common stock and 1,097,848 warrants.   Through its Stop N Go stores, NCS employs about 5,000 people in thestate.  NCS sells gasoline at about 595 of its stores.  DS has over2,000 branded retail outlets, including 835 Corner Stores.  DS now has1,500 company-owned convenience stores, 1,300 in Texas.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TOTAL PETROLEUM PUTS ARKANSAS CITY REFINERY UP FOR SALE   Total Petroleum Ltd. will close its 56,000 b/d Arkansas City, KS,refinery if it cannot find a buyer for the facility.  The company justrecently put the refinery up for sale and contracted Smith Barney tohelp unload it.  Some confidentiality agreements have already beensigned by interested parties, according to Total President and CEOGary Jones.   The refinery has a low complexity and has been marginallyprofitable for five years, Jones said.  "On a stand-alone basis it isprofitable," he said, explaining that the facility does not fit intoTotal's strategy of moving "capital investments toward marketing andlogistics.  The balance in the Mid-continent is such that we arecurrently long on product."    The gasoline and diesel fuel that is produced at the refinery issold on the spot market, Jones said.  The  company relies on its68,000 b/d Ardmore, OK, refinery to supply all of its retail outletsin Kansas and Missouri, he said.  Total has invested heavily inupgrading that facility in recent years and no longer needs theArkansas City refinery to meet its needs.   "It is a good refinery," Jones said.  "We haven't invested much init in the past few years, but it is in good shape environmentally," hesaid, noting that a buyer would have to make some investments to meettoday's more stringent environmental standards.  "This refinery willfit someone else's needs better than ours."  Should Total be forced toclose the facility, it would become the fifth Kansas refinery to shutdown in the last decade.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996VALERO CRITICIZES FLAW IN TOXICS RELEASE INVENTORY AND STUDY   Valero Energy Corp. wrote to the U.S. EPA protesting the way anenvironmental group interpreted its Toxics Release Inventory (TRI)data, contending the group made its Corpus Christi, TX refinery looklike a four times worse polluter than it really is.  The TRI lists thetoxics emissions levels on an annual basis of facilities that use,manufacture or process, certain levels of toxic chemicals.  Thisthreshold includes all U.S. refineries, which must report on emissionsof 586 toxic chemicals.     Last month, the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) released a reportthat identified Valero as one of the most-polluting refineries, on thebasis of emissions in relation to crude input capacity.  However, asValero pointed out in a letter to Lynn Goldman, assistantadministrator, EPA Pesticides and Toxic Substances, Valero primarilyprocesses heavy resid oil, not crude.   "When EDF reviewed Valero's refinery, it inaccurately assumed thatValero's throughput consisted only of crude oil processing (29,000b/d), when our actual processing throughput was 122,919 b/d (crude andresid oil) for 1992," wrote William Greehey, Valero CEO.  "Thiscalculation inaccurately resulted in our emission per barrel ofthroughput being reported as four times higher than it actually is." Valero should have been ranked 103 on EDF's list, not 27, wroteGreehey.   In addition, Valero pointed out that its TRI emissions total for1992, the year in question, included emissions from its marine loadingfacility, which were not required under TRI guidelines.  "Valerorecently installed a marine vapor recovery unit that eliminatesapproximately three million pounds per year of volatile organiccompounds from Corpus Christi's air," Greehey added.   Valero has installed the best available control technology atCorpus Christi, wrote Greehey, noting that Texas recently presentedthe company with its Environmental Excellence Award.  "We are proud ofour environmental record and we believe that EDF's use of TRI data hasunfairly damaged our reputation," wrote Greehey.  "When TRI data arenotably misused, would EPA be willing to assist in setting the recordstraight?"Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALIFORNIA'S LATEST ESTIMATE SEES ADEQUATE RFG SUPPLY   California refiners have the capacity to produce enough RFG meetingPhase 2 specifications even if demand next year surges beyond 900,000b/d, says the California Energy Commission (CEC) in its latest"Supply/Demand Balance Update."   CEC, the California Air Resources Board (CARB), refiners and otherinterested parties have been studying RFG implementation through theCalifornia RFG Advisory Committee.  After reviewing gasoline demanddata for the past several years, CEC has determined that the mostlikely demand level next year will be 890,000 b/d.  Even with theclosure this summer of two small refineries, Powerine and Pacific,maximum Phase 2 RFG production capacity for California refiners is962,000 b/d, according to industry input provided to CEC, leaving amargin of 72,000 b/d.  Even under its high-demand scenario of 917,000b/d, "supplies of CaRFG for 1996 should be adequate."   CARB has recommended that the mitigation fee be 15 c/gal, andpublic comments made at a policy workshop generally supported thatlevel, said Allan Hirsh, CARB spokesman.  CARB staff will review thewritten comments and prepare a final recommendation for the full CARBBoard, which will vote on the proposal at its Jan. 25 meeting.   In January, CARB will finalize the circumstances under which arefiner can request a waiver, but Hirsch said that these are only foremergency situations beyond a refiner's control.  Some of the waiversgranted refiners under the clean-diesel program in 1993 were disputedby competing refiners as too generous, both in terms of the dieselvolumes affected and the waiver fee.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GIANT SELLS E&P TO FOCUS ON REFINING AND MARKETING   Giant Industries, Inc. is downsizing after its recent acquisitionof a Bloomfield, NM, refinery by selling off its oil exploration andproduction business to focus on refining and marketing operations. Giant will upgrade and debottleneck the 16,000-b/d Bloomfield plantand the 26,000-b/d Ciniza, NM, refinery, but has not settled on theamount of capital to spend.  It will likely construct a new splittertower at Bloomfield as well.  The changes are expected to increasecapacity at both refineries.     The company is also looking to expand its company-owned andoperated retail system of some 57 outlets, primarily in southern Utahand southern Colorado near the "Four Corners" area.  "Although there'stalk about bringing in jobberships or dealerships from time to time, Ithink we'll continue to be a company-owned and operated retail andconvenience outlet system for now," said spokesman George Seitts. Giant recently installed pay-at-the-pump readers and redesigned someof its outlets.    The exploration and production division reported losses for everyyear since 1991, up until the most recent nine months ending Sept. 30,when it reported pretax earnings of $217,000.  However, the divisionmust also deduct "substantial" ceiling test writedowns from that. Despite the beginnings of a turnaround -- oil production will be 35%higher in 1995 than in 1993 -- E&P contribution has not metexpectations, the company reported.   "We are under no pressure to 'fire sale' these assets," said JimAcridge, Giant's Chairman and CEO, "as the volume and quality of ourreserves has greatly improved over the last two years as a result ofthe efficiencies and efforts of a new management team hired in early1994."Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CHEVRON REORGANIZATION COMBINES OFFICES & CUTS 130 JOBS    Chevron is restructuring its U.S. gasoline marketing business,combining regional offices, consolidating support functions and re-focusing the organization on sales and growth.  The restructuring isscheduled to be finished by summer 1996.   The reorganization will eliminate about 130 positions, create somenew jobs and relocate others.  Chevron's non-service station workforcewill be downsized 5% to 1,900.   The Houston and Atlanta offices responsible for the former Centraland Southern gasoline marketing "regions" will combine to form a newEastern Sales Center based in Atlanta.  The San Ramon, CA, and LaHabra, CA, offices handling the former Northwest and Southwest"regions" will form a Western Sales Center based in La Habra. Headquarters and specialized support for gasoline marketing willremain based in the San Francisco Bay Area.   Operations, business services and station development functionsonce managed regionally will be managed on a national basis. Specialized groups at the Bay Area headquarters will emphasize Chevronbrand strategy and development, convenience store marketing and jobberrelations.  The Hawaii retail gasoline marketing structure willcontinue as a combined sales and distribution unit.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INDUSTRY DEBATES EFFECTIVENESS OF OXYGENATES IN RFG   Some refiners claim that the use of oxygen in gasoline only reducesin CO emissions when new vehicle technology is used.  Fuel oxygenatesproponents claim that an oxygenate addition to RFG provides airquality and toxics improvement that is superior to low-Rvpalternatives.  An Auto/Oil study has added fuel to the fire on bothsides of that debate.   Tests performed on the emissions benefits of California Phase 2 RFGand a gasoline blended to the same specifications, but without anoxygenate component, showed that differences between the two gasolineswere generally not statistically significant.  Oxygenate proponentsargue that the study's data only shows that there is little benefit tooxygen in gasoline and fails to take into consideration the benefitsof oxygenates.   Auto/Oil technical bulletin #17 suggests that the use of oxygen inRFG provides little, if any, emissions benefit, outside of reductionsin CO.  In fact, the only significant difference between oxygenatedand non-oxygenated RFG noted was 13% higher formaldehyde emissions inoxygenated RFG when used in an advanced technology fleet.   Auto/Oil performed the study to determine whether the oxygenaterequired in California Phase 2 gasoline would affect emissions inlater technology vehicles to the extent predicted in earlier work. Four fleets, ranging from older vehicles (model year 1983 to 1985) toan advanced technology fleet of prototype passenger cars, were tested.   "What [the Auto/Oil Study] tells us is that as the fleet continuesto turn-over, the benefit of mandatory oxygen will continue todecline," said Mike Ingham, manager of the transportation fuelsperformance unit of Chevron Research Corp.  "There continues to besome benefit to the use of oxygenates in older vehicles.  What we weretrying to do was run a clean test of the benefits of oxygenates."       "As for the issue of dilution, what the oxygenate industry wants todo is take credit for the benefits of splash blending and attributethem to oxygenates," said Ingham.  "With new technology, that benefitis not there.  If we need those types of benefits, a refinery cantweak the blend to hit the desired target.  It is not appropriate toclaim those as benefits of oxygenates."   Proponents of oxygenates have a different interpretation of thestudy, arguing that while the study does show that the addition ofoxygen in RFG provides few emissions benefits over RFG, it helps makethe case that oxygenates added to gasoline provide substantialemissions improvements.   "What is important to consider here is the difference between'oxygen' and 'oxygenates'," said Fred Potter, president of InformationResources Inc.  "When you add oxygenates to RFG, it dilutes thesulfur, olefins and aromatics in the blend with a cleaner-burninghydrocarbon that gets more of its energy from burning hydrogen andless from carbon.   "During the Auto/Oil study, these components were often back-blended into the gasoline, thus eliminating the emissions gains thatare normally made by oxygenate addition," said Potter.  "Afterblending these high-emission components back into the fuel, the onlything left in the oxygenated RFG was the oxygen itself, which, outsideof carbon dioxide advantages, yielded little emissions improvementover the  non-oxygenated RFG when new vehicle technology was used.  Itis also important to point out that the Auto/Oil Study did not giveany credit to oxygenates for their octane improvements, which allowsfor fewer aromatics and olefins in the final fuel.  It also providesno stationary source credits when less octane production is requiredat the refinery."   "When I looked at the study, I noticed that the properties of thetwo gasolines are the same except for the oxygenates," said Cal Hodge,manager of marketing and regulatory analysis, Valero Energy Corp. While the technical bulletin did not say what the octane numbers werefor the two gasolines, it is likely that the non-oxygenated gasolinelost at least two octane numbers, he said, noting that this will causeproblems for cars that are sensitive to octane.   Ingham noted that the octane level of the oxygenated RFG wasslightly higher, but that both had adequate octane numbers over 90(R+M)/2.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALIFORNIA CHIPS AWAY AT ELECTRIC VEHICLE MANDATE   California held a public hearing to accept comments on amending theZero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) mandate and unveiled three alternativeemission reduction concepts.    The new plan under formulation may be more palatable to automakerswho balked at the 2% ZEV mandate, which would have required them tooffer for sale 20,000 electric cars in 1998 and another 10% in 2000. The new plan, expected in mid-to-late-January for a Marchpresentation, drops the 2% mandate for the first four years of theprogram.  Carmakers estimate that the revised plan will still resultin 14,000 electric cars being offered in 1998.   Modifications are drawing attention in the East becausenortheastern states adopted a plan that mirrors California's,including the ZEV option.  Changes to California's plan may requirechanges in those states which have adopted the controversial ZEVmandates, which at this time can only be met with short-range,expensive electric vehicles.     If the ZEV program was to begin in 1998, as originally mandated,the vehicles would displace 14 tons per day of pollution by 2010.  Thechallenge lies in finding equivalent reductions when "the cherry treeof options has already been picked," one source said.    Reformulated gasoline, enhanced inspection and maintenance,vehicle scrappage and the LEV program (including ZEVs) have all beencounted as part of the on-road mobile source state implementation planin California.  Yet even if the ZEV program is fully implemented,California would fall short of meeting its Clean Air Act requirements.    While the program  will "encourage" ZEVs with demonstrations andcredits, the board will not require them.  Secondly, a combination ofmarket forces and regulatory requirements will include a "market-basedZEV launch" with incentives and a suspension of the mandate through2003.  It would also add introduction of 2,000 advanced batteries andlong-range vehicles in 1998 through 2000, with credits for the sale ofadditional vehicles.  By 2004, CARB would require automakers to offerfor sale 10% ZEVs.  The last concept would maintain the mandate, butwith slower phase-ins, starting with 1%, and moving to 2%, then 5%,then 10%.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ILLINOIS PREPARES TO BEGIN VEHICLE INCENTIVE PROGRAM   Gov. Jim Edgar (R-IL) has signed into law a measure to promote theuse of alternative fueled vehicles.  The bill, known as the AlternateFuels Act, becomes effective within 90 days.   The Act will establish a rebate program which allows fleet ownersand operators to apply for one of three types of rebates, whichinclude: a conversion cost rebate;  an original equipment manufacturerdifferential cost rebate; and a fuel cost differential rebate -- basedon a three-year life cycle cost.  The rebate shall not exceed $4,000per vehicle, over the life of the rebate program.   The Act authorizes the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency toestablish an ethanol research program to cut production costs orincrease the viability of ethanol fuels by developing new enginetechnologies and ethanol refueling facilities.   The Act will be funded by establishing a user fee of $20 pervehicle required of public fleets with 10 or more vehicles.  Allstate, county, and local government vehicles (rental, antique andelectric) along with motorcycles are exempt from the fee.   In FY96, up to $200,000 may be appropriated from the fund to payfor administrating the program.   The ethanol research fund willreceive 20% of the remaining funds, and 80% will be appropriated tothe rebate programs.  The program will be in effect until Dec. 31,1999, or until funds are no longer available.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996NEVADA CERTIFIES WATER-BLEND AS AN ALTERNATIVE FUEL   A-21, a fuel comprised of 55% water and 45% naphtha and bondedtogether by a proprietary surfactant,  can now be used to meetNevada's definition of an alternative fuel.     "This fuel can be dispensed in existing fuel infrastructure, has avery low fire hazard potential, can be used in both compression-ignited engines and spark-ignited engines and has emission levelssignificantly below California Air Resources Board (CARB) tier 1reformulated gasoline emission standards," according to a NevadaDivision of Environmental Protection recommendation that A-21 beincluded in the state's clean fuel program.   State agency fleets of 10 or more are required to incorporatealternative fuel vehicles starting with the 1995 fiscal year. Nevada's definition of alternative fuel follows CARB standards andincludes ethanol, methanol, RFG, natural gas, propane and hydrogen.     The request to include A-21 was originally made by the A55 LimitedPartnership.  The Reno-based company has joined engine manufacturerCaterpillar Inc. in a venture company called Advanced Fuels tocommercialize A-21.      A Nevada Division of Environmental Protection demonstration of thefuel in a 1991 Taurus showed emissions results that surpass Fordstandards for 2002 and beyond.  The Taurus and a Reno city bus alsodemonstrated increased fuel efficiency, eliminating the range issueother alternative fuels are trying to overcome.     A-21 is being demonstrated in a stationary generator owned bySierra Pacific Power Co., and Nevada is exploring mining applications. Other states have expressed interest in A-21 as a cost-effective wayto reduce emissions.   An expert questioned the viability of using naphtha.  "The directuse of naphtha in a fuel will undermine its conversion value in atypical U.S. refinery," said Herb Bruch, president of B&B Associatesand member of the 21st Century Fuels Advisory Board.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996NEW JERSEY FIRST TO EMBRACE NLEV, BUT RETAINS CONTINGENCY     New Jersey blazed the trail for northeast states this week,becoming the first to sign a rule requiring it to participate in thetenuously pending national low emission vehicle (NLEV) program, ifthat plan is passed.  As a contingency, the state ruled for opting-into the Ozone Transport Commission's program (OTC-LEV) if thenationwide plan falls through.   The state's Department of Environmental Protection said it prefersNLEV because it provides emission controls more stringent than presentmodel cars, but at less expense than the technology used inCalifornia.  Also, cleaner cars would be sold nationally, rather thanjust in the 12  northeast states plus the District of Columbia, thedepartment said.  Other states, such as Rhode Island andMassachusetts, are considering also adopting NLEV, which would beginwith 1997 model-year cars (OTC-LEV starts with the 1999 model year).     "Because a substantial amount of air pollution travels across statelines into New Jersey," said Bob Shinn, New Jersey Department ofEnvironmental Protection.  "It's important to adopt measures that willhave broad impact on air quality, which will help us meet our CleanAir Act requirements, and will keep New Jersey economicallycompetitive with the rest of the country," he said.   U.S. EPA has set a NLEV resolution deadline of  Feb. 15, by whichtime automakers and the Northeast states must either voluntarily adoptit, or states will likely begin implementing the "backstop" OTC-LEVplan adopted earlier this year to achieve air quality control.   Theoptional zero emission vehicle mandate, adopted by New York,Massachusetts and Vermont, remains the chief sticking point in thediscussions between the two groups.  Neither of New Jersey's plansincludes a provision for the sale of zero emission vehicles.    "Each state may adopt whatever measure it wants as long as it meetsthe equivalent air quality reductions," explained Dave West, chief ofNew Jersey Bureau of Transportation Control.  "Each does notnecessarily need to adopt OTC-LEV; it may come up with its own plan. However, that would be very difficult because the reductions areconsiderable from the OTC-LEV program."   Each state must still form its alternative in a revised stateimplementation plan by Feb. 15, and enforce it program with stateregulations.  Although each state will have its own plan, pollutionmitigation is regional because air quality is affected by pollutioncrossing state lines, West added.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996API PETITIONS EPA FOR PHASE II NOX REPEAL   In the first attempt to unravel Phase II RFG, the AmericanPetroleum Institute (API) filed in early December a petition with U.S.EPA, seeking repeal of EPA's requirements to reduce summertimenitrogen oxides (NOX) emissions.   EPA estimates NOX reduction costs to range $5,000/ton, while API'sestimate exceeds $10,000/ton.  API "remains convinced that EPA'sestimates of gasoline desulfurization costs and the cost-effectivenessof NOX reductions are far too low because of flawed refinery modelingassumptions."   API claims that consumers would face higher costs because refinerswould have to make significant capital investments to comply with theNOX rule.     "EPA's RFG NOX reduction requirements reflect an overstatement ofair quality benefits, are not a cost-effective strategy for ozonecontrol, and are inconsistent with the Clean Air Act Amendments of1990 and the 1991 RFG regulatory negotiations," API said.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FIRST CAAA 1990 CHANGE PASSES HOUSE AND SENATE    The first modification to the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 --making Employee Commute Options (ECO) reductions optional -- passedthe House and Senate last month.   H.R. 325 was sponsored by Rep. Don Manzullo (R-IL) in the House andSen. Rick Santorum (R-PA), in the Senate.     Under current law, states with severe or extreme ozonenonattainment areas are mandated to use trip reduction as part ofState Implementation Plans.  Manzullo's office noted that "it has beenfound and the EPA has agreed that even if the ECO mandate wasimplemented to the letter of the law, at best, it would have only a`minuscule' impact on clean air.  In the end, the cost of the ECOprovision would far exceed any benefit as the law is currentlywritten."   Also known as the employee trip reduction plan, the rule requirescompanies with 100 employees or more in the highest nonattainmentareas to reduce commuter car trips 25%.  Though previously mandatory,the change would make the rule optional and leave enforcement up tothe states.   "The bill gives states the option to use car pooling or other tripreduction programs in their plan to attain clean air standards,"Manzullo said.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996EPA POSTPONES NOZZLE FLOW RATE DEADLINE FOR SIX MONTHS   The Environmental Protection Agency has extended by six months thedeadline to comply with its new gasoline pumping rate restriction (seestory.     The previous deadline was Jan. 1, 1996, but a notice from thedirector of EPA's Office of Mobil Sources said the agency is extendingit to July 1, 1996.  The change needs approval by the Office ofManagement and Budget.   The extension will give retailers more time to comply with the newregulation, which limits the rate at which gasoline is dispensed fromthe pump to 10 gallons per minute (GPM).  Some dispense gasoline atrates up to 13 GPM.    Several trade associations had requested the extension because EPAhad not set testing specifications with guidelines on how to comply. In addition, the groups said, devices to limit pumps to the new flowrate were not available.     "We  think it would have been chaotic if EPA had stayed with theJanuary deadline," said Petroleum Marketers Association of AmericaVice President of Communications David Morehead.   The EPA rule contradicted a California Air Resources Boardcertification of Stage II vapor recovery devices for service stationpumps with dispensing rates of 12 and 13 gallons per minute, accordingto API.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ETHANOL WATCH   Gulf Coast rack ethanol traded last month at $1.17/gal for domesticsale, ranging $1.18-1.22/gal for export.  Some ethanol activity(especially for January delivery) continued in late December.  Whileethanol prices reflected mid-to-late-December wrap-up deals, manyplayers were already turning their focus to January/February business.    Gulf Coast export traffic was slow, which was partially an effectof high U.S. ethanol prices but also a result of lagging Braziliandemand.   Though near-term ethanol prices were expected to remain firm, someexcess product was expected to be available for January/Februarydeals.   The West Coast reportedly had a two-tiered market, with contractbarrels at $1.24/gal and spot ethanol deliveries at $1.28/gal. Explaining the recent price surge, a source said oxy-fuel blendersunder-contracted their winter requirements, expecting "a loose spotmarket" this season, but supplies have been tight for several weeks. Also, railroad consolidations in 1995 brought service reductions, soit often takes twice as long to deliver ethanol from the Midwest.   Supply tightness persisted in the Midwest.  Chicago prices ranged$1.18-1.22/gal, a supplier said, while an independent refiner/marketerplaced other markets in the $1.19-1.22/gal range.  Some users cut backthe amount of ethanol blended into gasoline from 10 vol% to 5.7 vol%per gallon.  The current supply tightness will probably be alleviatedonce oxy-fuels demand begins to slow down in mid-February, thesupplier said.     An accident at Archer Daniels Midland's (ADM) largest ethanol plantin Decatur, IL, last month will not impact the company's ethanolproduction, the company said.  One of the boilers at a cogenerationfacility ruptured, said company spokesperson Carla Miller.  Therupture occured in an area which had been shut down for maintenance.The accident followed reports over previous weeks that ADM was havingproduction problems at at least one of its plants.  ADM also withdrewfrom the spot market and put customers on allocation.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INTERNATIONAL JOINT VENTURE TO BUILD NGVS   EDO Corp. and its majority-owned EDO (Canada) Ltd. of Calgary,Alberta launched a joint venture with three Japanese companies in theU.S. and international natural gas vehicles (NVGs) market.  EDO makesLiteRiderR, a lightweight all-composite CNG cylinder availableworldwide.  Japanese partners are: Toray Industries, Inc., a carbonfiber supplier; Sumitomo Corp., a commodities trader; and Sumitomo'swholly owned U.S. subsidiary Sumitomo Corp. of America.    As part of the alliance, the Japanese companies invested CAN$5million for newly issued common and preferred shares of EDO (Canada)Ltd.  Toray holds 9.9% and the Sumitomo group 6.6% of the company. The alliance covers technical and marketing issues facing the NGVindustry and will target expansion in the U.S. and the Pacific Rim.     A technical task force was set up to advance state-of-the-artcomposite NGV fuel storage.  Initially, the task force will focus onincreasing the cost-effectiveness of NGV fuel storage.                      This Month          Last Month          Year Ago                     $/Bu.  $/Ton      $/Bu.   $/Ton         $/Bu.Corn (#2,Y, 30 D) - *Chicago             $3.4400  $135.39  $3.2275   $127.03     $2.2450   Kansas City      3.5650    140.31   3.3450    131.66      2.2800   Minneapolis      3.0750    121.03   2.9025    114.24      2.0550   Omaha            3.2700    128.70   3.0750    121.03      2.1350   St. Louis        3.5600    140.12   3.3650    132.45      2.3900   Toledo           3.4100    134.21   3.1575    124.28      2.1300Barley (#2) - *Duluth              $2.9000  $133.16   $3.1000  $142.35      1.9800   Portland         3.845    176.56    n/a      n/a          2.5100Cane Molasses - Baltimore                    $90.00             $90.00       $82.50   New Orleans               75.00              75.00        66.25Sorghum (cwt, #2, Y) - *Kansas City        $6.240   $245.60   $5.610   $220.81      $3.875   Texas High Plains  6.6500   305.36  6.1900   243.64       4.5200Wheat - Kansas City (#1)    $5.3700  $197.07   $5.4050  $212.74      4.3250* Denotes Graph Series  Source: Information Resources, Inc., USDA                         This Month      Last Month       Year AgoCorn Gluten Feed (21%)   $/Ton           $/Ton            $/Ton   *Illinois Points      $117.00         $120.50          $84.00    Kansas City           120.00          125.00           92.00 Corn Gluten Meal (60%)                      *Illinois Points      $330.00         $330.00          $240.00    Kansas City           337.50          337.50           245.00 Distillers' Dried Grains (27%)                               *Illinois Points      $134.50         $140.00          $110.00    Lawrenceburg          149.00          143.50           120.00Soybean Meal (44%)                          Decatur               $221.00         $192.00          $147.25    Kansas City           219.50          196.60           148.30    Memphis               224.90          202.10           150.20    Minneapolis           214.20          187.70           138.60    St. Louis             228.50          204.00           156.00 * Denotes Graph Series  Source: Information Resources, Inc., U.S.D.A.                   Gasoline & Octane Component Pricing                               ($/Gallon)Product/Gulf Coast Spot  January         December         ChangeUnleaded Regular Gasoline  0.4860        0.4570           +.0290Midgrade Gasoline          0.4940        0.4820           -+0120Premium Gasoline           0.5310        0.5195           +.0115Benzene                    0.86          0.85             +.01Toluene                    0.76          0.76             .00Xylene                     0.98          0.98             .00Methanol                   0.31          0.34              -. 03Methanol (contract)        0.42          0.42             +.00Ethanol/Location           January       December         ChangeBellingham, WA             1.24          1.22             +.02Bettendorf, IA             1.19          1.17             +.02Cedar Rapids, IA           1.18          1.16             +.01Chattanooga, TN            1.14          1.12             +.02Chicago, IL                1.18-1.22     1.15-1.20        +.03/+.02Cincinnati, OH             1.21          1.19             +.02Decatur, IL                1.16          1.15             +.01Denver, CO                 1.25          1.23             +.02Detroit, MI                1.18          1.16             +.02Garden City, KS            1.19          1.11             +.08Hanford, CA                1.22          1.21             +.01Indianapolis, IN           1.15          1.14             +.01Knoxville, TN              1.14          1.12             +.02Loudon, TN                 1.14          1.12             +.02Memphis, TN                1.18          1.16             +.02Minneapolis, MN            1.22          1.20             +.02Nashville, TN              1.17          1.15             +.02Niles, MI                  1.17          1.15             +.02Peoria, IL                 1.15          1.14             +.01San Francisco, CA          1.28          1.27             +.01   Source: Hart/IRI Fuel Information ServicesBack to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MTBE WATCH   Gulf Coast spot MTBE finished December at 92 c/gal on continuedsupply concerns.  The spread between East Coast and Gulf Coast MTBEprices widened slightly from the usual 2.5-3.0 c/gal range to a strong4-6 c/gal.     Octane values for East Coast MTBE were reportedly as high as$1.10/gal, particularly for premium RFG and RFG for use in oxy-fuelareas, as a result of continued tight supplies.   Gulf Coast spot MTBE prices were also considered "fairly strong."  However, the market was said to have quieted considerably by the endof the month, and a trader noted that prices for later- month MTBEdelivery were considerably lower.   Thanks to the latest rise in MTBE spot prices and lower feedstockcosts, producers are again seeing production margins climb torespectable levels.     "Overall, 1995 was a fairly good year for MTBE producers, as faras margins are concerned," said Jim Thomas, vice president of marketanalysis for Houston-based Bonner and Moore Associates.  "After themethanol price corrected itself at the end of the first quarter, MTBEmargins were fairly strong throughout the rest of the year."   Margins did feel a pinch in late-October and early-November, butthe summer gasoline season supported the product fairly well, saidThomas.    Incremental MTBE margins rose to a yearly high of 32 c/gal in May-June, a dramatic improvement over 1994, when the unusually highmethanol price pushed several MTBE producers to cut back or shut downsome production capacity.  The yearly high margin for 1994 was onlyabout 13 c/gal, which was seen in late-December.   Producers still using the A-B-C contracts are seeing strongermargins.  While some A-B-C contracts still exist, they are "rapidlydisappearing," Thomas said.  "The new contracts will be structured foreach individual producer and buyer."     Those contracts are expected to be related more closely to MTBE'sgasoline blend value, with a premium or penalty based on the currentmarket price.  "The new contracts will be closely related to themarket, and the band around that price will be fairly narrow," Thomassaid.   "MTBE margins are going to begin to stabilize soon.  We predictthat they are pretty much at their peak right now."   The current strength in MTBE spot prices is due in part to theclosure of Enron's 12,500-b/d MTBE unit in Houston, said Thomas.     "The market is sensing a short-term shortage," he said.  "Theunderlying fundamentals are not strong enough to support the latestprice increase."   The major variable in MTBE profitability is methanol, which hasremained weak since early 1995.  The other major input, butane, hasremained steady throughout the year.   Gulf Coast spot methanol traded in a steady 31-32 c/gal range withmost deals completed at 32 c/gal.  However, trade was very light. While a few chemicals-related deals may be completed during the lastweek of the year, most players expect to be out of the market untilearly January.   Spot methanol prices were kept in check by the current supply glut,and contract postings were expected to roll over from December toJanuary for most methanol producers.  At the end of December, only twomethanol producers have kept their list prices at 39 c/gal, with therest at 42 c/gal.  Meanwhile, transaction prices ranged in the mid-30s, with most deals around 35-36 c/gal.   Saturn Methanol Corp. plans to have its first methanol plant,located in Point Lisas, Trinidad & Tobago, on-line by late 1997. Construction on the 2,500-metric-tons-per-day (287-million-gallons-per-year) facility will begin in May 1996.  The capital cost for theplant has been estimated at $250 million, said Deo van Wijk, presidentof Saturn.  Lurgi Corp. will supply technology for the project.   Financing and product off-take agreements for the plant have beensecured, van Wijk confirmed.  "In order to receive the financing, atleast 80% of your production must be spoken for," he said.  Saturnwill sell all methanol produced at the facility.   While Saturn is a new company, formed in June 1994, its staff isdefinitely not new to the methanol business, noted van Wijk.  "Thepeople we already have onboard and those we will add when constructionbegins on the plant, have more than 200 years of combined experiencein the methanol industry.  For many of us, this will be the seventhmethanol plant we have built together.  This gives the company aunique advantage," he said.   Trinidad & Tobago "not only offers competitive natural gas prices,but also skilled labor, logistical advantages and duty-free access toboth Europe and U.S. markets and has the needed infrastructureavailable," said van Wijk.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996HOUSE RECONSIDERS TAX INCENTIVE    ETBE's future is in limbo as members of the House ofRepresentatives reexamine ethanol's 54 c/gal excise tax exemption. Members for and against the incentive are circulating "Dear Colleague"letters outlining their positions.  The main issue is the financialimpact of ethanol and ETBE's excise tax exemption. The House passed aprevious budget reconciliation bill without cutting the incentive.   The first letter was from Rep. Randy Tate (R-WA), who calls ethanol"an example of a good intention gone bad" and proposes to phase-outthe ethanol tax incentive.  "According to the Treasury Department,ethanol has cost the Highway Trust Fund over $5.3 billion from 1983-1994, $684 million in Fiscal Year 1994 alone.  Motorists pay gas taxesand other user fees into the Highway Trust Fund. [Ethanol's] subsidycomes right out of the Highway Trust Fund," Tate wrote.  A later draftwas signed by Rep. Sam Gibbons (D-FL), the ranking minority member onthe House Ways and Means Committee.   Tate will introduce a bill this month to "eliminate the motor fuelsexcise tax exemption for ethanol and scale back the excise tax creditfor ethanol."  The bill echoes Rep. Philip English (R-PA)'s bill, HR264, which would end the incentive.    "The legislation to be introduced by Rep. Tate, if enacted, willhave the sure and swift effect of inflicting mortal damage" to theindustry, wrote Rep. Tim Johnson (D-SD) and others in response.    Another letter urges extending the incentive to 2002 to conformwith farm program cuts and other parts of a seven-year budget plan. Rep. Richard Durbin (D-IL) and 15 co-signers wrote, "The GeneralAccounting Office estimates that the value [of the incentive] to theU.S. Treasury is as much as $6.3 billion over five years.  The directcost of the incentive is more than offset by additional income taxrevenues and reduced federal farm program costs."Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GASOLINE/DIESEL WATCH   Gulf Coast spot regular and premium traded at 46.95 c/gal and 49.65c/gal, respectively.   East Coast octane spreads catapulted to 13.50 c/gal mid-monthbefore ending the month at a still high 9.75 c/gal.  In addition tohigher MTBE prices and tight winter oxygenated (2.7wt% oxygen) RFGsupplies, several local refinery outages were sending gasoline priceshigher.   Gulf Coast octane spreads widened briefly before returning to 2.7c/gal, the low side of the typical 2.5-5.0 c/gal range.  Compounding aglutted products market, Gulf Coast players sold off extra products instorage ahead of yearly inventory taxes.   In East Coast refinery news, Sun Co. shut down the 25,000 b/dcatalytic reformer at its 175,000 b/d Marcus Hook, PA, refinery.  Atthe same time, BP was reportedly planning to cut production at its172,000 b/d Marcus Hook refinery to 150,000 b/d before Tosco takespossession.  At presstime, the company was still in negotiations withlabor leaders over the plan, which would lay off 130 workers.   Some time in January/February, Chevron will restart its Richmond,CA, refinery, the whole of which was closed in early December for sixweeks for major scheduled maintenance in anticipation of CaliforniaPhase 2 RFG.  Chevron said it had adequate supplies to cover theshutdown period.     Retail gasoline prices made another decline from November toDecember.  Self-serve regular gasoline fell 0.5 c/gal to $1.118/gal,down 3.1 c/gal from December 1994 rates, according to the AmericanAutomobile Association (AAA)'s Fuel Gauge Report.  "The good newscontinues for holiday motorists as gasoline prices dropped for thesixth consecutive month,"  AAA said.   The average price has dropped11 c/gal since June.   The average price of self-serve midgrade slipped 0.7 c/gal to$1.211/gal while self-serve premium declined 0.4 c/gal to $1.295/gal. Prices were most expensive in the West, unchanged at $1.254/gal, andleast expensive in the Southeast, where prices fell 0.6 c/gal fromNovember rates to $1.032/gal.   In distillates, Gulf Coast low-sulfur and high-sulfur diesel fueltraded at 54.60 c/gal and 53.35 c/gal.  The cold wave across theNortheast and Midwest propelled NYMEX No. 2 December heating oilfutures prices to two-year highs at around 58 c/gal.  Prices wenthigher when January became the front-month, topping 60 c/gal, butsources warned that the heating oil contract is overdue for a downwardcorrection.   U.S. retail low-sulfur diesel fuel prices hit their highest averagesince May 30, $1.12/gal, according to EIA's Distillate Watch for theweek ended Dec. 18.  Regional averages ranged: East, $1.12/gal;Midwest, $1.11/gal; Gulf Coast, $1.09/gal; Rockies, $1.21/gal; andWest Coast, $1.26/gal.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SUPPLY/DEMAND WATCH   Refinery production of gasoline took the opposite direction ofdeliveries in November, according to the American PetroleumInstitute(API)'s November statistical report.    "Gasoline output declined for the first time this year, whiledistillate production rose 2.5%, its strongest showing so far in1995," API noted.   Refinery gasoline output fell 1.1% from high November 1994 rates. "This was mostly due to unusually strong levels last November as thereformulated gasoline program was gearing up for retail productionJan. 1.  Even so, gasoline output has slackened off more thanseasonally in the past two months," API qualified.   However, continued strong gasoline deliveries outpaced apparentdemand.  "November's 5.1% increase is especially surprising, andunsupported by other indicators of underlying consumption.  Thoughthere have been some recent indications of further strengtheningdemand, any such strengthening has likely been modest," API explained.   As a result of declining refinery production of gasoline andcontinued stronger-than-seasonal gasoline deliveries, total gasolinestocks finished below 200 million bbl for the fourth month in a row.   Influencing demand, the latest (September) on-highway andinterstate travel figures have both shown strong growth.  Meanwhile,the repeal of Federal highway speed limits is expected to have a"noticeable but small" impact on gasoline consumption, API said.     Many states, including California, Texas and others west of theMississippi River, plan to raise speed limits, according to API.   A cold snap in the Northeast combined with growth in on-highwaytrucking to push distillate deliveries 5.0% above November 1994 ratesto 3.34 million bbl last month -- the highest November rate since1978.  November marked the third straight month of growth above 4%.   "In addition to increased demand for heating oil, demand for dieselfuel for on-highway vehicles is also estimated to have added 30,000-40,000 b/d to final demand for November distillates over lastNovember," API said.  "A slowing economy has reined in growth of on-highway diesel demand from about 135,000 b/d in the first quarter. November's growth in on-highway diesel is estimated to be the lowestfor the year to date."   Low-sulfur diesel deliveries continued to surpass high-sulfurdeliveries.  Low-sulfur deliveries rose 150,000 b/d to 3.340 millionbbl.  High-sulfur deliveries totaled 2.049 million bbl -- inching up10,000 b/d.     "Demand for heating oil was estimated to have grown by more than 10times this amount.  This suggests that the pattern of spill-over oflow-sulfur distillate to uses where it is not required continued inNovember, and up to 120,000 b/d of the increased heating demand mayhave been met by deliveries of low-sulfur oil," API said.   Distillate stocks rose 4 million bbl to 135 million bbl, "the lowend of the typical range for November," API said.   Total imports of crude oil and petroleum products, which haddeclined in seven of the previous 10 months, made a strong year-to-year increase.  Total imports averaged 9.429 million b/d -- 8.3%higher than November 1994 rates.   U.S. crude oil production fell again.  The 6.495 million b/d leveltrailed November 1994 by 2%.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996STATE CLEAN AIR PROGRESS RANKED   Across the U.S., five states have made no progress towards meetingClean Air Act deadlines -- and only three have made steady progress,reveals Clean Air at the Crossroads: Progress Made and ChallengesAhead, a new report released by the Clean Air Network.     Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Texas and Virginia were given a "red"designation, indicating "no progress, will not make deadlines."  OnlyNew Mexico, North Carolina and Oregon received a "green" designation:"steadily making progress; on track to meet public health standards bythe deadlines in the Clean Air Act."     Most states received a "yellow" or "orange" grade.  While "yellow"signified "making progress in some areas, no progress in others; couldget back on right track and meet the deadlines," "orange" symbolized"making progress in a few areas, no progress in others; enough offtrack that it will not make deadlines."    The group did not rank for 10 states: Arkansas, Hawaii, Iowa,Kentucky, Mississippi, North Dakota, South Dakota, Tennessee, WestVirginia and Wyoming.GEORGIA:  Private and local government fleet managers in Atlanta areshowing increased interest in alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs),according to a survey  by the Energy Information Administration (EIA). In 1994, AFVs made up 1% of Atlanta's fleets of six or more vehicles. Most were in local government fleets, but 3% of private fleet managers reported AFV plans for 1995, EIA said.     Fueling availability plays a major role.  Since 85% of localgovernment fleets fuel at central government-owned sites, alternativefuels could be easier to incorporate.  Only 10% of the privately ownedfleets had central fueling sites.ILLINOIS:  Gov. Jim Edgar (R-IL) signed the Alternate Fuels Act, whichwill be in effect until Dec. 31, 1999, or until funds are no longeravailable.  The Act established a rebate program for fleet owners andoperators, which will not exceed $4,000 per vehicle.   The Act authorizes the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency toestablish an ethanol fuel research program to cut ethanol productioncosts or raise the viability of ethanol fuels by developing new enginetechnologies and refueling facilities.  The Act will be funded througha user fee of $20 per vehicle on fleets with 10 or more vehicles.  InFY96, up to $200,000 may be appropriated from the fund to payadministrative costs.  The ethanol research fund will receive 20% ofthe remaining funds, and the other 80% will cover the rebate programs. KENTUCKY:  EPA Director of Mobile Sources Margo Oge has written thedirector of the Kentucky Division of Air Quality, John Hornback,asking him to consider ending the state's request to leave the federalRFG program.   EPA is hoping the opt-out request is pulled before itis forced to make a decision on whether it will allow three countiesin Northern Kentucky to opt-out of RFG.     The letter suggests that Hornback should review ozone exceedencesduring 1995.  Preliminary ozone monitoring data last summer "reveal acontinuing ozone problem," indicating that there was at least oneozone violation.  Gov. Brereton Jones (D) originally requested theopt-outs.  Since then, Kentucky elected a new governor, Paul Patton(D), and it is unclear whether he will pursue the opt-out.NEBRASKA:  A coalition of Nebraska ethanol interests is pushing forall gasoline sold statewide to contain a minimum oxygenate levelstarting in 1997, and it hopes to introduce a bill in the state'slegislature by the second week of January.     The current "reformulated fuel" definition requires a 3.1 wt%oxygen, with no other parameters, but the fuel is not required at anytime of year.  Ethanol interests want to amend the law to reduce theoxygen level but apply it statewide starting January 1997.  Whether toimplement a 2.7 wt% or 2.0 wt% minimum oxygenate standard is stillbeing debated.  Nebraska uses about 930 million gallons per year ofgasoline; 30% contains ethanol.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ALTERNATIVE FUELS CALENDAR*  January 21-24, 1996: Society of Independent Gasoline Marketers ofAmerica's Winter Management Conference, Vail, CO.  Call (703) 709-7000.* January 22-23, 1996: 4th Annual Environmental Vehciles EnV '96, AnnArbor, MI.  Call (800) 659-2559.* January 23-25, 1996: LNG-Powered Heavy-Duty TransportationConference & Exposition, Los Angeles, CA.  Call (713) 952-9500.* January 29-February 2, 1996: Energy Week '96 Conference &Exposition, Houston, TX.  Call (713) 963-6215.* February 12-13, 1996: Ozone Transport Commission Meeting,Washington, DC.  Call (202) 508-3840.* March 11-13, 1996: Gas Processors Association 75th Convention,Denver, CO.  Call (918) 493-3872.Back to Headline List Copyright21ST CENTURY FUELS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SOME FUEL TAXES DROP AT  START OF YEAR   Here is a list of new tax rates as of Jan. 1, 1996, provided by thePetroleum Marketers Association of America.  "Please note, however,that the ongoing budget battle could result in changes in theseschedules," PMAA said.     All rates are in cents per gallon.FUEL                       OLD           NEW Gasoline                   18.4          18.3Gasohol:1% alcohol                 13.0          12.97.7% alc                   14.24         14.145.7% alc                   15.32         15.22Gasoline sold for gasohol production:7.7% alc                   15.42         15.325.7%                       16.24         16.14Special fuel               18.4          18.3Special (LPG)              18.3          18.3Inland Waterways Fuel Tax                           24.4          24.3Aviation Fuel other than gasoline                           21.9          0Diesel Fuel in trains*:    5.65          5.55Diesel Fuel in buses:      7.4           7.3Qualified Methanol         0.1235        0.1230Qualified Ethanol          0.1295        0.1290* This rate changed Oct. 1, 1995.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-5IA059-000323-B029-92http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey30.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225607 text/html 47057HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:54:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:01 GMTContent-length: 46870Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey30.html Sample Issue Copyright COAL OUTLOOK via NewsNet August 13, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TVA, Peabody Coal reach new agreement (584 words) Backers pull plug on embattled Thousand Springs (329 words) MSHA rule seen as generally favorable to industry (589 words) AMAX mine faces shutdown over permit void (357 words) Savage to haul W.V. coal for Arch Mineral (354 words) Oil crisis is no boon to coal -- yet (615 words) East Coast exports show little growth (336 words) Acid rain bills carry high price, in jobs, dollars (677 words) McCall fate still uncertain (176 words) NERCO gets cautious Shearson nod (282 words) NLRB, UMW deal awaits ruling (161 words) Arch hit with Ky. finding (166 words) Big Mama probe could take month (146 words) Crisis may hurt coal (143 words) Lawson says `I told you so' (150 words) UFI signs coal car deal (109 words) Inter-Mountain clarifies identity (195 words) Carboex positions for Ashland buy (241 words) *PEOPLE IN COAL* Island Creek has tightened its belt, (103 words) Diane Bunton, manager of marketing research (41 words) Peter Rumsey, former vice president of sales (43 words) A.G. "Tony" Fernandes, previously controller (66 words) Meanwhile, Mark Baylor has been named ARCO (40 words) David Hemenway, formerly Peabody Holding's (48 words) TVA to buy Kingston coal (225 words) TVA reworks Sevier coal pacts (139 words) CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990TVA, Peabody Coal reach new agreement     A new ten-year contract between Peabody Coaland the Tennessee Valley Authority will allow TVAto get out of the mining business at the CampBreckinridge mining complex in western Kentucky.     Although the agreement itself is no surprise (CO4/16), the quantity of coal finally agreed on -- 5million tons/yr -- does tend to limit opportunitiesfor other producers to ship coal to Cumberland.     Under an agreement that TVA's three-manboard of directors is expected to approve thisweek, Peabody assumes all of the CampBreckinridge liabilities -- including black lung,reclamation and employee benefits -- for whichTVA had some responsibility.     In return, Peabody receives title to TVA'sCamp Breckinridge assets, including some miningequipment, the No. 9 wash plant, the overlandconveyor to the barge loader, and the bargefacility itself.     However, TVA retains the coal reserves,which it will lease to Peabody for a nominal fee.     Under its current Cumberland contract,signed five years ago, Peabody supplies the plantwith 3.5 million tons/yr, but TVA has been takingan additional 1 million tons/yr from the Campmines under short-term contracts.     The new base price/adjustment contract callsfor the delivery of 5 million tons of coal peryear, so there is no significant change from thecurrent delivery schedule.     Island Creek has the only other contract atthe plant, supplying about 1.5 million tons/yrthrough April of next year. Talks are underway ona possible renegotiation of that contract.     The new Peabody contract is retroactive toNovember 1989 with a base price of $26.50/tonf.o.b. barge. Specs are essentially the same --11,425 Btu/lb, 4.9 lbs/mmBtu of SO2, and 10.5%ash. But sulfur specs have been tightened toaddress the quality of individual shipments.     TVA's current f.o.b. barge cost for CampBreckinridge coal is $29.18/ton but this includespreparation and belt costs. The price paid toPeabody is somewhat less, a TVA fuels officialsaid. Market reopener is possible     The contract allows either party to reopenfor a market- driven price adjustment in thefifth year (1994), with provisions forarbitration if no agreement is reached. Thecontract expires in 1999.     In addition, TVA can "wind down" thecontract if it chooses not to install scrubbersat Cumberland to comply with the federal acidrain law. Scrubbers are TVA's most likelycompliance choice for Cumberland. in lieu ofhigh-sulfur Camp Breckinridge coal, but it wouldhave to do so at the contract price, a TVAofficial said.     TVA purchased the Camp Breckinridge reservesin 1965 for $7.4 million. Peabody managed themines under a cost/plus contract that was costingTVA over $40/ton in 1985, when it decided toclose the mines and seek coal on the openmarket(CO 10/28/85).     That decision sparked a firestorm of protestfrom the United Mine Workers and Kentuckycongressmen. Within a few weeks TVA and Peabodyhad a new contract, and the UMW had agreed toconcessions to improve productivity (CO11/11/85). Peabody reopens Camp No. 11     Meanwhile, Peabody this week will reopen itsCamp No. 11 mine after constructing a new slopefrom the No. 11 seam to the lower No. 9 seam.Some 30 miners have been recalled, but when the300 workers in five continuous miner sections toproduce 3.5 million tons of raw coal per year.     First opened in 1977, No. 11 was closed in1987, because the Camp No. 1 and No. 2 mines weresufficient to meet TVA demand. A Peabodyspokesperson said all three mines will continueto operate.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Backers pull plug on embattled Thousand Springs     Developers last week killed the proposed $4billion Thousand Springs coal-fired generationproject.     Confronted with uncertain demand for its powerand under attack in three Western states because ofair quality worries, backers of the 2,000-MW projecthad little choice. This is a jolt for Western coalproducers. The planned facility would have burned upto 7.4 million tons/yr.     Just two years after losing four of the originalpartners, the consortium led by Sierra PacificResources had lost four other companies in the pastmonth, apparently the final nails in the ThousandSprings coffin.     Sierra Pacific Chairman Austin Stedham said lastweek the holding company would take a $35 millionwriteoff against 1990 earnings because of the decisionto terminate.     Two key equity participants added with muchfanfare in September 1988 were among the recentdropouts. Foster Wheeler Energy Corp. was to supplysteam generators. And Bonneville Pacific Corp., anindependent power producer, was to play a key role inpermitting and licensing.     In addition, two original backers, Pittsburg &Midway Coal Mining Co. and Westinghouse ElectricCorp., pulled out.     Those four defections left only four backers:Sierra Pacific Resources, the project manager andparent of Sierra Pacific Power Co.; Robert L. HelmsConstruction and Development Co. Inc.; Coastal StatesEnergy Co.; and Kidder, Peabody & Co. Inc.     Bonneville Pacific President Robert Pratt saidhis company dropped out because the project hadn'tsigned any power contracts. Yet the consortium wasplanning to start construction of the first 250-MWunit next year.     A Thousand Springs spokesperson said the powercontract problem was the same reason the other threecompanies pulled out.     Ironically, the project's biggest public headachein recent months was not the power issue but thedebate over its environmental effects on a regioncovering parts of Utah, Nevada and Idaho. In a letterwidely distributed by the project's opponents, aregional EPA administrator said the plant wouldseriously degrade a region with exceptionally good airquality and visibility.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990MSHA rule seen as generally favorable to industry     Industry is calling the Mine Safety and HealthAdmin.'s final rule on patterns of violation fair, butthe United Mine Workers is wondering if MSHA is justappeasing Congress and miners with an unenforceablestatute.     The rule, which took 10 years to complete, isdesigned to spot coal mines as well as metal/nonmetalmines that habitually break safety rules. MSHA willbegin its initial screenings of the nation'sunderground and surface mines for patterns ofsignificant and substantial (S&S) violations Oct. 1.     However, the agency will wipe the slate clean foroperators by not examining any pre-October history.MSHA says that "only citations and orders, whetherfinal or non-final, issued after the effective date ofthe rule will be considered in the initial screeningprocess."     Only final citations and orders will beconsidered in the criteria for establishing a pattern.     "This is about as fair a rule as could have beenexpected, based on the Mine Safety statute," saidBobby Jackson, vice president of the American MiningCongress.     "MSHA's prospective application of this rule willprovide mine operators with the Due Process clause ofthe Fifth Amendment," Jackson said. He added that AMCis concerned that parts of the final standard couldlead to "excessive and unwarranted" application ofMSHA's most severe enforcement standard.     A UMW spokesperson said the strength of the rulecan be measured by industry's reaction, which isgenerally positive. It is not typical for a statutethat makes things tougher for an industry to bewelcomed by that industry, the spokesperson said.     The design of the rule has a double-edged effect,the spokesperson said. First, it won't take intoconsideration true safety conditions at a mine becauseit does not consider violations before October.Second, it will encourage operators to focus on legalred tape rather than correcting violations.     "The union has to question whether Congress'intent to have a rule used as an additional tool toprotect miners from unsafe conditions will ever seethe light of day," the spokesperson said.     The rule will work this way:     After Oct. 1, MSHA will review the compliancerecords of every mine at least once a year, reservingthe right to take a closer look at specific mines asoften as needed.     Generally, the agency will use a two-yearyardstick to measure health and safety patterns.     MSHA will look at each mine's history of S&Sviolations, withdrawal orders for failure to abate S&Sviolations, and withdrawal orders for conditionsposing imminent danger to miners.     When a potential pattern of violations isspotted, MSHA's district manager will provide writtennotification to a mine operator and a representativeof workers at the mine. The operator has 20 days totake a number of possible steps, one of which is toinstitute a program to avoid repeated S&S violations.MSHA will not consider unrelated S&S violations inidentifying a pattern of violations. It will consideronly those of the same standard, or standards relatedto the same hazard, or violations resulting from anoperator's unwarrantable failure to comply. Notice ofa pattern can be ended after an MSHA inspection of theentire mine finds no S&S violations.     If MSHA inspects a mine within 90 days afterissuing a pattern of violation notice and finds anyS&S violation that could cause a mine safety or healthhazard, the agency will issue a withdrawal order forall persons in the affected area. Workers will not beallowed to return until an MSHA inspector determinesthat the violation has been abated.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990AMAX mine faces shutdown over permit void     An AMAX Coal surface mine in southern Indianacould be idled next week if a state commission agreeswith a finding by an administrative law judge that themine's permit is void.     William Teeguarden, an ALJ for the state NaturalResources Dept., has ruled that the permit issued inMay 1989 to AMAX for the Cass pit at its Minnehahamine is void because two conditions raised at the timeof the permit application were so major that thepermit should not have been approved. The twoconditions have to do with blasting and hydrologyissues at the site, concerns for nearby landowners.     Nathan Noland, director of the Indiana CoalCouncil, said last week that Teeguarden's decision mayhurt the smooth issuance of mine permits in the state.An attorney for the council is investigating thatpotential impact.     Teeguarden's order, essentially a recommendation,is what a review commission at the state DNR will ruleon next week. If the commission agrees the permit isvoid, the company can appeal, but will have to ceaseoperations at the site during the appeal. The mineproduces 1 million tons of coal annually.     Noland explained that when the DNR approves apermit, it allows a 30-day period for comments frominterested parties. Within that period, the departmentcan put conditions on the permit that must be metbefore the permit is actually issued.     For example, Noland said, paying bond fees is acommon condition that must be met during the 30 days.     Teeguarden's ruling says that certaincircumstances are so major they shouldn't be allowedas conditions within the 30-day period, and should bemet well before then. The two concerns at Minnehahafall under that definition, he said.     Noland says the question here is what constitutesan appropriate condition for issuing a permit. He saidTeeguarden's order paints a grey area, where it isdifficult to define what exactly is an inappropriatecondition.     Kevin Feeney, an AMAX spokesperson, said thecompany is reviewing the decision and trying todetermine what the judge means in his findings. Hesaid that in the meantime operations and water pumpingcontinue at Minnehaha.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Savage to haul W.V. coal for Arch Mineral     The largest hauler of truck coal in the West hastaken a piece of the Eastern market, say sources, witha deal to haul West Virginia coal for Arch MineralCorp., on a movement to Dayton Power and Light.     Savage Coal Industries of Salt Lake City,Utah, will truck the coal from Arch's Wylo minein Logan County, W.V., to Arch's Big Sandy Riverterminal (formerly Dock's Creek).     Savage referred questions last week to ArchMineral, whose only comment was that a file agreementhas not been signed.If the deal does goes through, Arch will take over themovement from independent truckers.     The coal -- about 900,000 tons/yr -- is nowtrucked some 55 miles from Wylo to the river andthen loaded into barges for shipment to Dayton.The coal was shipped by CSX Transportation untillast year, when the switch to truck was made (CO5/8/89).     That change wasn't and hasn't necessarilybeen an easy one. Truckers typically do not bringreliability and stability to the business ofhauling coal, opined one source in the utilityindustry. Although their costs initially arecompetitive with rail, controlling those costsover time has been a problem for some shippers,the source said.     Savage's use of storage terminals at themines, its emphasis on service, and variouscost-control measures will help Arch and Daytonin this regard, two sources believe. "It's a gooddeal for both companies," added one observer.Savage competition to improve Eastern trucking?     Another coal executive sees the Savageapproach as the wave of the future in the East,putting pressure to upgrade service not only onindependent truckers but on railroads as well.Others aren't so sure.     "Savage's entry into the Eastern coal fieldsshould serve notice there is a need for a vastimprovement in service," agreed one industryexecutive. But although Savage itself likely willget more Eastern business, "I don't see anyoneelse putting together helpful transportationpackages," the executive said.     "A classy trucking company is almost acontradiction in terms," the executive stated."Trucking will continue to be a localizedphenomenon in Kentucky and West Virginia."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Oil crisis is no boon to coal -- yet     Don't expect to wake up one morning and see asignificant hike in coal demand or prices as a resultof the oil crisis in the Mideast staring you in theface, at least not right away.     Thats the word from most coal buyers and sellerson the outlook for coal in the wake of Iraq's invasionof Kuwait. Due to currently soft coal marketconditions, observers were willing to predict thatcoal demand and prices are not likely to change muchif any during the next month or two.     But most coal observers believe all bets areoff if war erupts in the Persian Gulf or if thecrisis lasts well into the fourth quarter.     From a marketing stand-point, the crisis isnot bad for the coal industry, but so far therehas been no indication of increased demand orwillingness by consumers to pay higher prices,said Wyn Holbrook, executive vice president ofsales and marketing for A.T. Massey Coal.     Holbrook's view, shared by several othercoal producers and consumers, is grounded partlyin recent market conditions: relatively lowdomestic and overseas demand, coupled with anexcess supply of coal.     European utilities, many of which arecapable of switching from oil to coal,conceivably could burn current oil stockpiles andcome back into the market with enough demand toboost U.S. exports by 4 to 6 million tons thisyear, Holbrook said.     Whether this much extra tonnage withdrawnfrom domestic consumption could spark an increasein prices depends on the actual ratio of supplyto demand. The market will be interesting towatch, suggested one coal buyer who is notconfident that prices will not get some lift fromthe crisis.     Mark Joseph, president of Maran Coal, anexporting company headquartered in New York, addsthat European cement companies who were using oilmay now come back to coal, but the tonnage isrelatively minor.Recession could balance any demand upsurge     If there is eventually a shortage of oil,Joseph said, the resulting need for more coal maybe offset to some extent by an economic downturn,cutting coal buys. "Basically a recession is atime when you trim inventories," he cautioned.     But Joseph said he cannot predict what willhappen to coal markets if the oil crisis lastspast mid-November.     Ramesh Malhotra, president of Coal NetworkInc., points out that higher fuel prices willincrease ocean freight costs in favor of U.S.coal over Australian coal in Europe, because theU.S. is closer to European coal ports.     Florida and New England -- two areas of thecountry heavily dependent on oil -- are not in aposition to take advantage of coal-fired powergeneration from other areas.     Jim Tullis, manager of off-system sales forthe Southern Company, said Florida utilitieswhich buy coal-fired power from Southern havealready been taking close to the maximum amountof power for which they have contracts.     Also, once Florida Power and Light beginstaking another 300 MW beginning Nov. 1, therewill be no transmission capacityleft betweenSouthern Company and the Florida utilities,Tullis said.     The same conditions exist in New England,where utilities generate 37% of their electricitywith oil. The transmission capacity does notexist to import large amounts of coal-fired powerfrom the Midwest, said a spokesperson for the NewEngland Power Pool.     In any event, the utilities' oil stocks arein "relatively good shape" for the short term andso far there is no shortage of oil on the worldmarket, although prices are rising, thespokesperson said.     Most coal units in New England -- such asNew England Power's Salem Harbor and BraytonPoint plants -- are baseloaded already.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990East Coast exports show little growth     Three major East Coast coal export harborshaven't exactly needed to add new shifts to load shipsso far this year, with coal shipments out of HamptonRoads and Baltimore through June down about 100,000long tons from the same period last year.     Latest figures from John S. Connor Inc. ofBaltimore and W.M. Stone & Co. of Norfolk, Va., show27.5 million long tons (30.8 million tons) shippedthrough the three ports through June. That's comparedwith 27.6 million long tons (30.9 million tons)through June 1989.     (All figures from this point on are in longtons.)     Norfolk has seen an upturn in business. Coalshipments through there are up about 800,000 tons overshipments through June 1989. But its companion port,Newport News, is down over 900,000 tons, more thanmaking up for Norfolk's good fortune. Baltimore'snumbers have been fairly stable so far this yearcompared with 1989.     Pittston Coal has seen a slump in its shipmentsPittston had shipped over 3.4 million tons throughNorfolk and Newport News, despite labor troubles withthe United Mine Workers union. In the first fivemonths of this year, it's about 3 million tons.     Pittston did see a strong export picture in June,with over 800,000 tons shipped through Hampton Roads.In May, Pittston shipments through those two portstotaled about 415,000 tons.     A big operator shoving less through Hampton Roadsthrough June is Consolidation, with nearly 2.3 milliontons loaded, compared with 2.8 million tons in thefirst five months of 1989. Consol increased its Juneshipment through the two ports, with around 417,000tons that month, compared with about 316,000 in May.     On the brighter side, Westmoreland, another majorexporter, is sending a lot more coal cars throughNorfolk and Newport News. Through June of this year,Westmoreland shipped nearly 2.2 million tons throughthere, compared with a little over 1.7 million in thesame period in 1989.     June shipments through Hampton Roads forWestmoreland totaled nearly 394,000, down from nearly325,000 in May.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Acid rain bills carry high price, in jobs, dollars       EPA has finally issued a long-awaitedstudy of the impact of the acid rain titles of theHouse and Senate clean air bills, and it shows massivecosts for utilities and high-sulfur coal.     Neither the House nor Senate acid rain controlmeasures is apparently veto bait for President Bush --at least in terms of cost. The new EPA study says bothbills carry a price tag for utilities through 2010 of$12 billion-$18 billion. The original Bush bill had anestimated cost of $13 billion-$18 billion.     The EPA report is laid out in "high" and "low"cases. "High" assumes the highest likely impact of thebill. The "low" case assumes lowest impact, plus anaccelerated utility use of clean coal technologiesthat would tend to further soften the blow of thefinal clean air bill on coal jobs and markets.     One major surprise is that by the end of Phase 2compliance deadlines -- roughly, the end of the decade-- neither bill would achieve the targeted 10 millionton/yr cut in SO2. The House bill would go thefurthest, with up to an 8.3-million-ton cut by the endof 2000. Only by 2005 would the 10-million-ton targetbe met by both bills.     The report, at least in part, answers questionsput to the administration earlier by House EnergyChairman John Dingell, D-Mich. A House Energy staffersaid last week that Dingell, who chairs the Housedelegation to the clean air conference committee, hadnot had a chance to review the report before returningto Michigan for the August recess.     Work by conferees is on hold for the recess,which ends the week after the Labor Day holiday.Negotiations between staff from the House and Senatewill resume the week before Labor Day.     Some observers say Congress, if it can't pass abill in the month it has left in session, may have todo it in a "lame duck" session after the Novemberelection. Or the bill just may die for this year, theypoint out, especially with Congress distracted by theoil crisis in the Middle East, and other pressingissues.Bill hits utilities, high-sulfur regions     Meanwhile, the EPA report puts some numbers onacid rain title impacts. Under Phase 1 (early 1990s),both bills would hit utilities for about $500 million-$800 million/yr. In Phase 2, House mandates onscrubbing in the West due to haze problems aroundnational parks -- and also due to higher mandatedSO2/NOX reductions -- would mean the House bill wouldcost utilities more. The House cost -- $3.4 billion-$4.4 billion/yr. The Senate bill -- $3 billion-$3.9billion/yr. Costs to utilities under both bills wouldpeak at $5 billion/yr in 2005.     In Phase 1, said the report, high-sulfur coaloutput sags by 35 million-42 million tons/yr under theSenate bill over basecase levels. The House bill cutshigh-sulfur coal by 47 million-56 million tons/yr. TheSenate bill has a lower impact because it sets loweremissions reductions in Phase 1 and has scrubberincentives.     In Phase 2, high-sulfur consumption continues totumble, by 96 million-98 million tons/yr under theSenate bill, 92 million-109 million tons/yr due to theHouse measure. High-sulfur coal markets will show astrong recovery after 2000 as new, cleaner coal plantscome on-line.     The silver lining in this acid rain cloud is thatan uptick in low-sulfur coal production will offset,basically one-for-one, losses in high-sulfur coallining doesn't help high-sulfur coal regions.     In Northern Appalachia and the Midwest, the twomain high-sulfur regions, the Senate bill would cutend of the century. Under the House proposal, it's6,000-7,000 jobs by 1996, 13,000-16,000 after 2001.(The House bill's Phase 1 and 2 deadlines are one yearlater than those of the Senate.)     One factor in the House bill that could mitigatehigh-sulfur coal losses is a provision allowinggovernors to mandate use of in-state coal. The reportdoes not analyze that factor, but says job losses canbe held down with it -- at the cost of higher utilityrates.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990McCall fate still uncertain     Jno. McCall Coal has told its coal suppliersand creditors that it will resolve its currentcredit crisis and resume buying coal for its 1990export contracts.     "I'm confident McCall will get themselvesout of it," said the sales executive for oneproducer who has sold coal to McCall for over 10years. "They indicate to me they will."     As reported last week, numerous sources inthe coal industry believe McCall's major bankpulled its line of credit, preventing the companyfrom paying for coal already shipped and, insome cases, from procuring new coal.     There was no indication late last week thatthe problem had been resolved. McCall continuedto decline comment.     Coal industry executives speculate thatMcCall will choose to file for protection fromits creditors under Chapter 11 of the federalbankruptcy code, but one supplier said hebelieves any filing would protect creditors aswell.     But McCall had made no such filing throughlast Thursday, according to a clerk in the U.S.Bankruptcy Court in Baltimore, Md., where McCallis headquartered.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990NERCO gets cautious Shearson nod     Coal makes NERCO Inc. a good investment, but thecompany's natural gas and precious metals divisionsare putting the company on slightly shaky stock marketground for the moment.     Rafael Villagran, coal analyst for ShearsonLehman Hutton, says in a new report that continuingsoft prices for gas and precious metals for the restof this year and through 1991 will hamper NERCO'sprofitability even though NERCO's second-quarterearnings were higher than Villagran expected.     He points out that the price of NERCO shares hasfallen in the past two months -- down 14% from a highof $25/share. That downturn likely will be correctedin the long run as gas and precious metals pricesrecover, Villagan predicts. He adds that pending acidrain legislation should also boost NERCO stock becauseof the company's heavy position in low-sulfur coal.     NERCO coal shipments in the second quarter of1990 hit 8.8 million tons, 1 million tons aboveVillagran's earlier estimates. Because of an unusuallystrong marketing push that resulted in recent spot andtest-burn sales, 1990 company sales should hit 36.2million tons, Villagran predicts. The company shipped32 million tons in 1989, he reports.     The situation in the Middle East, with Iraqinvading Kuwait, could also help NERCO, if theinstability lasts long enough. Investors tend to goheavily into precious metals during unstable times,Villagran points out. And an oil shock would tend todrive up prices for natural gas.     That aside, Villagran is cutting his estimate ofNERCO's expected profits/share this year from $2.15 to$1.95, and from $2.50 to $2.25 in 1991. But he has ahigh recommendation out for the stock, especially forinvestors interested in long-term performance.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990NLRB, UMW deal awaits ruling     A decision is imminent on a settlement betweenthe National Labor Relations Board and the United MineWorkers on litigation over secondary boycotts duringthe Pittston strike (CO 4/16).     The settlement would prohibit secondary boycottsnationwide, and in exchange the union would not befound guilty of secondary boycott activity in thePittston strike. The NLRB's general counsel isdeciding on the merits of that settlement.     John Falcone, the NLRB attorney working on thecase, said the settlement was filed with the boardalong with the objections of most of the 300 companiesinvolved in the secondary boycotts.     If the general counsel decides the objectionshave merit, the settlement will be sent back to theparties for further negotiations. If the counseldecides the objections lack merit, the settlement willbe forwarded to the labor board for approval.     One source said the counsel is unlikely toendorse the settlement with the full weight of allthose objections attached to it.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Arch hit with Ky. finding     Arch Mineral Corp. has been slapped with a pairof relatively mine violations by the state of Kentuckythat could endanger another project.     The state Natural Resources Cabinet last weekcited the company for not reclaiming all of a highwallat a surface mine in Breathitt County, next to theRobinson Forest. Company attorney Blair Gardner saidthat finding will be appealed.     A second citation has to do with spillover ofsite debris onto nearby land owned by the Universityof Kentucky. Gardner said the company will clean thedebris and won't appeal the state ruling.     The state action has larger implications fordelicate negotatiations among the state, theuniversity and Arch over a 350-acre site Arch hasleased for a surface mine in the Robinson Forest.     The university claims the site is part of awatershed it uses for research purposes. Both sidesare talking about a possible land swap to easeenvironmental concerns.     The application to mine the property is pendingwith the state.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Big Mama probe could take month     Kentucky investigators in the triple-fatality BigMama mine blast are saying the investigation probablywill not be complete until mid-September.     Leroy Gross, supervisor for the London districtoffice of the state Dept. of Mines and Minerals, saidthe investigators have not reached any conclusions andhave not ruled anything out.     Gross had told Coal Outlook  after the explosionthat he thought the investigators would have someconclusions this week (CO 8/6). He said lastweek, however, that the investigation will probablynot be completed until mid-September.     Charles McGraw, team leader of the Mine SafetyHealth and Admin.'s investigation, said investigationteam members are not allowed to talk about theinvestigation or findings until a report is published.He said the agency may issue a preliminary report,perhaps in September.     Gross said the investigators interviewed thewitnesses last week but he could not discuss thefindings.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Crisis may hurt coal     Far from aiding the coal industry, thecurrent oil crisis may reduce its profits,suggests Ramesh Malhotra, president of CoalNetwork, Inc. of Mason, Ohio.     Higher oil prices will increase rail, bargeand truck costs, as well as mining costs,particularly at surface mines, Malhotra notes.     "At the same time, demand for coal will notincrease, because there will be a very limiteddemand as a result of oil shortages or higher oilprices," he added. Because there is a currentoversupply of coal, producers will not risklosing market share by increasing prices.     "Profit margins will go down," he concludes.     The only wild card is the export market andthe possible increase in demand for U.S. steamcoal worldwide resulting from oil shortages,Malhotra said.     Malhotra acknowledged that coal contractswith pass-thorugh provisions will allow producersto escape the cost increases.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Lawson says `I told you so'     Richard Lawson, retired Air Force general andhead of the National Coal Assn., pointed out last weekhe was right in his repeated warnings over the yearsabout U.S. reliance on Middle East oil.     A continuing crisis over the Iraqi seizure ofKuwait has driven up world oil prices, and put indoubt the continued steady supply of oil from thatregion.     Lawson said that for too long the U.S. has beenignoring the true cost of Middle East oil, includingthe cost of "keeping $8 billion aircraft carriers(and) $3 billion battleships" on patrol in the region,"and more importantly, the lives of American militarypersonnel on the front lines."     Domestic coal needs a greater role in U.S. energypolicy, Lawson said. Coal, along with energyconservation, domestic oil, natural gas, nuclearenergy and alternative energy sources are "imperativeto assure energy independence and self-determination,"he points out.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990UFI signs coal car deal     Utility Fuels Inc. has signed a $25 million dealwith the Chicago Central & Pacific Railroad to supplyand maintain 220 coal rail cars in the West.     The cars, a combination of rotary and bottom dumpunits, will transport coal from the Hanna Basin ofWyoming east to power plants around Chicago. UFI,based in Houston, is a subsidiary of HoustonIndustries Inc.     This deal moves UFI, which owns the third-biggestprivate fleet of rail cars in the U.S., into newterritory. The company owns and operates 2,300 carsthat run 17 million tons/yr of coal and lignite fromWyoming to six Houston Lighting & Power units inTexas.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Inter-Mountain clarifies identity     As of the first of August, Inter-Mountain CoalsInc. passed into coal industry history and a newentity began taking its place.     Parent AMVEST Corp. decided, due in part toInter-Mountain's increasing production and size, toclarify its identity, so Inter-Mountain's name hasbeen changed to AMVEST Coal Sales Inc.     "The adoption of the new name," said WilliamDickey, executive vice president of Inter-Mountain,"should clearly communicate both our productioncapabilities and our relationship to AMVEST."Privately held AMVEST Corp. is also involved in oiland gas exploration and merchant banking.     Dickey told Coal Outlook that in the past twofiscal years, Inter-Mountain has produced about 4.5million tons each year. In the 1991 fiscal year, whichbegan Aug. 1, he hopes to push that to 5 million tonsfrom existing operations, which encompass two mines inVirginia and one in West Virginia.     Also, said Dickey, the company has a "relativelyaggressive acquisition program," which is looking forcoal mines/properties in the same region as currentoperations. All qualities of coal are beingconsidered, he said, though the ideal properties wouldfit with their existing production, including a largeoutput of high-vol metallurgical coal.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990Carboex positions for Ashland buy     Carboex International, Ltd., the Spanishcoal trader, has notified the Securities andExchange Commission that it may increase itsstake in Ashland Coal from 9% to 11.87%.     This is not exactly a major surprise. David Todd,a spokesperson for Ashland, notes Carboex was given awarrant to purchase 450,000 shares of common stockwhen the company was restructured two years ago (CO8/22/88).     Carboex has not yet exercised the warrantbut has merely informed the SEC that it may doso, Todd said. The shares would be issued byAshland, Todd added.     The warrant permits Carboex to buy theshares during the six-month period from Sept. 1,1990, through Feb. 28, 1991 at a price equal totwo times the price the stock sold for in the1988 public offering. The 1988 sale price was $11per share; last week the stock was trading forabout $24/share.     One Wall Street coal analyst doubts Carboex wantsto up its stake in Ashland. But he suggests Carboexmay be tempted to buy shares if it can "dump" them inthe market for a profit.     In selling 4.6 million shares of AshlandCoal common stock to the public in 1988, thethree principle shareholders decreased theirstake. Ashland Oil now owns 46%, SaarbergwerkeA.G. has 14%, and Carboex 9%.     Saarbergwerke is a West German coalproducing, coal trading, and electricitygenerating company owned by the government.Ashland Oil also owns 50% of Arch Mineral.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990     Island Creek has tightened its belt,     Island Creek has tightened its belt,eliminating 13 positions in its Lexington, Ky.,office and 21 positions in its two West Virginiadivisions.     The reductions include two positions at thesales account level at Island Creek Coal Sales.The company has also transferred sevenLexington-based employees to the operatingdivisions.     Chairman S.O. "Bud" Ogden said thereductions and transfers follow a corporatestrategy "to maintain a competitive position intoday's coal market and to place more decision-making responsibility with the operatingdivisions."     The move is not related to last spring'sreorganization that separated operating andmarketing functions, the company said (CO 5/14).Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990      Diane Bunton, manager of marketing research      Diane Bunton, manager of marketing researchfor Arch Mineral, has been named a salesrepresentative for the St. Louis-based company.She will handle utility and industrial accountsin the East, reporting to Patrick Panzarino,assistant vice president of eastern coal sales.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990     Peter Rumsey, former vice president of sales     Peter Rumsey, former vice president of salesfor Ingram Barge, is a new vice president of PenTransportation, an affiliate of Pen Coal ofNashville, Tenn. He has 23 years of experience inrail, barge and truck transportation, as well asterminal operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990     A.G. "Tony" Fernandes, previously controller     A.G. "Tony" Fernandes, previously controllerof Atlantic Richfield Co., has been namedpresident of ARCO Coal, succeeding H.L. Bilhartz,who moves to ARCO's Alaskan oil unit. The changeis part of an ongoing program to expose thecompany's younger executives to a variety ofmanagerial experience, ARCO said.     With ARCO for over 20 years, Fernandes hasno prior coal experience, although he has workedin minerals.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990     Meanwhile, Mark Baylor has been named ARCO     Meanwhile, Mark Baylor has been named ARCOCoal's manager of contract administration,replacing Jerry Biggs, who left the company.Replacing Baylor as manager of coal sales for thenorth central region is Paige Beville, who waspreviously in market research.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990     David Hemenway, formerly Peabody Holding's     David Hemenway, formerly Peabody Holding'ssenior litigation counsel, has joined a regionalSt. Louis law firm, Thompson and Mitchell, andwill practice primarily in the firm's litigationdepartment.     Hemenway, who had served in Peabody's lawdepartment since 1973, said he will continue tohandle coal industry matters.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990TVA to buy Kingston coal     The Tennessee Valley Authority will buyabout 16,000 tons of coal per week under threenew contracts to be reviewed this week by thefederal utility's board of directors.     The purchases come under its Requisition 23for the Kingston steam plant. No purchases weremade for John Sevier (see separate brief).     Manalapan Mining will supply about 23,500tons/mo via CSX Transportation to Kingston for adelivered price of $31.06/ton,136 cents/mmBtu (evaluated), and124.24 cents/mmBtu (actual). The total termis six years, but either party can reopen thecontract for any reason after three years.     Manalapan's agent is Pincelli andAssociates. Its sources are its various mines inHarlan County, Ky. Specs are 12,500 Btu/lb (asreceived), 1.63% dry sulfur, 2.34 lbs/mmBtu ofSO2, and 9.2% ash (as received).     Bell County Coal Corp. and U.S. Coal Inc.will each receive 10-year contracts with mutualreopeners after the first five years.Norfolk-Southern railroad will deliver the coal.     Bell County, a unit of James River Coal,will furnish 7,500 tons/wk for $31.14/ton,136.32 cents/mmBtu (evaluated), and124.54 cents/mmBtu (actual). Specs are 12,500Btu/lb, 1.6% sulfur, 2.3 lbs/mmBtu, and 9.2% ash.     U.S. Coal will supply 2,500 tons per weekfrom its Scott County, Tenn., mine for$31.47/ton, 137.40 cents/mmBtu (evaluated),and 125.88 cents/mmBtu (actual). Specs are12,500 Btu/lb, 1.84% sulfur, 2.6 lbs/mmBtu ofSO2, and 9% ash.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL OUTLOOK via NewsNetAugust 13, 1990TVA reworks Sevier coal pacts     The Tennessee Valley Authority hasrenegotiated one coal its John Sevier steamplant.     The agency was able to negotiate prices that areat least 50 cents/ton less than the best and finaloffers it received for John Sevier under Requisition23, said Greg Nicely, a TVA fuels official.    Theagency therefore "walked away" from the John Sevierbids, Nicely said.     Marion Duncan, another TVA official, said hecould only comment on one contract, an RBS Inc.agreement with a new base delivered price in theneighborhood of $30/ton, 134.5 cents/mmBtu(evaluated), and 122.83 cents/mmBtu (actual).     At the rate of 4,200 tons/wk, RBS willsupply coal from J.A.D., a Virginia supplier, andMountain Spur and Harlan-Kyvaco, both ofKentucky. Guaranteed specs are 12,200 Btu/lb,1.9% sulfur, and 9% ash, all as received. Theterm is three years starting this month.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-6IA059-000323-B029-133http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey90.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225745 text/html 72361HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:55:26 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:27 GMTContent-length: 72174Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey90.html Sample Issue Copyright COAL UK via NewsNet January 30, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES COAL PRIVATISATION ONE YEAR ON (2727 words) THE MARKET: FLATTERING TO DECEIVE (508 words) M & G TAKES MC PANAMAX (574 words) EASTERN SEEKS 500,000T (108 words) OWENS STARTS NEWCARB (246 words) NEWS BUYING AGENCY SEEKS 25,000T (73 words) NW NHS SEEKS 26,000T (95 words) RJB BUILDS A POWER PLANT (75 words) NP TURNS TO SELF-UNLOADERS (742 words) STRATHCLYDE SEEKS 90,000T (274 words) IMPORTS MOVE 7% AHEAD (436 words) BRUNNER MOND DROPS COAL (48 words) OPENCAST NERVES FRAY (1712 words) GILLESPIE TO MINE EASTER (78 words) MAIDENS HALL LOOKS HOPEFUL (111 words) GOLIGHTLY MINES AT HOME (87 words) BANKS APPLIES FOR PITHOUSE WEST (122 words) EUROPE TIGHTENS EA NEEDS (101 words) COALCO CLOSES ON ALBION (346 words) ASFORDBY: DELAYED TO SUMMER? (238 words) RAIL-FREIGHT GOES FOR $400M (78 words) POWERCOAL FIXES 1996 FREIGHT (79 words) PG PICKS HAULIERS (50 words) STERLING SUPPORTS SHORT SEA RATES (388 words) CI WINS BANKS' SUPPORT? (124 words) SHARES HOLD UP (292 words) CELTIC GOES INTERNATIONAL (63 words) COALITE TALKS COLLAPSE (52 words) CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996COAL PRIVATISATION ONE YEAR ONThe privatised coal industry was a year old on January 1. Governmenthas been quick to claim plaudits for the completion of anothersuccessful privatisation and not just because of the huge amount (#950mfor the mining assets alone) of cash that it generated. However, muchof what has happened in 1995 that has been positive has been byaccident (demand recovery for example) whilst there are policyleftovers (on opencast) which are still hurting coal.Coal minister Richard Page, speaking to the Coal Industry Society atthe beginning of January, said of the industry that "it is a good dealbigger than many people forecast ... one year on, there are 29 former-BC pits in operation (30 if you count Cwmgwili) in the private sector."Paradoxically competition, which was supposedly at the heart of thegovernment's privatisation policy, has had a bad year with thedominance of one company each in England, Scotland and Wales clearlyoutweighing the influence of the small to medium-sized independentmining companies. Perhaps the biggest source of grievance in theindustry at the privatisation is that only two companies in the UK wereable to benefit significantly from higher demand in 1995, each asuccessor to BC. The others simply didn't have the resources to makemore than a token effort towards meeting the generators' needs.At a January-November figure of 31.2mt deep mined output looked set tobe 10-12% ahead of year ago levels, suggesting a full year tally of 34-35mt. Coal consumption for power generation in January-November was53.3mt, 4.4% below year-ago levels but still way ahead of expectations.This implies a full year burn of 58-59mt, split between NorthernIreland, 1-1.5mt; Scotland, 4.5mt; and England/Wales, 52-53.5mt. In1994 RJB Mining predicted 1995/96 coal-burn by the electricity supplyindustry at 36-42mt, whilst Coal UK predicted 38mt.In a declining trend the fiscal year figures ought to be lower than thecalendar year numbers, but even so the fiscal year predictions clearlyunderstated 1995's potential burn. Coal benefitted from nuclearfailures, from a better-than-expected electricity demand and fromfailures at new gas-fired plant. Although nuclear generation recoveredlater in the year and is now ahead of year-ago levels, these factorscombined to give extra coal demand of 4-6mt over the year.The opencast sector had its worst year since 1987, in terms ofproduction, and since who knows when in terms of planning permissions.Planners point out that 30% of planning appeals are still being won,but so far the victor has always been the same company, RJB Mining. RJBhas also done well at securing planning permissions from localauthorities, an area where the rest of the industry has experiencedproblems. Opencast output at 14.9mt in January-November was marginallybelow year-ago levels despite reports from the opencasters that allsites are working flat out at the moment.For the housecoal trade, last year's mild winter, followed by a verywarm summer when stocks were high, came close to wrecking manybusinesses. For importers, the stakes were pushed too high for mostwhen UK producers concentrated sales efforts on the markets that theyhad won from BC and sized coal imports are lower than for many years.RJB beats all expectationsWithout a doubt the star of 1995 was a rampant RJB Mining. It startedthe year having just taken over the mining assets of BC's Englishdivisions, complete with contracts to supply National Power andPowerGen with 28-29mt/yr to March 31 1998. Although it lost industrialsales during the year and, with everybody else, had a dreadful firsthalf in the domestic trade, the company has gone from strength tostrength.The problems of the power industry led to frantic efforts by thegenerators, particularly early in the year, to make up the shortfallsleft by nuclear and gas by burning coal. With additional sales of up to3mt in its first quarter, RJB effectively kicked off from the penaltyspot and continued to enjoy the misfortunes of the power industry forthe rest of 1995.Although other companies have complained that RJB was the chiefbeneficiary of the increased burn, RJB's biggest achievement has beenthe speed with which it adapted to its new position. As one importantsource at a generator put it, "the transition (to private ownership)has been seamless and RJB has been very responsive to our needs".The vast bulk of the increase in deep-mined output came from RJB. ByMay the company was announcing debt reduction well ahead of schedule(Coal UK 42/9) and in September it confirmed good first half resultswith a turnover of #740m on sales of 21mt and output of 18mt (Coal UK45/17). Full results for 1995 will not be published before March but,given further stock clearance to 5mt or less since June and moreadditional sales to the generators, a turnover of #1,400-1,500m looksto be on the cards, implying profits of #160m plus and presenting theprobability of almost complete bank debt recovery by the summer. Someanalysts have been upgrading their forecasts of turnover andprofitability to, respectively, #1,500-1,600m and #175m-plus. InDecember 1994 RJB predicted pre-tax profits at #119m for 1995.With another two years of lucrative contract tonnage ahead, RJB'sinitial #914m gamble has clearly paid off. After getting a pricereduction of #100m, it paid #700m initially for its acquisition plus#37m to the government at the end of last year. It will pay another#77m at the end of this year, #40m six months later and a final #40m atthe end of 1997. It raised #494m in bank debt and #385m in equity whilec. #375m of the bank debt was acquisition finance. To have paid off somuch of the acquisition finance this quickly is a considerableachievement.Of the 20 individual pits, the best performers have been Riccall andWistow, which easily passed 3mt each for the year, Stillingfleet, whichhit 2.2mt; and Maltby and Welbeck, which both passed 2mt. At a smallerscale, the Blenkinsopp drift apparently surpassed expectations of250,000t. Problem mines were Asfordby (see separate story) and Point ofAyr, whilst Daw Mill is understood to have been disappointing.Celtic lays sound foundationsFor Celtic Energy, progress has been less spectacular but nonethelessjust as encouraging. Last November (Coal UK 47/7) its chief executiveBryan Riddlestone announced that 25% of the company's senior debt hadalready been paid off. Given the heavy venture capital backing forCeltic's takeover of BC's South Wales interests, a 25% payback wasprobably in accordance with expectations. Celtic's financial year willrun from April to March, so the first year will last for 15 months. Atypical year, according to sources close to Celtic will gross turnoverof c. #120m.Celtic won't say how its doing at the moment but sales are likely tohave been #110-125m in Calendar 1995; comprising those to NationalPower, likely to have been 1mt and bringing in c. #35-40m; those toindustry, 750,000t earning #20-25m; exports, 200,000t for #5-10m; anddomestic sales of over 500,000t for over #50m.Scotland braces for drivageScottish Coal was the least successful of the three successor companiesbut, even so, sold more than it expected. It did not gain as much fromhigh generator demand because Scottish Power needed less than had beenexpected, but English independent suppliers boosted demand by taking onScottish coal to make up for their own shortfalls.The power link to the English grid remains hamstrung by planningproblems in the north of England and, until these can be overcome,cannot function at full capacity. The ESI's burn struggled to get above4mt. Scottish found new sales of low-volatile product to marketsoverseas and re-established links with Ireland and Northern Ireland. Itsold significant quantities of industrial and housecoal grades toEnglish markets.The company will not comment on its profitability. This is partlybecause it, like Celtic, will work in future to an April-Marchfinancial year so this year will last for 15 months. However, it alsohas three PLC shareholders - Coal Investments, Savile Gordon andWaverley Mining Finance - which means that disclosure of financial databecomes an organisational nightmare. Coal UK's best guess is that thecompany managed a turnover of roughly #150m over the 12 months with asmall profit.It faces, shortly some fairly big investment decisions, funded fromwithin, because it has to complete converting Longannet to full retreatmining and it has to access a new set of reserves. A decision todevelop westward under the Forth and north of Airth and Kincardinelooks imminent. Longannet had a poor first half to the year, hittinggeological problems in the late Spring, but has subsequently improvedsteadily, particularly with the arrival of its first retreat face.Scottish's opencast business continues to function smoothly, althoughclaims from before privatisation continue to divert attention.Coal Investments' runs before it walksFor Coal Investments 1995 will not be remembered happily. It startedthe year as a small scale operation that had failed to secure any ofthe BC regions. It had six licensed mines, each in various stages ofdevelopment and a small contracts portfolio. It was sticking with itsavowed intention to work each pit as a bord and pillar operation usingcontinuous miners.The scale planned had been surprising because BC pits were widelybelieved to be expensive to run even before they had any miningmachinery put in them. However, Hem Heath got started early in the yearand looked to be going well, with a continuous miner producing at200,000t/yr. Silverdale, meanwhile, discovered that it was a cokingcoal mine and developed a longwall face aimed at British Steel.At the same time chief executive Malcolm Edwards busied himself pickingup contracts; the trouble was that he picked up a few too many. By themiddle of the year CI had landed orders to supply: National Power,2.8mt/yr; PowerGen, 500,000t/yr; Alcan, 200,000t/yr; British Steel,250,000t/yr; Castle Cement, 400,000t/yr; plus AHS Emstar and NHSSupplies with singles. CI thus found itself with over 4mt/yr ofbusiness, all running to 1999, and output of less than 1mt/yr.The development programme, essentially to switch all mine plans tolongwalls, that was then put in place made substantial demands on thepatience of shareholders who had already stumped up #48.5m in pursuitof profits. Although the CI pits were running at 40-50,000t/week at thetime, they ran into major problems shortly after, with AnnesleyBentinck and Markham Main the main culprits. Having them down andgetting them back on line drained cash from the company just when itshould have been pouring funds into developing Coventry. ConsequentlyCI arranged a loan facility of up to #30m. In November it breached someof the conditions of the loan and the banks withdrew their cooperationand by the end of the year the company was in deep trouble. At the timeof writing Coal Investments looked set to retain the support of thebanks, but at the expense of another rights issue (see separate story).Betws, Hatfield, Tower: the real niche minersThree collieries are now run independently; Betws, Hatfield and Tower.Each has its own management structure and each its own priorities. Inmarketing they have each concentrated on specific sectors, aiming tomake a name in ways that the bigger companies cannot easily do. Allthree did very well in 1995.Betws is the oldest of the three and is approaching its second birthdayas an independent operation. It was taken on as a management buy-outafter BC closed it as one of the original 10 no-hopers announced inOctober 1992. The mine produced ahead of budget at 110,000t last yearand by March will have mined 200,000t since re-opening. Its managerMartin Cook says that Betws Anthracite is profitable and that it haspaid off 50% of its debt. Cook will not cite numbers but, at110,000t/yr, turnover is likely to be #5-8m/yr.Betws employs 110, working by shot-firing, and runs a prep. plantsupplied by Unifloc. According to Cook, it is likely to turn out thesame volume in 1996 and for the next seven to eight years will stickwith this annual rate. In three years time, Betws plans to startdevelopment work on the Rock seam, which Cook says will add another 10-15 years to the mine's life. Betws Anthracite has also seen itsmarketing relationships change. Its contract with Coal Products forwashed duff remains the same, but CP is now responsible for marketingthe sized output as well, following its takeover of Anglo Coal.Hatfield Coal Co. is another management buyout. It has rebuilt itselfby the simple expedient of offering the market what it always wanted.Hatfield's output is very popular because of its high quality,particularly in the sized grades. It shut, briefly, and had much of itsface gear removed by British Coal, partly because of an appallinglabour record and partly because BC's drive to increase efficiency alsoincreased the output of fines, which failed to pay their way.Hatfield now produces much the same as in the days before BC attemptedto make it more efficient - 400,000t/yr (Coal UK 48/6). It works hardto maximise sized output, using longwall techniques. It went intoprofit very quickly, selling sized output through traders and finesthrough Transcor. At 400,000t/yr, turnover ought not to be less than#10m. Its financial year runs from July to June. Last year it made#1.5m post-tax on an #11.5m turnover and 362,000t production.Goitre Tower Anthracite is the example that is celebrated by all of thepundits. With politicians queueing up to take credit for the workers'buyout's success, the real plaudits should be showered on the workforceitself. GTA recently announced pre-tax profits of #3.5m for 1995, whichit promptly divided between the work-force and its future investmentfund. It produced 400-450,000t and sold the lot, indicating a turnoverof #12-14m.South Wales gains one, loses oneFor the private mining industry in South Wales the most positive movewas the arrival of a new PLC, Consolidated Coal. This was launched torun five Neath Valley drift mines, to develop a briquetting worksnearby and subsequently took over the Sarn Helen opencast mine fromGlotec.Consolidated's arrival closely followed the loss of Ryan Mining. Havingfailed to acquire a BC region, Ryan's parent Ryan Group finallyaccepted that its debt burden was too high to sustain. It retreatedinto Crouch Mining and sold Ryan Mining to NSM for #25m including debttake-up.NSM is still swallowing its mouthful and continues to develop thePentreclwydau mine that Ryan had driven as far as the pit bottom. Big Pstarts coaling commercially in the summer, but it is already producingdevelopment coal. It will be a bord and pillar mine.The domestic trade turns upside downThe domestic solid fuel business had an awful year, with a warm spring,very hot summer and mild autumn ensuring that merchant stocks stayedhigh. Nevertheless, all of the leading distributors changed hands, orare doing so.First to go was Coal Products, sold by BC to its management. The newcompany started lucky, having missed a mild winter and geared up toendure the close season. Within months it bid for Anglo United's solidfuel businesses and it acquired Anglo Coal, with Hargreaves. Anglo'sefforts to sell Coalite have failed for the time being (see separatestory).Late in the year British Fuels was sold by BC to its management. It toostruck lucky. BC suffered the pain of a dismal heating year and, whenthe management team's Heptagon team took over, the weather turned cold.BF, like CP, has plenty of ambition and looks set to launch itself atthe domestic gas markets.Finally, the year ended with the last of the major distributioncompanies up for sale, PD Fuels. Its management has gained preferredbidder status to buy the company from Powell Duffryn and is aiming tocomplete within weeks.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996THE MARKET: FLATTERING TO DECEIVEIf 1995 was a great year for the UK coal industry, 1996 is the yearwhen the hangover starts. In England & Wales this year will see theimpact of the full operation of the gas stations that were delayed lastyear. It will also be the year when the nuclear industry minces beforeits prospective investors. Coal, as a consequence, will be squeezedand, by the end of the year 12.5mtce of coal-fired power burn will havebeen displaced.As 1996 progresses, 5GW of combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) plant willstart commercial operation. In the first half of the year BarkingPower's Barking Reach (IGW) station, which has already started working,has an impact. National Power's Little Barford (680MW), one of thechief problem stations, and Hydro/Norweb's Keadby (680MW), the otherwhich completes commissioning this month, also come on early in 1996.Together they will displace 6mtce.From the summer another 2.5GW will displace 6mtce of coal burn, taking1995's 52-53mt power station burn down to 40mtce/yr by the end of theyear. The actual burn for the whole of 1996 looks as though it will bebetween 42mtce and 46mtce. Assuming that Coal Investments is stillthere, it is at about this time that RJB finds that its market isshrinking but it does not appear to suffer until 1997. CI and the otherprivate miners will be supplying over 6mt to the generators who will beimporting at least 3mt, leaving RJB with 33-37mtce. Last year RJBsupplied 29mt under contract plus about 6mt of additional supplies.In 1997 the pace of gas station construction slows, but the effects oflate-1996 stations building up to full power, plus the timing ofcommissioning for the scheduled 1997 stations means that by autumn 1997the full impact of 17.5mtce of lost burn will be felt.Assuming rival suppliers remain at the same tonnage levels, implies ademand from RJB's mines of 25mtce/yr, against contracted tonnages of 28-29mtce/yr. With another 755MW station already under construction for1998 and a further 2.6GW planned, negotiations on future contracts willclearly be painful for the suppliers.Current CCGT development                      CommercialStation/MW             operation  Company/Partners           StatusBarking/1,000           end-1995  Barking Power             StartedLittle Barford/680    early-1996  National Power         CommissionKeadby/680              Jan 1996  Hydro/Norweb           CommissionConnah's Quay/1,400     mid-1996  PowerGen                 BuildingMedway/660              Aug 1996  AES Medway             CommissionCitigen/60                  1996  Citigen                  BuildingKing's Lynn/340         end-1996  Eastern Group            BuildingSalt Union/47               1996  Hydro/Salt Un.           BuildingTOTAL 1996    4,867 MW - 12.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1996Indian Queens/160     early-1997  Turb. Power              BuildingSouth Humber/750      early-1997  Humber Power             BuildingDidcot/1,350            mid-1997  National Power           BuildingTOTAL 1996-97  2,260MW - 17.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1997Avonmouth/755               1998  Hydro/British Gas        BuildingRuncorn/700                 1998  InterGen                Firm planEnfield/280            late-1998  Indeck                  Firm planTOTAL 1996-98  1,735MW - 22.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1998Winnington/300              1999  Brunner Mond            Firm planTeeside/800                 1999  Flotilla (Enron)        Firm planStaythorpe/1,500            1999  National Power          Firm planTOTAL 1996/99  2,600MW - 28.5mtce coal-burn displaced by end-1999GRAND TOTAL   10,462MW.Source: Power UK.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996M & G TAKES MC PANAMAXM & G is negotiating to take a panamax-sized cargo of Colombian productthrough the Redcar ore terminal. The shipment is expected to bedelivered in February-March and will comprise Carboandes materialloaded at Santa Marta. It is being shipped via MC Coal.Neither buyer nor trader would comment on the deal, beyond confirmingthat talks are underway, but its size has sparked plenty of excitementand speculation in the trading community. A move up to panamax-sizedtrades has long been a cherished ambition of UK importers, described byone as "inevitable", who have found themselves squeezed by the lowprice offers of local suppliers and by Sterling's weakness. Althoughhandy-sized shipments have come in this winter, for EH Bennett viaShell and for MacPhail via MC Coal, there has been a growing body ofopinion that such trade is very risky.Prices for Colombian screening product are unlikely to be below$36.00/t FOB, basis 12,000Btu GAR. After freight in a handy of wellover $12.00, plus discharge costs, the shipment lands in a UK port at#34-35.00/t and still has to be moved to a yard and screened. By fixinga panamax MC will probably shave $3.00 off the freight price,suggesting a landed #32.50/t.For M & G, the timing of the deal is also significant because deliveryas late as March indicates that the buyer is not that worried aboutmissing the housecoal season. By the time that screening can becompleted at the Hartlepool yard the season should be over. There willbe demand from merchants for good quality Colombian material forstocking but it will not be nearly as keen as during the season.This suggests that M & G has a different customer in mind, whoever isbuying the fines. It had a major fines customer two years ago inBritish Steel, when it sold on products generated by processing LaJagua coal supplied by Bridge. However, BS presumably lived withoutthat when Shell and Phibro got the rights to the La Jagua product andasked M & G a price it wouldn't pay. It also seems unlikely that BSwould be that bothered about securing large volumes of fines anywaysince it viewed the original M & G product as little more than fillercarbon.Either M & G has a new customer in mind or the finance deal offered byMC is such that M & G can afford to stock the sized coal for nextwinter and let the fines take care of themselves. MC's parentMitsubishi has more than a little financial clout.If it is a new customer then the three obvious choices are ICI,National Power and PowerGen. ICI looks a good prospect, on the buyer'sdoorstep and known to be fond of Colombian product. PG, with its ownsupplies of Colombian, looks unlikely. NP is an avid collector of cheapfines and has stations both north and south of the Tees, but they are afair-sized haul away.PG subsidiary PowerCoal has meanwhile booked freight for its Carbonesdel Caribe product (see separate story). One complaint of traders isthat any attempt to bring in alternative supplies of CdC product bringsinstant complaints from the utility to its suppliers. Although CdC hasnot apparently signed an exclusive deal, the PG business is big enoughit seems to make it effectively so in the UK.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996EASTERN SEEKS 500,000TEastern Group is on the verge of calling for offers of 500,000t fordelivery to Drakelow and High Marnham power stations in 1996/97. Thisis additional tonnage to that supplied to the stations and is thoughtto be partly a tester to see what is likely to be available in theevent that Eastern wins its bid for National Power's three stationdisposals. It is looking for deliveries from both domestic and overseassuppliers and is expected to prefer a low sulphur product.Contact: Sally-Ann Weston, Fuels Trading Manager, Eastern Group,Wherstead Park, PO Box 40, Wherstead, Ipswich, Suffolk, IP9 2AQ.Telephone (01473) 554725. Fax (01473) 554678.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996OWENS STARTS NEWCARBA new company has arisen from the ashes of MG Carbon UK. Using the sametelephone number as MGC, its name is Newcarb and its managing directoris Jeff Owens, former MD of MG Carbon.The new company has bought the stocks left by MGC at Immingham andKillingholme and it has bought some of the company's plant. It isoperating at the old MGC base in Sunderland. It will also importthrough "Humberside", according to Owens, probably Killingholme wherethere is the remnant of a stockpile bought by the company.Owens' partners in the enterprise are David Horrocks, the financialdirector, and Kevin Cornish, operations and industrial sales director.Both were formerly at MGC.Newcarb leaves behind the MGC base at Immingham, which was widely feltin the trade to have been expensive.MGC went into administrative receivership last October (Coal UK 46/14).Its debts were described by the administrator as "substantial", albeitowed primarily to its German parent companies. Other creditors wereexpected to receive close to 100p in the pound, thanks partly to thewillingness of the German companies to write off what is owed to them.Even so, one of the parents, MG Petroleum Coke, has angered traders byoffering product of its own throughout the administration period. It isnot known what MGPC's policy to sales in the north eastern UK will befrom now on.Newcarb. Telephone (0191) 510 9752. Fax (0191) 510 1357.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996BUYING AGENCY SEEKS 25,000TThe Buying Agency is about to tender for 23,500-25,000t of coal forJuly/June delivery. It needs the product chiefly to supply prisons. Theagency expects to pay #1.243m for the coal, indicating a deliveredprice of c. #50/t. It will issue official documents early in Februaryand will award by late-spring.Contact: Amanda Rummery, The Buying Agency, Fifth Floor, LiverBuilding, Liverpool, L3 1PE. Telephone (0151) 227 4262. Fax (0151) 2273315.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996NW NHS SEEKS 26,000TThe north western arm of NHS Supplies is seeking 23,500t of singles for11 sites and 2,500t of smalls for one for delivery in financial year1996/97. Bidders should express interest by February 3.Supplies currently come primarily from PowerCoal, but also from CoalInvestments and RJB Mining. The north western NHS Supplies office hasacted independently of the national office, based in Reading, sincelast spring.Contact: Mark Bagshaw, NHS Supplies, North West Division, Third Floor,Health Authority Headquarters, Watling Street Road, Fulwood, Preston,PR2 8GD. Telephone (01772) 831147. Fax (01772) 712986.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996RJB BUILDS A POWER PLANTRJB Mining is seeking bidders to supply and commission a 13.5MWcombined heat and power plant at its Monckton Coke & Chemicals works inRoyston, Barnsley. The station will be fuelled by coke oven gas fromthe works. It will burn 10m therms/yr and will produce 8,400kg/hour ofsteam. The plant must be working within nine months of the contract'scommissioning and the deadline for tenderers wishing to participatemust express interest by February 22.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996NP TURNS TO SELF-UNLOADERSNational Power's problems with its continuous unloaders at Tilburypower station (Coal UK 48/16) forced it to switch to self-unloadingvessels during December and January. Although the Kone-built unloaderslooked set to restart at the time of writing, NP had taken at leastfour Jebsen vessels through the terminal and almost certainly more.NP's problems started when a belt serving the unloader failed. Theutility had thought that it could use some old grab unloaders still atthe port but this proved impossible. It subsequently hired Jebsen tolift up to 150,000t and it almost certainly paid substantially more, atleast #2/t for Europoort loaders, for the privilege than it would havedone using its normal Stevie Clarke vessels.NP also took the P & O cape Pytchley through Bristol from New Orleansand is believed to have been the lead buyer behind the cape SCFEndurance, which called at Immingham from Hampton Roads. Another capeat Immingham from Hampton Roads, SKS Banner, may have been shared byBritish Steel and NP.PowerGen handled mainly local tonnage, with Lords Citrine and Hintontrading to Kingsnorth from the Tees and the Tyne. In addition, LordHinton made an unusual voyage to Kingsnorth from Poland.Hunterston took a cargo of petroleum coke from Texas City, whilstanother petcoke cargo came into the Tees from Los Angeles. Hunterstonalso took a cape for Nigen with Carbocol coal from Puerto Bolivar.UK/Ireland shipping calls in December 1995/January 1996Arrive/Sail    From           To          Ship               ReportPort Talbot    Xingang        -           Baia Noua         4/12/95Immingham      Hampton Roads  -           British Steel    11/12/95Liverpool      Ayr            -           Emerald          11/12/95Port Talbot    Vancouver      -           Menites          11/12/95Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Hinton      12/12/95Immingham      Baltimore      -           Primo            13/12/95Belfast        Durban         -           Cosa             14/12/95Ayr            -              N. Spain    Franz Keller     15/12/95Hunterston     Puerto Bolivar -           Mineral Century  15/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          15/12/95Rotterdam      -              Liverpool   Ashington        15/12/95Swansea        -              Immingham   Beli             15/12/95Swansea        -              Aviles      Mary C           15/12/95Amsterdam      -              Londonderry Lncing           16/12/95Newport        -              Rouen       Gorch Fock       16/12/95Ayr            -              Cork        Harting          17/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          17/12/95Immingham      Swansea        -           Sociality        17/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          18/12/95Newport        -              Bilbao      Klazina C        18/12/95Tyne           -              London      Donnington       18/12/95Cardiff        Hampton Roads  -           Nordic Bulker    19/12/95Arklow         Swansea        -           Gardwind         20/12/95Bristol        New Orleans    -           Pytchley         20/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          20/12/95Swansea        -              Spain       Natacha C        20/12/95Belfast        Durban         -           Blue Sky         21/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          21/12/95Immingham      Baltimore      -           SCF Endurance    21/12/95Szczecin       -              Ireland     Zwartemeer       21/12/95Belfast        Richards Bay   -           Western Winner   22/12/95Kingsnorth     Tees           -           Lord Citrine     22/12/95Gdansk         -              Cork        Wielun           23/12/95Swansea        -              Spain       Niquel           23/12/95Tees           Los Angeles    -           Ever Blessing    22/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          24/12/95Kingsnorth     Poland         -           Lord Hinton      24/12/95London         Hunterston     -           Pamela Everard   24/12/95Moneypoint     Santa Marta    -           Marine Courage   24/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          26/12/95Inverness      Szczecin       -           Short Sea Trader 26/12/95London         Hunterston     -           Sagacity         26/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling          27/12/95Swansea        -              Bilbao      Breezand         27/12/95Swansea        -              Spain       Polanco          27/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald          28/12/95London         Europoort      -           Tinnes           28/12/95Swansea        -              Immingham   Harting          29/12/95Gdansk         -              Foynes      Speciality       29/12/95Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Citrine     29/12/95Ayr            -              Seville     Sian             30/12/95Hunterston     Texas City     -           Giovanni Bottig  30/12/95Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald            1/1/96Gdansk         -              Wicklow     Short Sea Trader   2/1/96Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling            2/1/96Port Talbot    Hampton Roads  -           Western Bridge     2/1/96Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald            3/1/96Rotterdam      -              Londonderry Harting            3/1/96Swansea        -              Calais      Caspic             3/1/96Hunterston     -              London      Sociality          4/1/96Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Hinton        4/1/96Hunterston     -              Sligo       Bluebird           6/1/96Kingsnorth     Tyne           -           Lord Citrine       6/1/96Belfast        Ayr            -           Steyning           7/1/96Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald            7/1/96Lerwick        Garston        -           Nautica            9/1/96Swansea        -              Caen        Nancy              9/1/96Tyne           -              Kingsnorth  Lord Hinton        9/1/96Ayr            -              Drogheda    Arklow Abbey      10/1/96Hunterston     -              Bilbao      Cornet            10/1/96Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Emerald           10/1/96London         Europoort      -           Tertnes           10/1/96Immingham      Hampton Roads  -           SKS Banner        10/1/96Ayr            -              Londonderry Harting           11/1/96Belfast        Ayr            -           Lancing           11/1/96Bristol        Antwerp        -           Storrington       11/1/96Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling           11/1/96Swansea        -              Ostend      Sea Merlan        12/1/96Cork           Gdansk         -           Mielec            13/1/96Swansea        -              Bilbao      Buxtehude         13/1/96Clyde          -              Kilroot     Harting           14/1/96Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling           14/1/96London         Europoort      -           Trollnes          14/1/96Hunterston     -              Kilroot     Birling           16/1/96London         Hunterston     -           Sanguity          16/1/96Belfast        Ayr            -           Lancing           17/1/96London         Tyne           -           Trollnes          17/1/96Source: Lloyd's List, Shipping Movements.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996STRATHCLYDE SEEKS 90,000TStrathclyde Regional Council* has issued a tender for the supply of45,000t/yr of sized product for 1996 and 1997. This is to supplyoffices, schools, colleges and other council buildings with mainlysingles, but also doubles and trebles. Delivery is to be made withinfour days of each order, primarily by pneumatic or tipper lorries.Strathclyde is currently supplied by Scottish Coal via a contractinherited from British Coal.Meanwhile, Fife Regional Council has opted to stick with Scottish Coalfor its 3,750t (Coal UK 44/9) to be delivered over two years fromJanuary 1996. It paid #165,000, indicating a price of #44/t for whatwas primarily singles grade coal.* Contact: Head of Purchasing, Strathclyde Regional Council, PO Box462, Glasgow, G2 4PD. Telephone (0141) 227 3130. Fax (0141) 227 3869.UK coal import values: #/tonne                     Coking            Steam           Anthracite                  Oct      Nov      Oct      Nov      Oct      NovAustralia        38.17    39.16     -        -        -        -Canada           37.16    37.34     -        -        -        -China             -        -        -        -        -        -Colombia         37.30     -       33.47    30.25    40.00     -Estonia           -        -        -        -        -        -Indonesia         -        -        -        -        -        -Latvia            -        -        -        -        -        -Lithuania         -        -        -        -        -        -Poland           35.62     -       29.00    28.84    59.41    56.41Russia            -        -        -        -       47.61    45.73S Africa          -        -       32.80    32.35    63.59    67.78US               39.97    38.37    27.82    26.56    42.35    66.04Venezuela         -        -        -        -        -        -Vietnam           -        -        -        -       59.87     -Index (a)       101.7    102.5     88.4     84.4     83.3     87.7(a) MCIS Import Indices; Indexed to average Q1 1992 valuesSource: HM Customs & Excise.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996IMPORTS MOVE 7% AHEADMistakes by HM Customs notwithstanding, steam coal imports of 5.4mtwere 7% ahead of year-ago levels in January-November. This figure couldhave been higher were it not for the classification of 123,000t ofimports for PowerGen, through Kingsnorth, as a coking coal. Othermistakes by Customs put 61,000t of Australian coking coal imported viaAvonmouth for Britannia Zinc at an average #42.31/t in as an anthracitecargo, along with 71,000t of US coking coal delivered to British Steelthrough Immingham and Port Talbot.Steam coal imports from Colombia retained their leading position, at2.1mt, but have slipped back to 21% behind year-ago levels. Those fromthe US were up threefold at 1.5mt and South African arrivals up by 155%to 890,000t. All of the other major suppliers are behind, though, withPolish deliveries down 18% at 600,000t, indicating continued poordemand for sized material. Russian imports were down 81% at 42,000t andAustralian down 65% to the one cape-load delivered to Hunterston forNigen early in 1995.Coking coal imports, about which there is most confusion thanks toCustoms, are apparently 14% behind a year ago at 6.2mt. The onlyexporter to see a rise in shipments to the UK was Canada, which inJanuary-November supplied 1.25mt and in November alone a panamax-load.The US has apparently lost ground by 34% to 1.6mt and Australia by 7%to 3.1mt. However, US supplies have been mis-classified by Customs mostoften this year. A more realistic estimate for overall coking coalimports was 7.9mt, up 6% from 7.4mt.Anthracite imports were recorded by Customs at 2.6mt, up 77% from ayear ago. However, stripping out the mis-classifications changes thefigure to 860,000t, down 30% from 1.2mt. Imports from Vietnam were downby 46% at 101,000t and those from South Africa by 18% at 201,000t.Chinese arrivals grew 33.5% to 77,000t.Import values continue to climb slowly, although a lack of sizedimports made them lower for steam coal than they should be in November.Bennett took a 25,000t cargo of Chinese anthracite at an import valueof #62.43/t. A 5,470t cargo of Russian anthracite product, reportedlylanded at Immingham at #41.78, may have been sized bituminous product.ICF took a 24,000t cargo from Poland at #29.98/t whilst 59,000t ofColombian landed at Hunterston, presumably for West of Scotland Fuels,came in at #30.97/t. Other values included a cape of US product atAvonmouth at #28.99/t and a 115,000t landed through Immingham at anaverage #27.05/t. US product coming through London averaged #26.59/twhilst a Polish handy-sized cargo came through the same port at#27.68/t.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996BRUNNER MOND DROPS COALBrunner Mond has abandoned plans to build a 300MW coal-fired powerstation at Northwich in Cheshire. Its decision follows a collapse ingas prices and the takeover by Scottish Power of one of its partners inthe enterprise, Manweb. The plant would have burnt 1mt/yr from 1999onwards.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996OPENCAST NERVES FRAYFears are growing that opencast mining is becoming an impossible taskfor the vast majority of its practitioners. The private opencast sectorthat survived and grew through British Coal's dominance of the coalindustry has found itself in a much tougher world following thecorporation's privatisation. In particular, the disappearance of BC hasadded to the pressures coming to bear on the opencasters from planningauthorities. With tightening UK power station fuel prices and growinganti-development sentiment generally it is becoming more and moredifficult to justify and then proceed with projects.The chief pressure on new opencast operators is competitive.Ironically, having produced the cheapest available coal for many years,opencast is now being undercut by deep-mined coals. More than oneopencaster has expressed the belief to Coal UK that life would beeasier without Coal Investments, for example, because of the latter'shighly competitive pricing strategies. It has won contracts at mine-mouth prices of 95p-#1.10/GJ, beating many opencasters easily. At thesame time, RJB Mining's costs have come down at some pits to the pointwhere opencast costs are higher, so the opencasters can thank theirlucky stars that RJB is tied to contracts to March 1998.Such a tight pricing environment makes it difficult for new operatorsto establish themselves but those already strong in the industry arealso finding it tough. For them the situation is different because theyare trying to work to contracts granted them by the generators whichshadow those granted to RJB. The smaller operators get 9.5p/GJ less,but they can work to these levels profitably, if they can get sites towork. And it is here that the second biggest problem has surfaced.For whatever reason, councils have become much more hostile to theopencast industry. This has been especially the case since theHeseltine pit closure announcements in October 1992 and since thegovernment revised minerals planning guidelines a year ago.It became more than apparent in areas like Leeds and Barnsley whereCoal Contractors and Cobex in particular have had their fingers burntchasing what looked to be reasonable opencast proposals. One operatortold Coal UK last week, "South Yorkshire is effectively a no-go area".Cobex's losses of three sites there in 1995, which had been viewed atthe time as racing certainties, effectively sterilised resources.Northumberland, possibly the richest opencast county in terms ofreserves, took one look at the closure of its last colliery atEllington and announced that no more opencast approvals would be given.It has calmed down following Ellington's re-opening by RJB but theatmosphere is definitely cooler than before privatisation.The thing that has opencasters tearing their hair out most with theplanners is a general sense that the dichotomy between the approachesof the two sides to the mineral planning guidelines has widened sinceMPG-3 was revised. Time after time the complaint to Coal UK is thatcouncils interpret the rules as they wish to and that, even when theirplanning officials recommend approvals, they can and do find reasons toreject proposals.And the frustration does not end there. The opencasters complain thatthe Department of the Environment is stonewalling them, refusing toaccept even that there is a problem. Environment tells Coal UK thatinterpretation is a matter for local authorities.The cost of submitting planning proposals has also risen sharply. Apartfrom the expense involved in preparing environmental assessmentsopencasters are still coming round to the likelihood that they will nowhave to routinely hire consultants to prepare reports on dust, noise,interaction with other workings, archaeological acceptability,hydrology and potential effects on local flora and fauna. There haveeven been instances where the local council has taken one look at thereports prepared and opted to hire its own consultants and to chargethem out to the poor old applicant. Quids in for the consultants but aterrible waste of the opencaster's resources.Councils are also clearly a lot less trusting of opencast applicantsnow that BC has gone. Here they have taken to asking what guaranteesthere are that restorations will be undertaken as pledged when thecoaling has been completed. In the old days BC issued licences andcouncils were able to accept the implied word of a state-owned companythat it was ultimately responsible for any clean-up costs. Nowadaysthere is no guarantee that there will be anybody to clear up any messif an opencaster goes belly up half-way through a job. Coalpro, themain representative body, is close to strengthening its position as theindustry's voice by approving a bond scheme that will pledge all of itsmembers to salvaging a site if one of them runs into trouble. Untilthen, councils will remain distrustful.The companies themselves will clearly have their work cut out to gainplanning permissions to meet their contracts with the generators. Incontrast with the three successors of BC, which look very comfortablyplaced to expand opencast production, the private miners are looking ata drastic cut in output unless planning permissions become easier towin. Coal Contractors, for example, desperately needed to win approvalfor the Albion site (see separate story) because its portfolio barelyscraped past the next financial year without it. Clay is chasing siteswell outside of its normal remit, in Scotland and Northumberland. Cobexhas done the same and has also bought a site from another company,SAFE.Opencast - Where's it going to come from?                               Reserve Output  RemainingSite          MPA     Contractor '000t 95/96  FY 96 1997  1998 1999Major suppliersCelticBrnhenllysa   Powys   Taywood   1,150         200   200   200   200Derlwyn 2A    W Glam  Walters     250   100East PitA     W Glam  RJB       3,700   350   350   350   350   350Ffos LasA     Dyfed   Wimpey    5,650   625   625   625   100Ffos y Fran   M Glam  None     10,000         300   800 1,000 1,000Gilfach Iagoa Dyfed   Wimpey    1,200   150   100Gt White Tip  M Glam  Wimpey      650   100Kays & Kear   Gwent   Taywood     325   100Llanilid West M Glam  RJB         700   175   175   175Nant HelenA   W Glam  AMEC      3,500   375   375   100Park Slip West Glam   None      1,000               200   250   250SelarA        Glam    None      3,150         200   400   400   400TOTAL                          21,750 1,975 2,325 2,535 2,300 2,200RJB MiningArkwright     Derby   None      3,500   250   500   550   550   550Bleak House   Staffs  Wimpey    2,700   700   700   700Bleak House Ex Staffs None      2,200                     700   700Broughton Ldg Cumbria RJB         850   190   190   190Castle Farm   Durham  None        250    50Club Room Farm Derby  None        180         120    60Colliersdean  N'land  RJB       1,000   100Hathery Lane  N'land  None      1,350         250   400   400   100Herrington    Sund.   Tendered    550         200   200   150Kirk          Derby   Miller    2,225   300   300   100Minorca       Leics   None        750          50   200   200   200Nadins        Derby   Taywood   2,450   550   550   350Normanton Byp Wakef'd None        225    75Orgreave      R'ham   None      3,865    50   350   700   700   700Plenmeller    N'land  Mowlem    2,000   225   225   225   225   200Priors Close N Durham None        650   165   165   165   165Rockingham    Barns   CoalCo    1,050   150Rye Hill      Durham  Wimpey      825   225Shellbrook    Leics   None        210   100   110Smotherfly    Derby   Kier      1,700   300   300   300   300   100St Aidans     Leeds   None      2,850         100   500   750   750Stobswood     N'land  Crouch   12,250 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000White Lea     Durham  None      1,500         250   250   250   250Whitwell      Durham  None        250    80    80    50TOTAL                          48,075 4,510 5,440 5,940 5,390 4,550Scottish CoalAirdsgreen    Cumn'k  CoalCo    1,050   250   240   100Blindwells    E Loth  AMEC      3,600   470   285Chalmerston   Cumn'k  Crouch    2,750   240Chalmerston   Cumn'k  None      1,000                      50   200Dalquhandy    Clyde   Crouch   15,000   650   650   650   650   650Damside       M'well  CL & M    2,500   230   230   230   230   230House of Water Cumn'k Tendering 2,400         120   350   350   350Lambhill      Perth   Crouch      725   230   230    70Piperhill     Cumn'k  Fenton      765   200Rosslynlee    Midlth  FJB       1,300   280   200Westfield     Fife    Miller    3,550   390   390   100TOTAL                          36,640 2,990 2,345 1,500 1,280 1,430TOTAL BC Succesors                    9,475 10,110 9,975 8,970 8,180Other substantial companiesBanksDoe Hill      Derby   None        250    50   200Foxholes Farm Derby   None        156          56   100North Wood    Durham  None        190    95    60    60Renishaw Park Derby   None        450          50   125   125   125Others                            200   150   120TOTAL                                   295   486   285   125   125ClayCandles       Shrop   None        250   100    50Dost Hill     Staffs  None         86          86Fordel Mains  Midlth  Faslane**   200         100    50Odd House     Leics   None        200    80    70Others                                  100    90    90    90    30TOTAL                                   280   396   140    90    30CoalCo/NSMEllwood       Cumn'k  None        100    90Hecklers Yard M'well  None        150    60Ireland Coll  Derby   Fitzwise*   200    80    80Low Gordon    Durham  None        550    50   125   125   125   125Park Hall     Derby   None                    125   100Ravensworth   Gates   None        100    30    70Others                                   80TOTAL                                   390   400   225   125   125GolightlyS Brandon     Durham  None        229   100   100Bets Lane     N'Land  None        310   135   135    40TOTAL                             539   235   235    40LAWBirnie Knowie Cumn'k  None        140    45Wester Mosshat Clyde  None        210    90    90    30Others                                   35TOTAL                                   170    90    30MillstoneShortrigg    Falkirk  None         50    50Threaprig Rd Falkirk  None        250    50   100   100TOTAL                             300   100   100   100RackwoodBag Lane     Lancs    None        230   135    20Hannahston   Cumnock  None        216   108   108Hawks Nest Wd Leeds   None        250    65   120    65Old Leyland Gn Lancs  Cobex       115    40Skares Road  Cumn'k   None      4,500               450   450   450TOTAL                                   348   238   515   450   450OthersMiller Moor Gn  Notts None        123         123Miller Groce F                    100Caledon Woodbk  Fife  None        235    60    60    60    55C'Land Kidburn Cumbria None       170         100    70Fenton Northrg W Loth None        160    80    80D&S Blair Ford Perth  None        150    50    50Procoal Culrose Dunferm None      150    50Harrison Lowca Cumbria  None      500Russell    2 sites   None         220   125   125    25    25    25Grant New Farm  Midloth None      200    50   100Brown Cairncub  Dunferm None      250    90    70Cochrane Mossb  M'well  None      225    40    40TOTAL                                   545   898   305   175    75A - Anthracite, * Subsidiary of NSM working its own site. **Subsidiary of Clay working its own site.Source: The opencast iondustry, MCIS: Opencasting in the UK.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996GILLESPIE TO MINE EASTERGillespie Group has applied for permission to work a 600,000t site atEaster Balbeggie Farm in Kirkcaldy. It will work the site over fiveyears and will reclaim a scrap yard on the site. Gillespie has beenmarketing the coal for some time and is thought to have a salesagreement with Transcor.Also in Scotland, Procoal has applied for permission to work the160,000t Devonside site near Saline in Dunfermline. It will mine forthree years.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996MAIDENS HALL LOOKS HOPEFULRJB's Maidens Hall planning application, submitted to NorthumberlandCounty Council by British Coal before privatisation, goes before thecouncil's planning committee on February 5. This is for a 3.5mt site tobe worked over six years. The site is north of Stobswood and, inplanning terms, looks as though it should go through. It would feed itsoutput through the Butterwell disposal point. Maidens Hall is adjacentto Colliersdean and will use the latter's void for its overburden. Thecoal is of very high quality (26.6GJ/t, sulphur 1.2%) and will beproduced at low cost.Maidens Hall coal specsMoisture                  10.0%Ash                        9.6%Vols                      28.2%Sulphur                    1.22%CV                        26.61Gj/tBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996GOLIGHTLY MINES AT HOMEGolightly has applied for permission to work the West Lodge Farm site,near its home base in Shildon, County Durham. This is a 10.5 hectaresite with 100,000t of reserves which will be mined over 12 months. Theland will be restored to agricultural use, apart from a one hectarearea which has been allocated in the Sedgewick district plan forindustrial use. Golightly will cite the industrial site as likely tosterilise any coal deposits. The company will also stabilise groundwhich has been mined previously.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996BANKS APPLIES FOR PITHOUSE WESTHJ Banks has applied for permission to work a 280,000t opencast sitewhich includes 50,000t of fire clay, adjacent to its current 190,000tNorth Wood site. If approved, work at Pithouse West will begin early in1998, as North Wood finishes. The latter's void will take theoverburden of the former.Pithouse West is a 73 hectare site, including the 42 hectares coveredby North Wood, and will be worked in the same way as its predecessor.Banks will use the woodland in which the sites are operated to screenoff its working and will restore the whole area to commercial woodlandon completion. Coaling will take 26-29 months. The output will almostcertainly follow North Wood's product to the generators.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996EUROPE TIGHTENS EA NEEDSThe government has reportedly agreed to amendments to the EuropeanEnvironmental Impact Assessment Directive, which will tighten theplanning requirements on UK opencasters.At the moment only planners proposing sites which cover more than 50hectares, c. 250,000t of reserves, are obliged to submit an assessmentof their proposals' impact on the environment. The new adoptions willmean that sites covering 25 hectares and upwards will be obliged to dothis.In practice, the legislation is merely catching up with currentprofessional practices since most opencasters have already accepted theneed to submit EA reports for sites this small.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996COALCO CLOSES ON ALBIONThe plans of a joint venture of Coal Contractors, Hepworth and LeighEnvironmental to develop the 1.5mt Albion site, with a followinglandfill operation, has been given the green light by LeicestershireCounty Council's environment committee.Albion is one of the most complex opencast sites to have emerged. It ispart of a long established clay exploitation region; Hepworth runs aclay works on the site, which is close to Ashby de la Zouch. It hasbeen the subject of intense consultation between the county, BritishCoal and assorted minerals exploitation companies.The CoalCo plan, which goes before a full council meeting on January31, envisages the exploitation of the coal over four to five yearsfollowed by a landfill by Leigh over 17 years. It is the latter thathas aroused the most local opposition. There is, say council officials,"major dereliction" in the area, and granting the planning permissionwould entail its restoration, which will start very early in the site'sworking. If the deal is rejected by the council, then BC and the DTIstand to fork out #20m or more restoring the site, since BC createdmuch of the dereliction there. Given CoalCo's recent problems gettingpermissions for sites, coaling is likely to start as soon as possible,once planning permission is granted. (Although there are stocks of claystill on the site, the mineral is largely worked out. There is only asmall amount of muck to be shifted to expose the first coal and miningcan begin within months of gaining permits from the relevantauthorities.)As a part of the deal the main land-owner, British Coal, willrelinquish interest in other reserves in the area at Hanging Hill andPick. RJB Mining's former Moira interest has also been bought by Leigh.RJB's nearby Minorca site, 750,000t, is unaffected by the likely Albionapproval and is expected to go before the county planning officersearly in the summer. There are also thought to be other reserves closeto Moira which are unaffected by the Albion site.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996ASFORDBY: DELAYED TO SUMMER?RJB's Asfordby mine looks as though it could be virtually out of actionfor up to six months. The pit has been having problems since lastspring when a roof fall took out the main conveyor belt. Now it is alsosuffering from compression problems and, apparently, from water. Theflooding has been beaten back but the other problems remain.Asfordby has long been viewed as a potential problem pit, but morebecause of the poor quality of its coal, barely 22GJ/t net, andprodigious ash levels, than engineering. Although the mine itself wasnever envisaged before privatisation as likely to be problem-free, itsdevelopers were always confident that technology could overcome anyproblems before production began. When the 530 metre shafts were sunk,BC overcame the severe water problems associated with the KeuperWaterstones and Bunter sandstones by constructing a freeze chamber.Asfordby was developed by British Coal as a multi-entry retreat facepit, to very modern standards, and RJB simply carried on with BC'sdevelopment plan. However, mining engineers that have seen the problemsthat have developed there have likened the pit to "another Wistow".Wistow is now RJB's star performer but it soaked up millions before BCgot it to its current state.The Asfordby mine was initially planned as a 4-5mt/yr super-pit. BCsubsequently dropped plans to exploit the Parkgate seam andconcentrated on working the Deep Main seam at 2.2mt/yr.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996RAIL-FREIGHT GOES FOR $400MWisconsin Central has the lead in the race to take over the UK's bulkrail freight businesses (Coal UK 48/7). It is the Department ofTransport's preferred bidder after making a combined bid of $400m(#265m), including $47m (#31m) for the REs business that runs the mailtrains.It is now circulating the US financial institutions seeking backing forits bid. It beat a consortium of Loadhaul and Omnitrax for its prize.Also-rans were Mainline and Transrail.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996POWERCOAL FIXES 1996 FREIGHTPowerGen subsidiary PowerCoal has covered the bulk of its freightrequirements for deliveries of the Carbones de Caribe product that itimports from Colombia through Liverpool. It will pay $10.50 to Frenchshipowner Cetragpa for six 55,000t shipments of screening/washingproduct from Cartagena and Santa Marta. It also has the option, at$10.80, to load in Cartagena only. Shipments will be spread evenlythrough 1996 and there may be one or two additional cargoes fixed laterin the month.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996PG PICKS HAULIERSPowerGen has chosen four hauliers to transport coal to its Cottam,Ferrybridge, Fiddlers Ferry and Ratcliffe stations. Anglo Distributionof New Ollerton will serve Cottam and Ferrybridge. LCT Transport ofWigan and JWG Graham Transport of Penrith will serve Fiddlers Ferry. K& M Hauliers of Hucknall will serve Ratcliffe.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996STERLING SUPPORTS SHORT SEA RATESA slow short sea freight market saw little movement in rates in dollarterms but the weakness of Sterling meant that UK importers ended uppaying slightly more in January than in December.London broker Galbraith reports: "if anything, a slight downward trend"in rates at the moment. This has been caused by severe ice conditionsin the Baltic Sea which has forced tonnage south in search of cargoes.According to Galbraith, "fresh coal business is in very short supply".Rates are expected to remain static while the severe weather retainsits hold. When the thaw starts, though, a rush of tonnage northwards islikely to spark a recovery.In the deep sea sector, freights are still very soft. London brokerClarkson says that a cape can be hired for Rotterdam discharge at $6.10from the US east coast, for $6.00 (#4.00) from Puerto Bolivar inColombia and for $5.15 from Richards Bay in South Africa. In each casethese rates are about the same as month ago levels but a good $1-2lower than three months ago.Deep sea shipments booked to the UK and Ireland included the PowerGentonnage which is detailed separately. Amongst the individual shipmentsin January, a Mitsui vessel was booked by Korean company Keoyang fromPuerto Bolivar to Moneypoint with 130,000t at $5.50. A Keoyang vesselwas later let to Ireland's Electricity Supply Board for a journey fromLa Cienaga (Drummond's La Loma) in Colombia at $5.85-5.90 for a110,000t cargo. Cobelfret booked a panamax from Santa Marta toHunterston, presumably residual 1995 Phibro business, at $9.50 for end-January loading. A British Steel-bound panamax was booked by Lorentzenfrom Roberts Bank to Port Talbot at c. $12.00, at least $1.50 down onlast done business and a panamax was taken from Gladstone to Imminghamat $12.95.Typical short sea freight rates: #/tRoute                        Shipment  Jan 95 Nov 95 Dec 95 Jan 96Rotterdam-Thames             5-6,000t    4.90   7.30   5.50   5.60Rotterdam-Immingham          2-2,500t    6.30   8.90   8.15   8.25Rotterdam-S Wales            5-6,000t    7.40   9.85   8.10   8.25Rotterdam-Irish Sea          2-3,000t    9.15  10.65  10.40  10.60Russian Baltic - WCUK        5-6,000t   11.60  13.00  12.00  12.25Russian Baltic - ECUK        5-6,000t    9.75  11.10  10.50  10.60Poland - ECUK               10-13,000t   8.00   7.60   7.80   7.95Poland - WCUK               10-13,000t  10.05  10.30  10.05  10.25Source: Galbraiths.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996CI WINS BANKS' SUPPORT?Coal Investments looks as though it will live to fight another day. Atthe time of writing, its three main bankers looked set to maintainsupport for the company but also to insist on a rights issue. This canprobably not happen until March. The company got great support from itswork-force who turned out to cut coal during the Christmas holiday.It is expected to make some personnel changes. Former-ICI Paints chiefexecutive Herman Scopes joins the company as a non-executive directorand a new chief executive has apparently been lined up. It is not knownwhat current chief executive Malcolm Edwards' future position will be,but the company has apparently successfully argued that there is stillan active role for him.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996SHARES HOLD UPCoal company shares continue to behave as though the problems of CoalInvestments did not exist, assuaging fears that they might be trippedup by a knock on effect. Shares in RJB Mining traded at 555-560pthroughout the month, although brokers expectations of the company'sresults appear to be improving.Smaller company equity values hardly changed, with NSM steady at 77p,Rackwood at 47p and Consolidated Coal at 50-60p. Waverley MiningFinance, which recently put a financial package together to take overMonktonhall Mining, saw rises in January from the low 100s to 110-115p.Other energy shares were quiet, with the exception of Scottish Powerand Powell Duffryn. SP's price recovered to 385p after bullish newsabout its takeover of Manweb was released. PD saw shares recover fromtheir recent low levels, rising from 430p to 450p on prospectivesubsidiary disposals.UK coal-linked share price movements                                  1995              1996Company          Sector          Jan 23    Jan 8   Jan 15    Jan 23FT All Share                    1,469.2  1,821.1  1,795.3  1,8354.5Anglo United     Chemicals          1.8      0.8      0.8       0.8British Steel    Metals           147.5    166.5    164.5     167.0Coal Inv.S       Mining            85.0     25.0     25.0      25.0Cons. Coal       Mining             -       60.0     50.0      55.0Dobson Park      Engineering       70.0    130.0    130.0     130.0Mowlem           Construction      98.0     59.5     67.0      64.0National Power   Electricity      477.0    443.0    434.0     439.0NSM              Construction      98.0     76.0     77.0      77.0Powell Duffryn   Transport        508.0    429.0    423.0     450.0PowerGen         Electricity      536.0    514.0    505.0     518.0Rackwood         Mining            31.0     47.0     47.0      47.0RJB Mining       Mining           318.0    558.0    556.0     558.0Scottish Power   Electricity      324.0    384.0    377.0     385.0Taylor Woodrow   Construction     124.0    117.0    115.0     125.0Waverley Mng     Mining           106.0    105.5    113.0     111.0Wimpey           Construction     118.0    138.0    141.0     142.0Young Group      Mining             2.0      1.0      1.0       1.0S - Shares suspendedSource: Financial Times.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996CELTIC GOES INTERNATIONALCeltic Energy has launched Celtic International Fuel Trading, to marketits exports in Europe. Simon Varley, formerly of PDIF, is the newcompany's boss. It will operate from new offices, yet to be found, inLondon and meanwhile can be contacted via Celtic's Aberaman head officeor PDIF's HQ at Mardell House, 9-11 Vaughan Road, Harpenden, Herts.Tel: (01582) 461000 Fax: (01582) 460535.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOAL UK via NewsNetJanuary 30, 1996COALITE TALKS COLLAPSEAnglo United and Apax Partners have stopped negotiations that wouldhave taken Coalite into the hands of a management team backed by Apax.Anglo is now apparently refusing to discuss the company withprospective buyers. The talks stalled on price but all prospectivebuyers had also expressed concerns about potential environmentalproblems.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-7IA059-000323-B029-181http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey77.html 205.156.212.5 19970114225825 text/html 57048HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:56:24 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:19 GMTContent-length: 56861Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey77.html Sample Issue Copyright COAL WEEK via NewsNet January 1, 1996 Vol. 22, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MARKET DEVELOPMENT (310 words) SAN ANTONIO SIGNS TERM DEAL; KENNECOTT WRAPS UP ALL PRB SUPPLIES (210 words) BROWN STEPS DOWN AS CONSOL CEO; KARIS TAKES ON GENERAL OPERATIONS (254 words) TAX CREDITS PUT FIRE UNDER BRIQUETTES; COVOL TARGETS UTILITIES, STEEL MILLS (552 words) CURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICES CURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICES (871 words) US MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES US MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES (91 words) CURRENT ANTHRACITE PRICES CURRENT ANTHRACITE PRICES (71 words) MARKET PERSPECTIVE MARKET PERSPECTIVE (299 words) RECENT TRANSACTIONS TU ELECTRIC (132 words) KENTUCKY UTILITIES (97 words) SOUTHERN ILLINOIS POWER COOPERATIVE (102 words) PUBLIC SERVICE NEW HAMPSHIRE (94 words) ORLANDO FL UTILITIES COMMISSION (160 words) NEW YORK STATE ELECTRIC & GAS (95 words) PENNSYLVANIA POWER & LIGHT (120 words) NEW ENGLAND ELECTRIC POWER (180 words) WEST VIRGINIA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION (34 words) APPALACHIAN POWER (156 words) MONONGAHELA POWER (284 words) INTERNATIONAL ENEL, THE ITALIAN ELECTRIC UTILITY (205 words) CHILE'S COMERCIAL CATUMUTUN S.A. (155 words) TMT COAL (148 words) PEOPLE IN COAL TEXAS UTILITIES ELECTRIC (64 words) DRUMMOND COAL SALES (69 words) WASHINGTON WIRE DOE SPONSORED CLEAN COAL PROGRAM FOR STEEL INDUSTRY MOVES TO TEST STAGE (574 words) WASHINGTON WIRE: FEDERAL BRIEFS MSHA EXTENDS COMMENTS; ROYALTY RATE (82 words) BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT (108 words) MARKETS WEPCO NEAR SUPPLY DEALS WITH KENNECOTT, PEABODY, CONSOL, WRI (193 words) BALTIMORE GAS SIGNS 7 CONTRACTS; DEALS COVER 4.5 MILLION TONS OVER 2 YEARS (193 words) LANSING, GM INK 10-YEAR STEAM PACT; DEAL WILL BOOST MUNIS COAL BURNS (233 words) EFC BUYS 90,000 TONS FOR JANUARY; DIAMOND MAY, CONSOL, RIVERWOOD WILL SHIP (263 words) INDUSTRY PACIFICORP IN TALKS WITH BIG RIVERS; WOULD OPERATE PLANTS FOR 25 YEARS (220 words) CONSOL BUYS RESERVES FROM PP&L; GREENE HILL BLOCKS UP AGAINST BAILEY (117 words) BIG RIVERS SEEKS TO CANCEL PACT; SAYS GREEN RIVER WON DEAL BY FRAUD (256 words) CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoMARKET DEVELOPMENT   On other fronts, Southern Company Services was watching waiting, aspokesperson said last week. In early December, an Alabama Powerspokesperson said that the utility would probably solicit for first quartercoal supplies. Georgia Power has had bids in hand since mid-November forall of its plants except Scherer. But last week, the SCS spokesperson saidfuels officials were evaluating the weather, the load and powerplant burnsbefore taking action for either utility. In addition, a spokesperson forMississippi Power said the utility still has not decided on a term coalsupplier for its Watson plant.   Maple Creek Mining is continuing to make progress in the Pittsburghseam, said MCM's president Robert Murray last month. Last year, sales agentAmerican Coal Sales circulated sheets of specifications developed by formerowner U.S. Steel Mining but Murray said quality has been far better. Themine has produced metallurgical and steam coals of 1.1-1.2 percent drysulfur, 5.5 percent dry ash and 4-5 percent moisture.   The key to Maple Creek's high quality is it's management's decision toconcentrate on coal in the main bench of the Pittsburgh seam, Murray said.Costs, too are lower than expected, largely because of the 2,900 feet ofcontinuous haulage MCM installed in the old mine. Murray said the mine'sproductivity will soon improve again as it installs bridge continuoushaulage system for the mines continuous miners.   ``It's a real complement to our workforce,'' who installed the mine'slongwall and haulage systems, cleaned up the mine and got into productionin 73 days, Murray said.   While Murray has said that the target for Maple Creek's coal is the morelucrative metallurgical market rather than the utlity market and the mine'sbase contract is with USX Corp., the coal has appeared on the steam coalmarket including a test cokntract with PSI Energy.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoSAN ANTONIO SIGNS TERM DEAL; KENNECOTT WRAPS UP ALL PRB SUPPLIES   The San Antonio City Public Service Board has signed a five-year,roughly 2.6 million t/y coal supply agreement with Kennecott Energy tocover the balance of the utility's 5 million t/y burn not covered under aseparate, pre-existing contract Kennecott inherited in its purchase of theCordero mine from Sun Coal.   Although declining to discuss coal pricing beyond that which wasavailable at the formal bid opening (10-16-95 Coal Week), an official saidthat the award was made as per the bid, which would mean that the Corderocoal is priced at $3.45/t FOB the mine. The new contract does not includeprice reopeners. Deliveries begin this month and continue through 2000.   While the Cordero contracts seem to close the door to spot coal venturesby San Antonio, there are provisions giving the utility some flexibility inthe event of delivery -- or other -- problems. Additionally, San Antonioplans to continue its alternative coal testing program, which included thedelivery in December of 45,000 tons of coal from the Kennecott-managedColowyo mine in Colorado. The test coal resulted from a ``specialarrangement'' and was not a purchase off of the October bids, he said.   Delivery of the Cordero coal is by Union Pacific.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoBROWN STEPS DOWN AS CONSOL CEO; KARIS TAKES ON GENERAL OPERATIONS   Twilight fell on an era in the U.S. coal industry Jan. 1 when B.R. Brownstepped down as chief executive officer of CONSOL Inc. in favor of William G. Karis, CONSOL's president. Brown remains CONSOL's chairman,focusing on ``selected strategic issues.''   A year earlier, Karis moved up from a position as executive vicepresident - administration to president. Karis has been gradually addingfunctions over the past several years and by January 1995, he supervisedmost functions except for marketing and planning, which Brown retained. AsCEO, Karis will be responsible for the general management of CONSOL Inc.and its subsidiaries in the CONSOL Coal Group.   Brown had been CONSOL's CEO since 1982. He presided over four contractnegotiations with the United Mine Workers of America, a number of majoracquisitions including Island Creek Coal Corp. and the installation ofhigh-productivity longwall mines.   Brown's tenure also saw DuPont sell a 50 percent interest in CONSOL toRheinbraun A.G. of Germany. DuPont considers CONSOL to be a non-corebusiness and officials have said in the past that DuPont would entertainoffers for its remaining interest.   CONSOL declined to elaborate on either Brown's or Karis' duties and saidneither man was available for interview.   With Karis moving up, CONSOL Inc. announced Dec. 20 that it had namedMichael F. Nemser senior vice president-administration, over financial andgeneral administrative activities at the CONSOL companies. Nemser will beeffectively replaced by Karen L. Musial as vice president and treasurer ofCONSOL Inc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoTAX CREDITS PUT FIRE UNDER BRIQUETTES; COVOL TARGETS UTILITIES, STEELMILLS   Armed with a favorable ruling by the Internal Revenue Service, COVOLTechnologies Inc. announced Dec. 19 that it had formed a partnership tobuild a coal briquetting plant in Utah, designed to produce 250,000-1million t/y of reprocessed coal fines.   Spokesperson Alan Ayres said the partnership, Utah Synfuel #1, would bethe first of up to 20 such ventures scattered around the U.S. They will useCOVOL Technologies' patented briquetting system which features a specialbinder that forms a chemical bond with coal particles, he said. Because thebinder bonds chemically with coal fines and changes their structure, theCOVOL's briquettes qualify as a synthetic fuel.   Separately, COVOL has two projects to use its briquetting process tocombine iron-bearing mill wastes, and limestone with coal fines or cokebreeze -- coke fines not generally usable in steel making -- to produce afeed stock for electric arc furnaces. One project is with Gulf States Steelto recycle coke breeze and mill wastes. The other is located at VineyardUT.   In September the IRS issued a letter ruling that, as a synfuel producer,COVOL is eligible for Alternative Energy Production tax credits undersection 29 of the Internal Revenue Code. As a result, briquettes producedby Utah Synfuel #1 ``investors in the partnership will receiveapproximately $25 of tax credits for every ton of coal briquettes producedby the partnership,'' COVOL announced. COVOL has not yet decided on a sitefor Utah Synfuels #1, Ayres said.   However, in November, COVOL agreed to buy the Wellington Loadout inCarbon County UT from Nevada Electric Investment Co. Wellington also was athe site of a wash plant and COVOL announced at the time that the areacontained at least 5 million tons of coal fines which it planned to convertto briquettes. Ayres said coal fines at the site are low in sulfur contentand would lend themselves easily to most utility uses.   Utilities have shown themselves resistant to synthetic fuels outside ofthe testing phase, but COVOL plans to market its all-coal briquettesanyway. The firm may have found a better market for its briquetting processin the steel industry, Ayres said.   COVOL found that steel mills produce a large volume of waste materialsthat now must be stockpiled or disposed of in landfills. COVOL developedthe idea of briquetting iron oxide materials to produce a material that canbe melted in an electric arc furnace with traditional ferric scrap.Briquettes of coal fines or coke breeze mixed with limestone and ironwastes can be used as a direct charge in blast furnaces, reducing the needfor coke, he said.   COVOL first built a miniature electric arc furnace at its Price UTresearch facility to prove out their iron-rich briquettes. Ayres said COVOLiron-rich briquettes were the principle material in a commercial-scale meltat a mill in the southeast. COVOL and Geneva Steel have built a briquettingplant at Vineyard UT to produce the coal-iron briquette. COVOL also isconsidering a commercial electric arc furnace mini-mill in Utah. COVOL anda steel mill which has requested anonymity have agreed to build a cokebreeze briquetting plant at a southeastern mill. Gulf States Steel andCOVOL have a letter of intent for a briquetted iron reduction facility inAlabama.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoCURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICESCoal Week's contract and spot market price listings follow ``marker''specifications determined on a combination of acknowledged transactions andconfidential state-of-trade discussions with buyers, sellers and coaltraders. These prices reflect only coals bought and sold for the purpose ofgenerating electricity. Metallurgical and industrial steam coals arereflected elsewhere in Coal Week. Prices are updated as warranted andexclude distress transactions. Some specifications may be changedperiodically.Price ranges reflect differences in current conditions for similar coalscaused by quantity, term or transportation arrangements. Spot prices covertransactions of 12 months or less. Contract prices reflect current quotesfor contracts of one year or more and include renegotiated prices based onmarket price reopeners. Prices are listed in US dollars per short ton FOBmine site, ``in the car'' or ``in the barge.'' Prices include severance,Black Lung and other applicable taxes. Producing districts are as definedin the Bituminous Coal Act of 1937.Users of this table are reminded that coal prices vary for quality,transportation and business considerations. Deviations from a marker coal'sspecs for heat value, sulfur, ash and chemical content should be consideredwhen making comparisons to coals of personal interest.Escalations. Here are some indices used in coal contract escalationclauses. Other escalators may be used.Producer Price Index. All commodities (1982 = 100) 6/95-125.3, 7/95-125.3,8/95-125.0PPI, Mining Equipment: 6/95-139.1, 7/95-139.1, 8/95-139.1.PPI, All Coal Rail Transportation: (12/1984 = 100) 6/95-107.6, 7/95-107.0,8/95-107.1.PPI, Bituminous Coal Rail Transportation: (12/1984 = 100) 6/95-107.7,7/95-107.1, 8/95-107.1.PPI, Diesel Fuel: 6/95-58.9, 7/95-54.2, 8/95-56.0.Labor (UMWA National Bituminous Coal Wage Agreement): General wageincreases -- 12/15/95-$0.40.PENALTY PROVISIONSSulfur penalties range from 25 cents - $1.00/t for each 0.1% deviation fromguarantee. Some contracts use SO2 allowances or EPA penalties to computepenalties or downward adjustments.Ash penalty provisions are quite prevalent with 30 cents/t or more foreach full 1% deviation over guarantee are not unheard of.Contract penalty/premium provisions for Btu/lb. deviations generally arebased as shown below:1) Deviation in Btu/lb. x FOB contract price per BTU/lb. = adjusted price.2) As received Btu/lb./guaranteed Btu/lb. x contract price = adjustedprice.CURRENT STEAM COAL MARKER PRICES                                 SpecificationsProducing districts    Btu/lb.   Sulfur     Ash1) Central PA,        12,300     2.0        13.0parts of VA & MD      12,500     1.8        10                      12,500     1.0        10.02) Western PA         12,200     1.5        14.0                      12,500     2.5        10.0                      13,200     1.7         9.0                      13,000     1.0         9.03) Northern WV        12,300     3.0        13.0                      12,300     1.0         8.0                      13,000     2.5        10.0                      13,000     1.0         9.04) Ohio               11,000     2.6        14.0                      11,800     3.0        11.0                      12,200     4.0         6.07) Southeastern WV    12,000     1.2lbs     10.0parts of VA           12,500     1.5        12.0                      13,000     1.0         8.08) Southern WV,       11,900     1.1        12.0Eastern KY,           12,500     1.0        10.0parts of VA &         12,500     1.2lbs     10.0Northern TN           12,500     1.5        13.0                      13,000     1.2lbs     8-9                      13,000     1.0        9-10                      13,000     1.1lbs     9.09) Western KY         11,000     3.6        14.2                      11,800     2.6        13.0                      12,300     2.5        10.010) Illinois          10,500     3.5        13.0                      11,700     2.5        8.5                      12,000     1.2        1011) Indiana           10,500     3.0        12.0                      11,000     3.0        12.0                      11,300     2.5        9.012) Iowa               9,500     4.0        15.013) AL & Southern TN  12,000     1.6        13.1                      12,500     0.75       10.015) KS, MO, &         11,700     4.5        12.0parts of OK           12,000     4.5        11.0                      13,000     1.2lbs     9.016 & 17) Colorado     10,700     0.5        9.1                      11,300     0.75       9.0                      11,600     0.5        9.018) Parts of NM & AZ  10,800     0.5        10.519) Wyoming            8,400     0.5        6.0                       8,800     0.5        7.5                      10,000     0.6        6.5                      10,500     0.6        8.520) Utah              11,500     0.6        9.022) Montana            8,600     0.7        8.0                       9,300     0.4        6.0                            Price--$/t FOB mineProducing districts        Term            Spot1) Central PA,             26.00         23.50   -24.00parts of VA & MD           24.00         22.50   -25.00                           24.50         23.40   -24.482) Western PA                           18.25   -20.22                           28.00        17.00   -18.50                   22.00   25.00        21.50   -26.40                           24.50        22.00   -24.003) Northern WV     20.00  -22.00        16.90   -19.18                           18.00        21.35   -24.43                  23.00   -23.60        16.50   -22.60                  24.00   -25.00        23.30   -28.004) Ohio                  --             22.00                           20.49        19.45   -22.50                  21.90   -24.20        17.50   -20.107) Southeastern WV         21.25        21.50   -22.00parts of VA       23.25   -25.00        21.90   -24.50                          --                 --8) Southern WV,   23.50   -25.00        18.20   -23.00Eastern KY,       22.50   -26.50        21.75   -23.23parts of VA &     25.50   -27.00        24.50   -26.00Northern TN       25.00   -28.00        20.64   -24.45                  25.25   -28.00        27.00   -30.00                  24.00   -25.00        25.00   -28.00                  28.90   -34.25            --9) Western KY     17.95   -19.50        16.50   -18.50                  20.00    22.00        18.00   -20.05                  19.65   -21.00        19.50   -23.0010) Illinois      21.00   -22.30        14.00   -17.00                           23.50                -21.25                                        23.0011) Indiana                15.90       15.00    -16.00                           18.50       20.00    -21.50                           19.00       18.05     20.0012) Iowa                    --                 --13) AL & Soutouthern TN     --         23.00    -25.00                  31.50   -44.50       23.00    -25.0015) KS, MO, &               --                 --parts of OK                 --                 --                                               --16 & 17) Colorado 12.00   -14.00     10.00      -11.50                           13.50     11.75      -14.00                  14.50   -15.75     12.50      -15.5018) Parts of NM & AZ        --                   15.5019) Wyoming        3.30    -4.00      2.90       -3.75                   4.25    -4.48      4.10       -4.48                         --          12.00                           17.50     11.30      -13.5020) Utah          14.50   -15.00     11.00      -16.0022) Montana                 6.25      4.75       -5.50                   5.95    -7.20      5.06       -6.50Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoUS MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES               US MARKER METALLURGICAL COAL PRICES                 Volatile                    Price FOB                 Matter     Sulfur   Ash     prep plantOrigin              %         %       %      $/t SpotNorth            17-22      1.0     7-9     --Appalachia       23-30      1.0     7-9     30-32(PA, N. WV       33-35+     1-1.5   7-9     29-31and MD)Central          17-22      1.0     6-8     35-37Appalachia       23-30      1.0     6-8     35-38(S. WV, E. KY    33-35      1.0     6-8     30-32N. TN and VA)South            17-25     <1.0     5-7     --Appalachia       26-30     <1.0     5-7     33-34Prices are shown  on an ``as received'' not ``dry'' basis.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, No    CURRENT ANTHRACITE PRICESAnthracite prices at the breakers, subject to negotiation and contracts,are as follows:Size Standard $/t FOB Breakers    Ash Max % Low HighEgg 11 70.00 75.00Stove 11 72.75 75.00Chestnut 11 72.75 74.00Pea 12 65.50 72.00Buckwheat 13 61.00 64.50Rice 13 68.00 72.00Barley 15 61.00 65.00#4 16 mid-40s mid-60s#5 16 low-30s mid-40s#6 18 18.00 38.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoMARKET PERSPECTIVE   Activity in the coal markets at year's end was mainly the wrapping up of1995. There were simply no solicitations to report east or west of theMississippi. Most purchases reported last week had been in the works forsome time and surprised few people. Prices were reported flat to weakeningdespite what most observers believes is pretty good production disciplinein Appalachia.   If December was slow, sources expect January to be slow as well, despitecold weather that dipped down to south Florida. ``A lot of people aretrying to push inventories down,'' one sales executive said inmid-December. While temperatures were cold through most of the East, therehas been no severe cold snap that would push burns way up. And, withoutsome sort of significant development, prices will not move much one way orthe other.   By the same token, small stockpiles carry the threat of pricevolatility. During the severe winter of 1994, utilities found that they hadto move quickly to keep their inventories in the safety range and pricessoared.   Sources agreed that A.T. Massey has made major inroads into the marketfor quality high-volatile metallurgical coal. The steel mills are beingsqueezed between flat prices for their products and higher costs forlow-vol coals. Massey, which has improved its productivity and cut costs,has been selling its high-quality met coals at $30-$30.50/t to meet themills' demands, the sources said.   One development that could affect the eastern markets is the decision ofItaly's Enel electric utility to pick up options on more than 900,000 tonsof coal for delivery in early 1996 (see item below.) With plans to buyanother 2.7 million tons this year, Enel could have an effect on theoverall steam coal market.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoTU ELECTRIC   TU Electric will rely on three Powder River Basin producers to supplyits Monticello power plant in 1996 with some 500,000 tons of subbituminouscoal as a supplement to Texas lignite. Competing offers out of the San JuanBasin had been called for (10-16-95 Coal Week) and at least one coal wastested (10-23-95 Coal Week) at the three-unit station, located near Mt.Pleasant in northeast Texas. Rail transportation contracts were still undernegotiation last week.   The half-million tons will be purchased by TU Electric on a spot basis,with the coal to be supplied from Kennecott Energy's Cordero mine, fromARCO Coal's Black Thunder mine, and out of Cyprus Amax Minerals' Belle Ayrmine. The Monticello plant uses about 11 million tons of fuel annually.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoKENTUCKY UTILITIES   As of late last week, Kentucky Utilities had not signed contracts aimedat supplying its Ghent station with a million tons of coal annually overthe next three years; however, an official said the contracts have beenapproved. Once the contracts are signed, Knott-Floyd Land will supply Ghentwith 300,000 t/y of coal from the Mott's Branch job in Knott County KY,Ashland Coal will supply 400,000 t/y from its Dal-Tex operation, and CyprusAmax will supply 300,000 t/y of Kanawha County WV coal produced byCannelton Industries, the official said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoSOUTHERN ILLINOIS POWER COOPERATIVE   Southern Illinois Power Cooperative has signed a two-year coal supplycontract with Jader Fuel and may sign a two-year agreement with Arch CoalSales, contracts which together could supply the utility with 500,000 tonsof truck-delivered coal in total.   Jader already supplies the utility under an existing contract whichexpires in May, 1996. The new two-year agreement will then kick in, withJader to supply 100,000 t/y out of its mine near Harrisburg IL.   A 150,000 t/y agreement with Arch depends on successful test burns. Thecoal is to be supplied out of the Captain mine.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoPUBLIC SERVICE NEW HAMPSHIRE   Public Service New Hampshire has split awards under Northeast Utilities'November solicitation for the Schiller station evenly between domestic andforeign suppliers, according to an NU official, who said last week that thecoal will be supplied out of Colombia South America and ``probably WestVirginia.'' Each unnamed source will be called on to supply ``at least100,000 tons, plus or minus 20 percent each,'' he said. As reportedpreviously (11-20-95 Coal Week), NU expects to return to the spot market,probably in the second quarter of 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoORLANDO FL UTILITIES COMMISSION   Based on a solicitation issued to its list of domestic suppliers by FAXon Dec. 12, the Orlando FL Utilities Commission announced the purchase offour unit train-loads of coal on the spot market from Blue Diamond Coal,according to OUC spokesman Sheridan Becht. All of the coal is for burningat OUC's 460 Mw Stanton No. 1 generating unit. Sealed bids from thesolicitation, which sought up to six unit train loads, or about 57,000tons, were due Dec. 21. OUC received a total of 17 bids.   Two train loads of coal will be delivered each month in January andFebruary 1996, on rail lines owned by CSX Transportation.   The specs on the Blue Diamond coal, which will come from its Leatherwoodmine in eastern Kentucky, were 12,600 minimum Btu/lb., a maximum ashcontent of 8.5 percent, 40 percent maximum fines, 8 percent maximummoisture, and a maximum sulfur content of 1.3 percent.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoNEW YORK STATE ELECTRIC & GAS   New York State Electric & Gas has purchased 321,000 tons of coal fordelivery in January, with 285,000 tons of that purchased under termcontracts and 36,000 tons purchased off of the spot market.CONSOL/Blacksville contract coal tonnages will go to the Kintigh station(168,000 tons) and to Milliken (81,000 tons), while the Greenidge andGoudey station each will receive 18,000 tons of contract coal fromPeabody's Federal mine. The Jennison station will receive 24,000 tons ofspot coal and Hickling station will receive 12,000 tons of spot coal.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoPENNSYLVANIA POWER & LIGHT   Pennsylvania Power & Light stations will receive 760,000 tons of coal inJanuary, a figure which includes 160,000 tons purchased off of the spotmarket and 700,000 tons purchased off of contracts. The Montour stationwill receive 240,000 tons of contract coal and 120,000 tons of spot,Brunner Island will receive 300,000 tons of contract coal, Martins Creekwill receive 60,000 tons of contract coal, and Sunbury will receive 30,000tons of contract coal and 10,000 tons of spot. In December, Sunburyreceived 45,000 tons of anthracite silt and 11,000 tons of petroleum coke,while Holtwood received 15,000 tons of anthracite silt, 2,000 tons ofhigher-grade prepared anthracite and 9,000 tons of petroleum coke.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoNEW ENGLAND ELECTRIC POWER   New England Electric Power has renegotiated coal supply contracts withMingo Logan Coal Co. and A.T. Massey Coal Co. and is very close to signingfinal agreements on a 1-3 year, 200,000 t/y deal with Crown Coal & Coke.Both the Mingo Logan and Massey renegotiations were for possible tonnagesof 160,000-400,000 t/y.   The Mingo Logan renegotiation covers 18 months, while the Masseyrenegotiation is for a two-year period. Massey will supply the coal fromits Sidney and Sprouse Creek operations.   The Crown Coal & Coke deal resulted from offers received in early fall(9-4-95 Coal Week) on 180,000-720,000 tons of coal for delivery in 1996.The coal will originate on a Norfolk Southern rail line and be deliveredinitially to Lamberts Point.   The coal will be delivered aboard International Shipholding's EnergyEnterprise, formerly owned by Keystone Shipping under the name, EnergyIndependence. It recently was sold to NEPCO and resold the same day toInternational. The Energy Enterprise, no longer dedicated solely to NEPCOneeds, has been drydocked for routine maintenance and epairs.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoWEST VIRGINIA PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION   Reports filed with the West Virginia Public Service Commission for themonth of September show that coal prices remained fairly stable through thefirst three quarters of 1995.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoAPPALACHIAN POWER   Appalachian Power reached a nine-month supply agreement with Cyprus AmaxCoal for 12,400 Btu/lb. coal from Cannelton Industries Lady Dunnpreparation plant. The price for a blend of Fayette County and KanawhaCounty WV coals was $23.23/t FOB barge for a 0.7 percent sulfur, 11.2percent ash product. Deliveries were to begin in September 1995 and end inJune 1996.   For the Sporn plant, APCo has a one-year contract with Anker EnergyCorp. and Camelot Coal for mid-sulfur coals from Monongalia County WV. InSeptember Anker delivered 10,483 tons of coal from its Patriot divisionsfor $21.33/t FOB barge of 112.7 cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,108Btu/lb., 1.6 percent sulfur and 13.7 percent ash. Also in September,Camelot delivered 20,761 tons of coal from Mepco Coal operations for an FOBbarge price of $21.35/t or 111.8 cents/mmBtu on specs of 12,213 Btu/lb.,1.y percent sulfur and 13.4 percent ash.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoMONONGAHELA POWER   Monongahela Power reached four-month contracts with American Coal Sales,CONSOL Inc. and American Carbon & Minerals for high-sulfur coal for thePleasants power plant, the West Virginia PSC report shows. In September,American Coal Sales shipped more than 84,000 tons of coal from Ohio ValleyCoal Co.'s Powhatan No. 6 mine for $18.75/t FOB mine or 79.8 cents/mmBtudelivered on specs of 12,728 Btu/lb., 4.3 percent sulfur and 9.5 percentash.   CONSOL `s shipped but 4,792 tons to Pleasants in September from itsMcElroy and Shoemaker mine in Marshall County WV for $16.90/t FOB mine or75.4 cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,248 Btu/lb., 3.8 percent sulfurand 10.3 percent ash. American Carbon & Minerals shipped a Washington PAcoal from the Donora Dock in September $15.87/t FOB barge or 78.8cents/mmBtu delivered for coal speced at 11,974 Btu/lb., 2.5 percent sulfurand 11.8 percent ash.   For the Albright plant, MonPower bought three-month spot supplies fromAnker Energy, Mepco and Bridgeview Coal, with supplies starting August 1and ending October 31. Anker Energy supplied mid-sulfur coal from itsPatriot affiliate's Fairfax No. 9 mine in Preston County WV at $20.67/t FOBor 93.5 cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,456 Btu/lb., 1.6 percentsulfur and 13.5 percent ash. A second shipment of 12,416 Btu/lb. coal cost$20.22/t.   Mepco Coal delivered 19,434 tons of 12,130 Btu/lb., 1.7 percent sulfurand 13.6 percent ash coal from its Mays Run mine in Monongalia County WVfor $21.28/t FOB mine or 93.9 cents/mmBtu delivered. Bridgeview Coalshipped 4,655 tons of Fayette County PA coal for $20.67/t FOB or 93.5cents/mmBtu delivered on specs of 12,127 Btu/lb., 1.5 percent sulfur and13.4 percent ash.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoENEL, THE ITALIAN ELECTRIC UTILITY   Enel, the Italian electric utility, has declared options on 850,000metric tons (934,700 st) of coal from seven U.S. suppliers and is preparinga solicitation for up to 2.5 million mt more for delivery in 1996. This isin addition to 500,000 mt that Peabody and Drummond are each scheduled toship to Enel during 1996 under their long-term contracts.   Enel is unusual for an international customer in that it holdstransportation contracts with U.S. railroads, primarily the NorfolkSouthern. Although it effectively buys coal at the mine, Enel evaluates iton a loaded basis in ocean-going vessels. Enel also buys premium U.S. coalof at least 12,500 Btu/lb. and pays well for the quality. The utility's1995 ``spot'' contracts were for $41-$41.50/mt..   Enel has exercised options with AMCI Coal Export for 170,000 mt at aprice of $41.05; with CONSOL on 70,000 mt at $41.25/mt; with Peabody on170,000 mt at $41.35; with Franklin Coal Sales on 120,000 mt at $41.40/mt;with A.T. Massey for 120,000 mt at $41.45/mt; with MAPCO Coal for 170,000mt at $41.50/mt, and with Pittston for 30,000 mt at $41.55/mt. Enel'soriginal tender called for a combined base tonnage of 2.5 million mt.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoCHILE'S COMERCIAL CATUMUTUN S.A.   Chile's Comercial Catumutun S.A., which buys coal for Chilean industrialand utility accounts, has arranged to buy two cargoes of test coals fromU.S. shippers, CCSA director Frederick J. Murrell said at year's end.Murrell declined to name the suppliers, but he said one will ship ahandymax cargo of about 40,000 mt from a U.S. West Coast port and the otherwill ship a 30,000-mt cargo from ``another U.S. port.''   In June, CCSA tendered for four 35,000-mt cargoes to be delivered to thefirm's port at Las Ventanas beginning in November 1995 (CWI 6-26-95).CCSA's tender specifications were 6,700 kcal/kg or 12,060 Btu/lb. GAR, 35percent volatiles, 1 percent sulfur preferred (2 percent maximum), 14percent ash and 12 percent moisture. CCSA's total 1995 sales will be about600,000 mt of imported and domestic coal. In 1996, the firm said it expectstotal sales of about 900,000 mt.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoTMT COAL   TMT Coal, the joint venture of Transmar Coal and Tomen America, willsupply Savannah Electric & Power with about 36,000 mt of South Americancoal to test the new coal unloading pier at the utility's Kraft powerplant. A spokesperson for Southern Company Services Inc., which acts asSE&P's coal supplier, confirmed the purchase last week.   SCS tendered Oct. 11 for 30,000 mt of coal to test the new unloadingfacility under construction at MP 20 on the Savannah River (10-24-95 CoalWeek). The plant has no unloading facilities, so the tender specified thatthe coal be delivered by a belt self-unloader. The SCS spokesman confirmedthat the coal will have specifications of 12,300 Btu/lb., 1.1 percentsulfur and 6 percent ash and will be loaded at the port of Palmerejo. Thecoal will be a blend of Colombian and Venezuelan coals.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoTEXAS UTILITIES ELECTRIC   Texas Utilities Electric has created a new position, coal acquisitionand transportation manager, to be filled by Thomas R. Jacobsen, who hasbeen Burlington Northern Railroad's assistant vice president/marketing andstrategic planning since 1990. From 1978-1984, Jacobsen was atransportation consultant with R.L. Banks & Associates, and before that hewas a transportation market analyst for Norfolk Southern.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoDRUMMOND COAL SALES   Drummond Coal Sales has announced new telephone numbers for WestBoettger and Jim Sobule, who have been the sales and marketing staff forCaballo Rojo, Inc. Sobule and Boettger have moved from Denver, where theyhad been located when the Caballo Rojo mine was owned by Mobil, toBirmingham AL. Boettger's number will be 205-945-6434; Sobule's is205-945-6436. Their telecopier number is 205-945-6415.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoDOE SPONSORED CLEAN COAL PROGRAM FOR STEEL INDUSTRY MOVES TO TEST STAGE   The U.S. Department of Energy's partial support of an innovativetechnology that could sharply reduce future air pollutant emissions fromthe nation's iron-making industry recently moved into full test operations,approximately five years after DOE initially approved the project.   The project is the 25th to begin operations in the DOE's Clean CoalTechnology Program, a joint government-industry program designed todemonstrate environmentally clean ways to use the nation's coal reserves.The 32-month testing program will be carried out at the Bethlehem SteelCorp. Burns Harbor plant in Chesterton IN. Commissioning and start-uptesting was completed last November.   The project involves retrofitting existing iron-making blast furnaceswith a technology that injects crushed coal directly into the furnace.Conventional iron-making requires that coal first be converted into coke, aprocess that can release significant emissions of airborne toxic impuritiesalong with nitrogen and sulfur based pollutants.   Because the ``granulated coal injection system'' can replace up to 40percent of the coke required in a blast furnace, it has the potential forsignificantly lowering air emissions while enhancing blast furnaceproduction, according to a DOE description.   To prepare for the test operations, Bethlehem Steel retrofitted two highcapacity blast furnaces at Burns Harbor with the new technology. Each unitcan produce 7,000 net tons per day of hot metal. Currently the plant isprocessing more than 225 pounds of coal per each net ton of hot metal, anamount which could be increased to as much as 400 pounds per ton during thetest program.   Bituminous coals from West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Illinois and Kentuckywill be tested along with possibly a subbituminous coal from the westernU.S. The direct coal injection process allows the use of a wide range ofrelatively inexpensive coals, in contrast with coke, which can be made onlyfrom certain high-quality coals.   Sulfur from the coal is removed by the limestone flux added to the blastfurnace, and is retained by the slag, which is a marketable by-product. Inaddition to replacing the coke, the new technology can also improveperformance of the blast furnace. In conventional blast furnaces, naturalgas or oil is used as a fuel supplement. Because coal contains lesshydrogen than either gas or oil, it does not cause as severe a reduction intemperatures in critically important zones inside the blast furnace. Thehigher, more stable temperatures in the furnace improves the efficiency ofthe iron-making process, noted DOE.DOE agreement calls for technology sharing   If successful, the granulated coal injection system can be applied toessentially all U.S. blast furnaces. The technology should be applicable toany type of coal commercially available in the United States with theexception of various high moisture coals.   As part of the agreement with the DOE's Morgantown WV Energy TechnologyCenter, which oversees the project for the federal government, BethlehemSteel will share the results of the project with other steel companies. TheClean Coal program requires that at least 50 percent of the cost of aproject be shared by the private sector, with the Energy Departmentcontributing the remainder. In this project, Bethlehem Steel is providingmore than 80 percent of the total cost of $191.7-million, with DOEproviding about $30-million.   The project was first approved by DOE in December 1989. Design of theretrofit technology was started in November 1990 when a cooperativeagreement was signed. Construction began in September 1993.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoMSHA EXTENDS COMMENTS; ROYALTY RATE   The U.S. Labor Department's Mine Safety & Health Administration hasextended the comment period to February 5, 1996 on a proposed rule dealingwith the requirements for approval of flame resistant conveyor belts to beused in underground mines. Last October MSHA reopened its rulemaking on thematter and issued a new proposal. As a result of the response from themining community, MSHA decided to extend the comment period. Contact:Patricia Silvey, MSHA (Tel. 703-235-1910).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoBUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT   The U.S. Interior Department's Bureau of Land Management has extendeduntil the year 2000 the designation of a nine country area in Oklahoma fora Category-5 rating for federal coal royalty rate purposes. The region wasgranted such a federal royalty rate reduction status in 1990, and BLM hasdetermined that the coal market in the region is essentially unchanged. Asa result, holders of federal coal leases in the region will pay reducedfederal royalty rates of two percent for underground coal and four percentfor surface mined coal. The notice was published in the Federal Register ofDec. 4, 1995.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoWEPCO NEAR SUPPLY DEALS WITH KENNECOTT, PEABODY, CONSOL, WRI   Wisconsin Electric Power Co. is close to contracts on subbituminous andbituminous coal supplies for its Oak Creek power plant.   Meanwhile, for its Presque Isle plant, the utility has worked up a 1996,300,000-ton supply contract with Peabody Western for coal from the Big Skymine in Montana. WEPCO also revised its contract with WestmorelandResources for coal from the Absaloka mine to run through 1997 at 300,000t/y, said a utility official.   The not-yet-finalized Oak Creek contracts include a likely 4-year,600,000 t/y agreement with Kennecott Energy from the Antelope mine in thePowder River Basin, which could increase to roughly 1 million t/y if WEPCOis successful in burning a 50-50 blend of subbituminous and bituminous coalat the plant.   For bituminous supplies at Oak Creek, WEPCO and CONSOL are workingtoward finalizing a one-year, 500,000-ton minimum agreement, under whichCONSOL would supply Pittsburgh No. 8 seam coal from the Bailey-Enlow Forkcomplex, the official said. The still-pending agreement would supply all ofthe utility's Oak Creek bituminous coal needs which exceed the 800,000 t/ysupplied by Pittsburg & Midway from its York Canyon complex.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoBALTIMORE GAS SIGNS 7 CONTRACTS; DEALS COVER 4.5 MILLION TONS OVER 2 YEARS   Baltimore Gas & Electric has signed seven coal supply contracts whichwill supply its three coal-fired stations with 4.5 million tons of coalover the next two years. Eight coal companies will furnish the coal fromeight mines under a series of two-year agreements.   For its Brandon Shores plant, BG&E signed a 300,000 t/y contract withAshland Coal, which will fill the order with coal from its Hobet 21 andDal-Tex operations. Also for Brandon Shores, a partnership involving PBSCoals Inc. and Southeast Fuels Inc. will supply 400,000 t/y from the Holden22 mine.   The Wagner station will receive 300,000 t/y of coal from the Julianamine under a contract with Anker Energy, while Coastal Coal Sales Inc. willsupply 200,000 t/y from the Brooks Run mine.   The utility's Crane station will receive 300,000 t/y from the Sentinelmine under a contract signed with a partnership involving Anker EnergyCorp. and Courtney Foos. Peabody COALSALES will supply Crane with 200,000t/y under a contract to be filled from the Federal No. 2 mine, and CONSOLwill supply the station with 150,000 t/y from its Blacksville operation.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoLANSING, GM INK 10-YEAR STEAM PACT; DEAL WILL BOOST MUNIS COAL BURNS   The Lansing (MI) Board of Water & Light and General Motors have agreedto a 10-year deal which will provide steam to three GM auto plants, inaddition to one already serviced by the utility. A two-mile, 20-inch steammain, paid for by GM, should be completed by November 1996, connectingLansing's Eckert and Moores Park plants to the auto maker's steamdistribution system.   Earlier (10-23-95 Coal Week), an official estimated that the Lansing/GMarrangement then under study would increase the coal burn by some 70percent at Moores Park, going from 50,000 t/y to 85,000 t/y. Lansing'sMoores Park coal contract with Costain Coal for coal from the Ramsey mineruns through 1996.   Lansing has been supplying steam to GM's Plant No. 1, near downtownLansing. The new deal will provide steam for heating and manufacturingprocesses at GM's nearby body and fabrications plants, as well as theCrafte Centre. Lansing's steam sales will be returned to levels notrequired since the late 1960s, before the loss of downtown buildings,before the construction of more energy efficient buildings, and beforerecessions of the 1970s and the introduction of more efficient powerproduction technologies.   For the first five years into the arrangement, GM will be paying lessthan the rate it now pays for steam; after that, GM's payment for steamwill be structured from published indices.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoEFC BUYS 90,000 TONS FOR JANUARY; DIAMOND MAY, CONSOL, RIVERWOOD WILL SHIP   Electric Fuels Corp., which acts as the fuel-buying agent for FloridaPower Corp., announced the purchase of 90,000 tons of coal from threevendors in four transactions on the spot market for delivery in Januaryunder its monthly inventory true-up program.   Transportation will be either direct to Crystal River by rail on linesowned by CSX Transportation, or by river barge. Barge coal moves throughthe river system down the Mississippi to EFC's International MarineTerminals south of New Orleans, where it is transloaded on to oceangoingvessels for the trip to Crystal River.   Diamond May Coal Co. will provide 27,000 tons for Crystal River unitsNos. 1-2, which will be transported by rail from Yellow Creek. The specswere 12,100 Btu/lb., 11 percent ash, a sulfur content of 0.9-1.2 percent,and 8 percent moisture. Diamond May Coal Co. also will provide 30,000 tonsfor Crystal River units Nos. 4-5, which will be transported by barge fromKMRD Dock on the Big Sandy River. The specs were 12,500 Btu/lb., 11 percentash, a sulfur content of 0.75 percent, and 8 percent.   CONSOL Inc. received a contract for 27,000 tons of coal for CrystalRiver units Nos. 4-5, which will be delivered by rail from Mill Creek. Thespecs were 12,700 Btu/lb., 9.5 percent ash, 0.75 percent sulfur, and 8percent moisture. Riverwood Coals Sales Inc. will supply 6,000 tons, bargedfrom River Eagle Dock on the Big Sandy River. The specs were 12,300Btu/lb., 11 percent ash, a sulfur content of 0.75 percent, and 7 percentmoisture.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoPACIFICORP IN TALKS WITH BIG RIVERS; WOULD OPERATE PLANTS FOR 25 YEARS   PacifiCorp would assume responsibility for coal buying, power plantoperation and surplus power marketing for Big Rivers Electric Corp. under a25-year contract it is negotiating with the co-op. Big Rivers confirmedlast week it is negotiating with PacifiCorp in an attempt to resolvelongstanding financial difficulties. The co-op is about $1.2 billion indebt. The two companies said they hope to sign a letter of intent withintwo to three weeks.   Unlike several other offers for ``business arrangements'' received andultimately rejected by Big Rivers, PacifiCorp is proposing only amanagement agreement. Big Rivers would remain locally owned and itsheadquarters would stay in Henderson.   PacifiCorp would take over Big Rivers' coal-buying activities. ``One ofthe contingencies we have is we're either going to renegotiate or find newcoal contracts for those power plants'' so their fuel costs can become morecompetitive,'' said PacifiCorp spokesperson Dave Kvamme. Big Rivers ownsD.B. Wilson, Green and Coleman plants and operates the Station Two plantfor the city of Henderson KY.   Big Rivers' past coal-buying practices have been criticized by its majorcustomers, the Kentucky Public Service Commission and others. Thus far,three individuals and a major coal supplier have been convicted inconnection with a bribery/kickback scheme to win lucrative coal contractsfrom the co-op.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoCONSOL BUYS RESERVES FROM PP&L; GREENE HILL BLOCKS UP AGAINST BAILEY   Two CONSOL subsidiaries have acquired Greene Hill Coal Co., comprised ofabout 31,000 acres of Pittsburgh seam coal and 4,000 acres of surfaceproperty near Waynesburg PA from PP&L Resources for about $52 million.   PP&L Resources, the parent of Pennsylvania Power & Light, has owned theproperty since 1974. Earlier this year it decided that it would not use thecoal to generate its own power and asked for bids from interested parties,a spokesperson said. The spokesperson declined to comment on anyconnection, but Pennsylvania state regulators have forced PP&L to divestitself of its Pennsylvania Mines division.   Industry sources said the Greene Hill reserves abut CONSOL's Bailey minereserves.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 22, NoBIG RIVERS SEEKS TO CANCEL PACT; SAYS GREEN RIVER WON DEAL BY FRAUD   Big Rivers Electric Corp. is redoubling efforts to cancel acontroversial long-term contract with Green River Coal Co. following therecent conviction of Green River and its majority owner, Clyde Brown Jr.,on charges they procured the high-priced agreement through fraud (12-18-95 Coal Week).   In late December, Big Rivers filed motions in U.S. District Court andU.S. Bankruptcy Court to set aside the 1984 contract which runs through2004. Green River, undergoing Chapter 11 reorganization, supplies about 1million t/y of high-sulfur coal. The utility buys the coal for $31/t. GreenRiver, purchases the coal from Andalex Resources for $22/t.   Big Rivers asserted that Green River ``is not an innocent party; it is aconvicted criminal ... equity should not permit Green River Coal tocontinue to profit from a contract which a jury has determined was procuredby fraud and commercial bribery.''   Big Rivers officials say the spot market price for comparable coal is$18.41/t. Green River is paid about $780,000 per month in excess of theAndalex price and nearly $1.1 million a month in excess of the spot marketprice, according to the utility.   Green River and Brown were found guilty of paying more than $200,000 inbribes and kickbacks to former Big Rivers general manager William Thorpe towin the lucrative contract. Thorpe, who faces similar charges, is expectedto stand trial next summer.   Green River and Brown are expected to appeal their recent convictions.They also are expected to oppose the latest Big Rivers' motions.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B34-8IA059-000323-B029-212http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey78.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230045 text/html 41110HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:58:16 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:20 GMTContent-length: 40923Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey78.html Sample Issue Copyright COAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet January 2, 1996 Vol. 17, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICES CURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICES (57 words) CURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATES CURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATES (266 words) CURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLE CURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLE (443 words) CURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLE CURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLE (355 words) MARKETS STEEL INDUSTRY OUTPUT GAINS (114 words) BRAZIL'S CST SEEKS DOWNWARD REVISION OF COAL PRICES (243 words) PHILIPPINES, AUSTRALIA AGREE TO INCREASE COAL TRADE (228 words) ISRAEL COMPLETES COAL SUPPLY DEALS FOR 70 PERCENT OF REQUIREMENTS (262 words) MARKETWATCH ENEL ARRANGES 1996 CONTRACT SUPPLIES WITH SOUTH AFRICA (200 words) JSM/AUSTRALIAN TALKS TO RESUME NEXT WEEK (129 words) TAIPOWER SETS TENDER FOR LOW-CV COAL SUPPLY (278 words) CHILEAN INDUSTRY TO TEST TWO U.S. COAL BRANDS (155 words) NEPCO COOLS ON IMPORTS; FOCUSES ON U.S. COALS (177 words) NAPOCOR DELAYS COAL TENDER BY THREE MONTHS (116 words) TMT TO DELIVER SOUTH AMERICAN COAL TO KRAFT POWER PLANT (136 words) CODELCO BUYS INDONESIAN, CANADIAN AND COLOMBIAN COAL (72 words) UKRAINE TRADER SEEKS TO IMPORT COKING COAL (77 words) ATIC SERVICES APPOINTS ARNOLD TO CHAIR BOARD (96 words) INDUSTRY U.S. UTILITY PLANS COULD IMPACT COAL EXPORT CAPABILITY (526 words) POLICY POLAND BEGINS TO NARROW SCOPE OF COAL MINING (196 words) CURRENT VESSEL FIXTURES CURRENT VESSEL FIXTURES (125 words) CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoCURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICESCURRENT PETROLEUM COKE PRICESOrigin                 Sulfur     HGI   Current Price                         %              (US$/MT-FOBT)United StatesGulf Coast               4.0     50        18-24                         6.0     70        16-18                         6.0     30        11-15West Coast               2.0     50        41-44                         3.5     50        32-36Venezuela                4.0     45        Not quotedArgentina(calcinable)             0.5    120        70-80Kuwait(semi-calcinable)        3.0     80        45-50Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoCURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATES            CURRENT TYPICAL SPOT FREIGHT RATESOrigin/              Volume       Rate       DischargeDestination           (mt)       ($/mt)        termsAustralia-QueenslandLoad: Cape-35,000 SHINC/Panamax-25,000 SHINCRotterdam             140,000     $9.00     20,000 SHINC                       60,000    $13.50     20,000 SHINCIskenderun            110,000    $10.25     20,000 SHINC                       60,000    $13.90     20,000 SHINCJapan                 120,000     $5.25     25,000 SHINCAustralia-New South WalesLoad: Cape-30,000 SATPMSX/Panamax-20,000 SATPMSXRotterdam       120,000 $10.00  25,000 SHINC                       60,000    $13.50     20,000 SHINCCanada-Roberts BankLoad: Cape-35,000 SHINC/Panamax-20,000 SHINCRotterdam             140,000       NA      25,000 SHINC                       60,000     $13.00    20,000 SHINCJapan                 120,000      $6.25    30,000 SHINC                       60,000     $10.50    20,000 SHINCChina-QinhaungdaoLoad: 11,000 SHEXRotterdam              60,000     $13.25    20,000 SHEXColombia-Puerto BolivarLoad: 45,000 SHINCRotterdam             130,000      $5.95    20,000 SHINCMilaki                110,000      $8.90    12,000 SHINCSouth Africa-Richards BayLoad: Cape-50,000 SHINC/Panamax-34,000 SHINCRotterdam             140,000      $5.25    25,000 SHINC                       60,000      $9.00    20,000 SHINCSpanish Med.           60,000      $9.05    10,000 SATPMSHEXHong Kong             110,000      $6.50    20,000 SSINC                       60,000      $7.90    15,000 SSINCSouth Africa-DurbanLoad: 7,000 SATSHEXAntwerp                40,000     $10.20    20,000 SHINCUS-Hampton RoadsLoad: Cape-3 Days SHINC/Panamax-20,000 SHINCRotterdam             110,000      $5.90    25,000 SHINC                       60,000      $7.75    20,000 SHINCItaly                  90,000      $6.75     3 Days SHINCJapan                 120,000     $12.50    25,000 SHINC(& Richards Bay)US-MobileLoad: Cape-30,000 SHINC/Panamax-20,000 SHINCRotterdam              60,000      $8.65    20,000 SHINCItaly                  60,000      $9.20    15,000 SHINCTaiwan                 60,000     $25.50    20,000 SHINCUS-BaltimoreLoad: 96 hours SHINCRotterdam          90/110,000     $6.25     25,000 SHINCData supplied by Simpson, Spence & Young. Freight rates estimated on spotrates believed fixable at time of submission. Explanation of load dischargeterms: SHINC-Sundays & holidays included; SHEX-Sundays & holidays excluded;FHINC-Fridays & holidays included; SATPMSHEX-Saturday afternoons, Sundays &holidays excluded.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoCURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLE              CURRENT STEAM COAL PRICE TABLEORIGIN               Btu/      Kcal/      Sulf.      Ash        CurrentPrice                     lb.        kg.         %         %       US$/MT-FOBTPierUnited States (GAR)Hampton             13,000     7,200      1.0        10.0      41.70-43.25Roads               12,500     6,950      1.0        10.0      40.10-41.55                    12,000     6,700      1.5        12.0      37.00-38.70Baltimore           12,500     6,950      1.0        10.0      40.20-40.55                    12,000     6,700      1.0        12.0      37.00-37.30                    12,000     6,700      1.5        12.0      32.40-34.00Gulf Coast          12,500     6,950      1.0        12.0      37.75-38.50                    12,000     6,700      1.5        15.0      33.10-34.00                    11,500     6,400      1.5        15.0      31.60-32.50                     8,800     4,900      0.4         5.0      23.00-24.00West Coast          12,000     6,700      0.6        10.0      40.00-42.00                    11,500     6,400      0.7        10.0      38.00-40.10Canada  (GAR)Vancouver           13,000     7,200      0.7        10.0      43.00-45.00                    11,500     6,400      1.0        14.0      34.00-38.00Poland   (NAR)Baltic ports        12,200     6,800      0.8        8.5       41.00-42.00                    11,500     6,400      0.8       11.5       37.60-38.55                    10,800     6,000      0.8       15.0       35.12-35.30South Africa (GAR)Richards Bay        11,500     6,400      1.0       16.0       34.35-35.15                    10,800     6,000      1.0       16.0       32.40-33.05Australia   (GAR)Newcastle/          12,000     6,700      0.8       14.0       38.10-41.45Port Kembla         11,700     6,500      0.8       14.0       36.90-40.65                    11,000     6,200      0.8       14.0       35.20-38.75Gladstone           11,700     6,500      0.6       14.0       38.10-41.80China  (GAR)        11,200     6,200      0.8         8.0      36.75-37.20                    10,800     6,000      1.0        12.0      34.60-36.60Colombia (GAR)                    12,000     6,700      0.7         8.0      37.00-38.70                    11,800     6,550      0.8         8.0      33.65-37.65Europe (GAR)ARA (FOB Barge)                    11,500     6,400      1.0        16.0      47.90-48.90                    10,800     6,000      1.0        16.0      45.10-46.10Russia  (GAR)Pacific             11,500     6,400      1.0        15.0      37.90-38.60Baltic              12,250     6,750      1.0        16.0      34.45-37.70                    11,500     6,400      1.0        16.0      32.60-35.75Black Sea           11,500     6,400      0.5        13.0      36.75-39.80Venezuela  (GAR)                    12,600     7,000      0.8         7.0      36.40-37.70Indonesia   (GAD)                    12,800     7,100      0.8         3.0      38.10-43.30                    12,500     6,700      0.8         2.0      35.80-37.40                    10,000     5,500      0.1         1.0      25.50-27.00ORIGIN               Fourth            Third              Second                   Quarter 1995      Quarter 1995      Quarter 1995                      (Average of quarterly high and low range)United States   (GAR)Hampton             42.95            44.26            46.38Roads               41.30            42.68            44.75                    37.49            39.40            41.31Baltimore           40.18            40.84            42.75                    37.10            37.10            37.77                    33.70            34.75            35.96Gulf Coast          38.84            39.95            40.95                    33.52            33.25            35.73                    32.03            31.60            32.07                    23.50            23.50            23.75West Coast          41.13            41.58            38.74                    39.19            39.99            34.87Canada  (GAR)Vancouver           44.35            44.21            41.75                    36.90            36.81            32.83Poland   (NAR)Baltic ports        40.50            40.48            42.42                    37.20            36.52            39.48                    34.35            34.61            36.69South Africa   (GAR)Richards Bay        35.54            35.78            34.92                    33.31            33.74            33.05Australia   (GAR)Newcastle/          40.45            41.37            39.62Port Kembla         39.20            40.14            38.04                    37.33            36.45            36.26Gladstone           40.68            41.29            39.26China  (GAR)                    36.95            36.76            35.52                    35.52            35.45            33.90Colombia   (GAR)                    37.98            37.46            38.35                    35.11            35.57            36.99Europe   (GAR)ARA (FOB Barge)                    48.63            48.33            47.11                    45.60            45.36            44.10Russia  (GAR)Pacific             38.10            37.80            36.12Baltic              34.49            35.31            36.26                    33.95            33.45            34.36Black Sea           37.42            35.73            35.39Venezuela   (GAR)                    37.01            36.68            36.70Indonesia   (GAD)                    40.70            42.00            40.53                    37.76            39.67            37.39                    26.13            25.77            24.19NOTE:  Terms of trade are published monthly.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoCURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLE               CURRENT COKING COAL PRICE TABLEORIGIN              %VOL.      %SULF.       %ASH         Current Price                                                       Per MT/FOBT Pier                                                          in US$United StatesHampton        17-22            0.6           7.0        49.50-53.00Roads          23-30            0.6           7.0        54.00-55.00               31+              1.0           7.0        45.90-49.10Baltimore      17-20            1.0           8.0        47.00-50.00               21-28            1.0           8.0        47.50-52.20               29-33            1.5           8.0        45.50-46.00East Coast(Blend)        23-30            1.0           8.0        49.00-49.50(Semi-soft)    35               1.0           10.0       46.00-47.00Gulf Coast     17-22            1.0           7.0        48.50-48.90               23-30            1.0           7.0        44.55-47.00               31+              1.0           7.0        44.00-46.00CanadaWest Coast     <19              0.5           7.0        47.00-48.00               19-22            0.5           7.0        45.50-46.00               23-27            0.5           9.0        46.00-49.35East Coast     33-35            1.5           4.0        47.99-49.50AustraliaPort Kembla    21-24            0.5           10.0       48.00-49.00               27-28            0.5           8.5        48.00-49.25Newcastle(Semi-soft)    31-37            0.4           9.0        41.50-42.40Hay Point      17-22            0.7           9.0        43.25-49.00               23-30            0.6           7.0        48.00-49.00Gladstone      31-34            0.7           7.0        43.30-48.50Poland               25-31            0.7           7.0        50.10-50.90(Semi-soft)    32-37            1.0           9.0        43.00-44.50RussiaPacific Coast  17-19            0.6           9.0        46.50-47.50               19-21            0.4           9.0        47.70-48.50Baltic         28-30            0.6           9.0        46.90-48.50South Africa(Semi-soft)    28-30            0.6           10.0       34.75-35.75(Soft)         32-35            0.5           7.0        35.50-37.00Colombia(Injection grade)30-35          0.7           8.0        38.50-39.50Venezuela(Injection grade)30-35          0.8           7.0        36.70-38.00ORIGIN              Fourth            Third             Second                  Quarter 1995      Quarter 1995     Quarter 1995                   (Average of quarterly high and low range)United StatesHampton              51.42            53.71            53.85Roads                54.25            54.25            54.94                     48.20            48.59            51.28              Baltimore            48.08            50.88            52.48                     49.60            51.35            50.75                     46.05            45.46            46.23East Coast(Blend)              49.40            49.50            50.13(Semi-soft)          46.55            46.65            46.47Gulf Coast           48.45           Not Quoted        47.00                     46.32            49.05            48.58                     45.50            48.12            50.55CanadaWest Coast           47.25            47.50            46.30                     45.50            45.75            45.50                     48.05            48.72            47.77East Coast           48.50           Not Qoted         47.00AustraliaPort Kembla          50.18            50.70            49.63                     49.35            51.14            51.10Newcastle(Semi-soft)          42.10            42.35            41.31Hay Point            46.42            46.90            50.44                     49.08            49.80            50.68Gladstone            46.20            47.51            50.19Poland                     50.25            50.50            48.89(Semi-soft)          43.50            43.88            42.47RussiaPacific Coast        46.93            47.18            46.23                     48.30            47.73            45.50Baltic               47.20            47.50            48.25South Africa(Semi-soft)          35.00            35.00            30.96(Soft)               36.00            36.50            36.70Colombia(Injection grade)    38.54            39.00            39.50Venezuela(Injection grade)    37.31            37.50            37.42]All quotes are for hard coking coal unless noted otherwise.  Terms of tradeare published monthly.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoSTEEL INDUSTRY OUTPUT GAINS(BRUSSELS)   For the first 10 months of 1995, production of crude steel has increasedin the 67 countries reporting to the International Iron and SteelInstitute. Total crude steel output reached 612.1-million mt from Januarythrough October, a 3.8 percent gain versus the same period in 1994. IISIreported that October 1995 output, at 61.9-million mt was at the same levelas last year for the month. North America showed a production gain of 6.7percent for the 10-month period versus last year. Japan's 10-month output grew by 5.4 percent over the 1994 period. Western Europe showed a gain of 5percent over the same period in 1994.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoBRAZIL'S CST SEEKS DOWNWARD REVISION OF COAL PRICES(RIO DE JANEIRO)   Brazil's CST steel mill recently faxed messages to all of its currentcontract coal suppliers asking them to cut prices on existing deals. Themill was looking for a 10 percent price cut to become effective withshipments this month. The mill said it was making its request in light ofthe falling prices for its steel slab production. CST asked for a $4/mtreduction in price for hard coals and for a $3/mt reduction in the price ofsoft coking and pci coals.   Thus far, sellers have not agreed to comply with CST's request.   No reason for this has been given, but observers point out that on thevery day CST faxed the messages to suppliers, CST's market relationsdirector, Antonio Lima Filho, told Brazil's Gazeta Mercantil newspaper, thenation's biggest business daily, that the company's January-November 1995net profits were $222 million, up 4 percent on 1994's figures.   CST is Brazil's biggest slab steel producer. Some 95 percent of its 3million mt/y production is exported. CST claims that, with slab steelprices falling and expected to fall further through 1996, many of itsoverseas customers are threatening not to pay for slabs ordered unless theyget price reductions.   In an unrelated development, Helio Sad, coal purchasing manager forUsiminas, has been reelected to coordinate 1996 coal contract negotiationsfor joint steel industry purchases. The negotiations are expected to beginin March.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoPHILIPPINES, AUSTRALIA AGREE TO INCREASE COAL TRADE(MANILA)   The Philippines and Australia have signed a memorandum of understandingto increase the volume of Australian coal to be imported into thePhilippines, according to Filipino energy department officials. The accordwas signed in mid-December by visiting Australian minister for resourcesDavid Bedall and Philippine energy secretary Francisco Viray.   Australia vowed to ensure that its coal industry would continue to be a``reliable, efficient and competitive supplier of coal products to meet theongoing needs of the Philippines,'' the department said.   Manila agreed to give Australian coal suppliers ``access to contractsand tenders on no less favorable terms than those available to other worldsuppliers.'' Bedall said during the signing that ``The Philippines canconfidently rely on Australia as a key supplier of coal, infrastructure,services and proven technology -- the complete integrated package at thebest price.''   According to the official Philippine Energy Plan, coal is expected totake up 25 percent of the country's fuel requirements by 2000, a leap fromthe current 5 to 8 percent.   Bedall said at current rates of production, world coal reserves wouldlast for 236 years compared to 43 years for oil and 65 years for gas.``Unlike oil and gas, world coal reserves are spread relatively evenlythroughout the world. Security of supply for coal should not be aconcern,'' Bedall said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoISRAEL COMPLETES COAL SUPPLY DEALS FOR 70 PERCENT OF REQUIREMENTS(JERUSALEM)   Israel's National Coal Supply Corp. has signed agreements guaranteeing70 percent of its supplies for 1996, according to a senior companyofficial. The company plans to purchase 7.5 million mt this year. Theofficial said 50 percent of the supply would come from South Africa, 20percent from the U.S., 15 percent from Colombia, 10 percent from Australiaand 5 percent from Indonesia.   The actual percentage of South African coal is down from 55 to 60percent in recent years. It appears that NCSC will not import coal fromChina this year.   According to the agreements being signed, options allowing for spotpurchases of 15 to 30 percent of the total supply are being arranged. Thisis expected to give the NCSC maximum flexibility in the event of pricefluctuations.   Meanwhile, Israel Electric Corp. has expanded coal unloading capacity atHadera where the first 575-Mw unit of a second power plant recently wentinto service. With a second conveyor belt now in operation, Hadera port cannow unload 7,500 mt/h. IEC also has expanded its coal storage area atHadera.   Hadera No. 2's second unit will come on line next fall. Once totallyoperational, the two Hadera plants will consume 6.1 million mt/y of coal.   And in an unrelated development, a senior Israeli energy ministryofficial visited Nigeria recently to discuss energy cooperation.Discussions were held on possible future Nigerian coal purchases by Israel,but, because Nigeria has not yet developed its substantial coal reserves,an agreement on supplies is unlikely in the near future.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoENEL ARRANGES 1996 CONTRACT SUPPLIES WITH SOUTH AFRICA(LONDON)   Italy's Enel has arranged to buy 2.5 million mt of South African coal in1996. The national electricity generator has reached agreement withlong-term contract supplier Ingwe for 700,000 mt, with long-term contractsupplier Shell for 400,000 mt and with winners of its recent South Africantender for 1.4 million mt. The Ingwe and Shell deals are the second partof a two-year arrangement set last year. At that time both suppliersoffered Enel a slight price reduction in return for a the two year term.Price details on this year's deals are expected next week pending boardapproval of the arrangements.   Enel, which is projecting a 1996 coal requirement of 8.8 million mt,expects to begin negotiations next week with Colombian suppliers who areexpected to sell at least 500,000 mt to the Italian company. In addition,Enel will soon issue a spot tender for some 2.5 million mt of U.S. coal.   The company recently declared options on some 1 million mt of coalsigned for under terms of last summer's U.S. tender. In addition, long-termcontract suppliers Peabody and Drummond are each expected to supply Enelwith 500,000 mt in 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoJSM/AUSTRALIAN TALKS TO RESUME NEXT WEEK(TOKYO)   Coal contract negotiations are set to resume in Tokyo next weekfollowing the break in last month's deliberations when neither the Japanesemills nor their Australian suppliers were able to establish common ground.In addition to there being no agreement between the two sides on whetherthere's room for a price increase, sources close to the talks say there isalso disagreement among the mills themselves on the appropriate volume thatshould be purchased under terms of the joint purchasing agreement. NipponSteel, reportedly, would like to see a reduction in the tonnage taken onjoint purchase. Disagreements also seem to be emerging on how to go aboutincreasing the volume of semi-soft coal purchased as part of the jointbuying program.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoTAIPOWER SETS TENDER FOR LOW-CV COAL SUPPLY(TAIPEI)   Taiwan Power Co. has tendered for April 15 to April 24 delivery of apanamax of subbituminous material for its Taichung power plant. Thedeadline for bids into this tender is 4:30 PM in Taipei, January 16. Bidswill be opened at 9:30 the next morning.   Taipower seeks one 57,000-mt delivery of coal with a cv of 4,500 to5,500 kcal/kg GAR; maximum total moisture of 30 percent as received;maximum ash content of 10 percent air dried; maximum sulfur content of 0.65percent air dried; minimum volatiles of 24 percent air dried; maximum fixedcarbon of 60 percent air dried; minimum grindability of 45 HGI, and minimumash fusion temperature (under reducing condition, H=W) of 1,150 C. Sizing:50x0 mm, with allowance for 5 percent overs and 30 percent fines below 2mm.   The ash analysis is important in the tender. If the aggregate of CaO andMgO is equal to or less than the Fe2O3 content, then the Na2O should notexceed 2 percent. If the aggregate of CaO and MgO is greater than the Fe2O3content, then Na2O content should not exceed 5 percent.   Bidding documents are on sale through January 15 and can be purchasedwith a $60 check made out to Taiwan Power Co. or for NT$1,200 that can bedeposited directly into Account No. 034001900023 at the Bank of Taiwan,Kung-Kuan Branch. A bid bond of $57,000 or NT$1,480,000 is required.   For more information, write to Director of Fuel Department, Taiwan PowerCo., 9th Floor, 242 Roosevelt Road, Section 3, Taipei 100, Taiwan.Telephone: (886-2) 366-6752 or (886-2) 366-7399. Fax: (886-2) 367-0597 or(886-2) 367-8593.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoCHILEAN INDUSTRY TO TEST TWO U.S. COAL BRANDS(WASHINGTON)   Chile's Comercial Catumutun S.A., which buys coal for Chilean industrialand utility accounts, has arranged to buy two cargoes of test coals fromU.S. shippers, CCSA director Frederick J. Murrell said at year's end.   Murrell declined to name the suppliers, but he said one will ship ahandymax cargo of about 40,000 mt from a U.S. West Coast port and the otherwill ship a 30,000-mt cargo from another U.S. port.   In June, CCSA tendered for four 35,000-mt cargoes to be delivered to itsport at Las Ventanas beginning in November 1995.   CCSA's tender specifications were 6,700 kcal/kg or 12,060 Btu/lb GAR, 35percent volatiles, 1 percent sulfur preferred (2 percent maximum), 14percent maximum ash and 12 percent maximum moisture. CCSA's total 1995sales will be about 600,000 mt of imported and domestic coal. In 1996, thefirm said it expects total sales of about 900,000 mt.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoNEPCO COOLS ON IMPORTS; FOCUSES ON U.S. COALS(KNOXVILLE)   New England Electric Power Co. has renegotiated coal supply contractswith Mingo Logan Coal Co. and A.T. Massey Coal Co. and is very close tosigning final agreements on a one-to-three year, 180,000 mt/y deal withCrown Coal & Coke. The development continues a trend in which Nepco hasconcentrated more on U.S. domestic coals, which currently carry lowerprices than South American supplies.   Both the Mingo Logan and Massey (Sidney/Sprouse Creek) renegotiationswere for possible tonnages of 145,000 to 360,000 mt/y. The Mingo Loganrenegotiation covers 18 months, while the Massey renegotiation is for atwo-year period.   The Crown Coal & Coke deal resulted from offers received in early fallon 163,000 to 650,000 mt of coal for delivery in 1996. The coal willoriginate on a Norfolk Southern rail line and be delivered to LambertsPoint.   The coal will be delivered aboard International Shipholding's EnergyEnterprise, formerly owned by Keystone Shipping under the name, EnergyIndependence. Keystone recently sold the ship to Nepco which resoldit toInternational Shipholding.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoNAPOCOR DELAYS COAL TENDER BY THREE MONTHS(MANILA)   The Philippines' state-run National Power Corp. has postponed to Marchits 180,000-mt tender to supply coal to its two unit Calaca power plant.Originally scheduled for December, the March tender will seek coal with acv of 5,500 to 6,500 kcal/kg GAR, sulfur content of 0.7 percent, ashcontent of 16 percent, moisture content of 12 percent and volatility of 22to 41 percent. The tender is being delayed because Napocor has yet todetermine the actual tonnage needed. It appears that more local coal willbe available for the first unit of the Calaca plant, but the forecast oflocal product availability is being questioned by Napocor officials.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoTMT TO DELIVER SOUTH AMERICAN COAL TO KRAFT POWER PLANT(WASHINGTON)   TMT Coal, the joint venture of the U.S.'s Transmar Coal and TomenAmerica, will supply Savannah Electric & Power with about 36,000 mt of aColombian and Venezuelan coal blend to test the new coal unloading pier atthe utility's Kraft power plant. Southern Company Services Inc., which actsas SE&P's coal supplier, tendered October 11 for 30,000 mt of coal to testthe new unloader under construction at MP 20 on the Savannah River (CWI10/24/95 p. 1).   The electric generating plant has no unloading capability, so thetender specified that the coal be delivered by a belt self-unloader. Thecoal being supplied has speced out at 12,300 Btu/lb, 1.1 percent sulfur and6 percent ash. It will be loaded at the port of Palmerejo in LakeMaracaibo.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoCODELCO BUYS INDONESIAN, CANADIAN AND COLOMBIAN COAL(LONDON)   Industry sources said in late December that Chilean utility Codelco hasarranged for coal supplies from Glencore, Fording and Intercor. Glencorewill supply an Indonesian coal produced by PT Kideco; Fording will shipcoal from its Coal Mountain mine, and Intercor -- the Exxon Coal andMineral's subsidiary which is a 50-percent partner in the El Cerrejon Nortemine -- will ship its Colombian product.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoUKRAINE TRADER SEEKS TO IMPORT COKING COAL(LONDON)   JV Everest, a Ukrainian export-import company, is seeking to import 1.5million mt/y -- roughly a large panamax or small capesize delivery a month-- of coking coal for Ukrainian steel mills. The company plans to importthe coal into a terminal located near Odessa. For more information, writeto JV Everest, Risheljevskaja str. 25, 270011 Odessa, Ukraine. Telephone:(380-482) 22-3267 or (380-482) 22-24-63. Fax: (380-482) 22-43-85 or(380-482) 26-3704.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoATIC SERVICES APPOINTS ARNOLD TO CHAIR BOARD(PARIS)   ATIC Services has named Thierry Arnold to succeed Pierre Verbrugghe aschairman of the company. Other officers of the company are Michel Margnes,president; Michel Bellissant, chief executive, and Gilbert Join,secretary.   ATIC Services was formed early last year as a commerical entity offeringa wide range of services to companies involved in importing coal and othersolid fuels into France. It took over functions previously performed by thegovernment agency Association Technique de l'Importation Charbonniere. Thatagency now only tracks data and does not participate in commercialactivities.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoU.S. UTILITY PLANS COULD IMPACT COAL EXPORT CAPABILITY(WASHINGTON)   Utility coal stockpiles throughout the U.S. remain low despite coldweather that has reached, off and on, into Florida. Traditionally, U.S.utilities built coal inventories before their peak generating months in thewinter and summer but this appears to have changed. As a result -- anddepending on the weather -- utility coal buyers and the state commissionsthat regulate their activities may have built considerable price volatilityinto the U.S. market, a volatility that could work its way into theinternational coal market as well.   Stockpiles at U.S. power plants and river docks appear to be at recordlows but utilities are doing nothing to rebuild them. Indeed, utilitybuyers say they are under pressure to reduce the carrying costs of largeinventories. Coal buyers also currently are very sensitive to pricefluctuations and will defer purchases if bids are too high for theirliking.   The trend toward maintaining lower coal stockpiles has been going on forsome time -- as long as two years in some cases. The Tennessee ValleyAuthority, for example, has a stockpile policy that sets a target equal to20 days' burn at each of its plants. While most utilities have higherstockpile targets of 30 to 45 days, their inventories are far below thoseof a few years ago when 90-day stockpiles were common and utilities builtinventories to 120 days if the United Mine Workers of America threatened tostrike.   Electric Fuels Corp., in its role as coal buyer for Florida Power Corp.,bought about 200,000 mt of coal on month-to-month purchases for Decemberand January, yet it said its purchase for December was the result of highconsumption during the summer, and was not an effort to rebuild a stockpileas a cushion against unexpectedly high winter demand.   Extremely cold weather in early 1994 forced utilities to buy largequantities of coal and pushed prices up by as much as $5.50/mt for certaingrades. Mild summer and winter weather through mid-1995, coupled with cleanair issues, caused a collapse in prices. A hot summer in 1995 again raisedprices, but not nearly to the levels of 1994 as mines and docks worked offinventory.   Many coal producers and brokers have reacted to the utilities' price andinventory practices by cutting back production.   As a result, the U.S. steam coal market has split. Utilities are able toobtain enough low-priced material to support their conservative buyingpractices, especially from producers with high-volume mines.   Brokers and traders report that they are having some difficulty findingcoal, especially at Big Sandy River docks and that prices have increased.   All of this leaves the eastern U.S. coal market poised for either a boomas it experienced in early 1994 or a bust similar to that of early 1995.The question is: Will this winter's weather be mild enough to support theutilities and their low-stockpile strategy or will a deep freeze triggerpanic buying that will push prices through the roof? From the internationalstandpoint, a sharp increase in U.S. domestic demand could strip U.S. coalfrom the international trade and possibly boost prices.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoPOLAND BEGINS TO NARROW SCOPE OF COAL MINING(WARSAW)   Industry Minister Klemens Scierski said hard coal and lignite wouldremain ``basic fuels'' in the Polish economy even while coal extractionwould be reduced for ``economic and ecological reasons.'' Poland's deepmines would no longer work at depths below 1,500 meters and would only workat depths below 1,200 meters ``in special cases,'' he said.   Because of this ruling, the Halemba mine would be closed. Miningoperations would also be shut down under major population centers.   Mine sections below towns like Rybnik, Katowice and Bytom will beclosed.  The Budryk mine in Silesia and the Bodanka mine in eastern Poland, near,Lublin, will be privatized following the government's acceptance of thecoal resturcturing program outlined by minister Markowski.   Neither mine belongs to one of the seven coal operating companies. Theirshares are expected to be taken over by banks that financed theirconstruction.   Meanwhile, Urzad Antymonopolpwy, Poland's anti-monopoly office, isexpected to rule on complaints against the government's giving only threestate-controlled companies -- Weglokoks, Weglozbyt and Kopex -- andcompanies controlled by them the right to sell coal for export. Privatefirms have criticized the rule as anti-competitive.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightCOAL WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 17, NoCURRENT VESSEL FIXTURES                CURRENT VESSEL FIXTURESVessel *             Cargo Size    Orig/DestinationUnited StatesBona TBN             70,000        Davant/TarantoTBN                  60,000        Hampton Roads/TriesteMineral Dragon      110,000        Hampton Roads/DKKAustraliaOcean Conqueror     130,000        Dalrymple or Hay Point/                                          S. KoreaCanadaBorzesti             57,000        Roberts Bank/TarantoTBN                  60,000        Roberts Bank/Port TalbotVessel *             Loading              Rate            ChartererUnited StatesBona TBN             Jan 7 - 15           $9.25            SIDEMARTBN                  Jan 9 - 16          $9.50            DEIULEMARMineral Dragon       Jan 8 - 15           $7.00            CAPEKLAVAustraliaOcean Conqueror      Jan 11 - 20          $5.15            YUKONGCanadaBorzesti             Jan 10 - 20         $13.50            SIDEMAR                     Jan 18 - 25         $12.50            BSCData is supplied by Lalemant (U.S.A.) and Rodriguez Sons.*TBN - To be nominated.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B34-9IA059-000323-B030-23http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey91.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230207 text/html 145306HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:59:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:28 GMTContent-length: 145118Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey91.html Sample Issue Copyright EAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet January 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES UNIPETROL SET FOR DEBUT (626 words) CHERNOBYL CLOSURE AGREEMENTS SIGNED (551 words) GERMANS PAY TOP PRICES IN HUNGARY AS EDF DIVERGES (752 words) EDF SECURES MOCHOVCE ROLE (650 words) NEW LAW COULD BOOST ROMANIAN OIL SECTOR (453 words) HUNGARIAN POWER DEMAND RISES 2.5% ON 1994 FIGURES (473 words) LUKOIL CONTINUES TO HARBOUR KAZAKH PIPELINE AMBITIONS (860 words) RENEL RAISES PRICES ON BACK OF DEVALUATION (383 words) UNOCAL BRIEFS PAKISTAN ON TURKMENIAN PIPELINE PLANS (474 words) POLES MAKE MORE COAL MOVES (408 words) RUES STRUGGLES WITH SALE AMID CONTINUED PAYMENT PROBLEMS (1158 words) POLES SEEK POSTPONEMENT OF FUEL IMPORT LIBERALISATION (442 words) ROMANIA AND GAZPROM ESTABLISH JOINT VENTURE (438 words) BULGARIA TO TEST REACTOR VESSEL AND GO AHEAD WITH STORAGE (704 words) MOL FIGURES FAIL TO DAMPEN OPTIMISM (560 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE (1001 words) POLES RAISE PRICES (200 words) HUNGARY SECURES 1996 SUPPLIES (299 words) OILGATE ENQUIRY CLEARS MINISTER OF TRADE AND MOL CHAIRMAN (256 words) RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT APPROVES FUEL AND ENERGY PROGRAMME (185 words) POLISH PARLIAMENT SENDS ENERGY LAWS FOR MORE STUDY (213 words) WORLD BANK LAUNCHES $100M BOSNIA AID PLAN (177 words) ENERGY PRIVATISATION FUND ESTABLISHED IN BULGARIA (189 words) BLACK SEA ENERGY CENTRE OPENS (290 words) FLOODS HIT ROMANIAN FACILITIES (188 words) RUSSIA'S 1995 CRUDE OUTPUT DOWN (226 words) MOLDOVA COURTS CASH FOR OIL DRILLING AND EXPORT PORT (260 words) RUSSIA-CHINA ENERGY DEAL ATTRACTS MOSCOW'S ATTENTION (217 words) UKRAINE CONFIRMS RUSSIAN OIL FLOWING VIA DRUZHBA (505 words) CZECHS AWAIT INGOLSTADT SUPPLIES (162 words) RUSSIAN PIPELINES SPILL (235 words) US COMPANY BACKS TALLINN PIPELINE (174 words) MAZEIKAI HIRES US COMPANY AS FINANCIAL ADVISOR FOR MODERNISATION (268 words) CZECH REFINER PAYS NO DIVIDEND (214 words) SLOVAK REFINER PLANS MAINTENANCE (228 words) LATVIAN PETROL TAX TO FUND ROADS (153 words) UKRAINE NAMES IMPORTERS (194 words) BULGARIAN/RUSSIAN GAS JOINT VENTURE ADMITS NEW SHAREHOLDERS (329 words) LATVIJAS GAZE SIGNS 1996 AGREEMENT (272 words) MOL GIVES RIGHTS TO OPERATE TRANSIT PIPELINE TO PANRUSGAZ (267 words) NORWEGIAN DENIAL ON POLISH TALKS (230 words) RUSSIAN GAS DELIVERIES CAUSE PROBLEMS FOR BULGARIAN INDUSTRY (179 words) UKRAINE BEGINS RESTRUCTURING (297 words) UKRAINE RECONNECTED TO RUSSIAN POWER GRID AFTER LEAK REPAIRS (249 words) UKRAINE RADIOACTIVE LEAK UNDETECTED (188 words) POLES SET FOR ROWS OVER COAL PRICING (251 words) BELCHATOW CONSIDERS EXPANSION (291 words) BULGARIA FORMULATES INVESTMENTS (262 words) KRASNOYARSK SENDS POWER TO MONGOLIA VIA NEW LINK (278 words) RADET PLANS PIPE OVERHAUL (207 words) NEWS UKRAINE RAISES PRICES (59 words) RUSSIA AWAITS IMF AGREEMENT (83 words) AZERI 1995 OUTPUT DOWN (37 words) UKRAINIAN OUTPUT DOWN ON 1994 (55 words) FRONTIER OPTIMISTIC ON POLISH CONCESSION (70 words) CONCESSIONS IN POLAND LINED UP (77 words) SOCAR GETS PIPELINE CONTROL (70 words) LUKOIL CONSOLIDATES MOST SHARES (110 words) SLOVENIAN COMPANY STARTS SHARE SALE (100 words) FIRST HYDRO-TEXACO STATION IN LITHUANIA (98 words) RUSSIA REDUCES BELARUS PRICES (109 words) RUSSIAN COAL PRODUCTION FOR 1995 TOTALS 250.1MT (100 words) MAJOR RUSSIAN SHALE PRODUCER FACES CLOSURE (81 words) US SUPPORT FOR ARMENIAN COAL INDUSTRY (85 words) RUSSIAN PLANT OPERATORS WARN OF PROTEST ACTION (93 words) OBJECTIONS TO RUSSIA'S FAR EAST NUCLEAR PLANT (94 words) CERNAVODA EXPECTED TO START THIS MONTH (72 words) CZECH DRAFT LAW ON NUCLEAR TAX (105 words) IGNALINA PLANT IN FINANCIAL TROUBLES (106 words) POWER PRODUCTION DOWN AT ARMENIAN NUCLEAR PLANT (77 words) NO POWER CUTS FOR BULGARIA (102 words) BULGARIA TO SET UP AN INSURANCE POOL (104 words) SERBIAN ELECTRICITY UP IN 1995 (37 words) SWISS AGREEMENT FOR UKRAINE (30 words) SLOVAK DESULPHURISATION DELAY (47 words) CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UNIPETROL SET FOR DEBUTUnipetrol, the giant new holding company for the Czech petrochemicaland oil refining industry, is due to formally emerge on 29 January,when it is expected that all hurdles relating to the break-up of thetwo companies that currently control the industry will have beenovercome.The holding company is due to replace Chemopetrol Litvinov and KaucukKralupy, the two partly-privatised companies that currently ownpetrochemical and refining interests. Shareholders in Chemopetrol andKaucuk, which are both listed on the Prague stock exchange, willeventually receive shares in the holding company in lieu, although thestate will remain the largest shareholder in Unipetrol.The creation of Unipetrol coincides with a big restructuring of thepetrochemical and refining industry. This involves a merger of thepetrochemical divisions of Chemopetrol and Kaucuk, which will becomewholly-owned by Unipetrol; and a merger of their refining interestsinto Czech Refineries Company.The international consortium of Royal Dutch/Shell, Agip and Conoco hastaken a 49% stake in Czech Refineries, while Unipetrol will control 51%for at least five years. The consortium has paid $173m for the stake,part of a $480m investment undertaking at the refineries that isexpected to begin in the spring.Unipetrol will also acquire full control of Benzina, the state-ownedpetrol retailing company. Its three divisions - petrochemicals,refining and retailing - will make Unipetrol one of the biggest Czechcompanies. It will be partially listed on the PSE but the state willremain its controlling shareholder until plans have been completed foreither a flotation or the sale of a stake to a strategic partner.Analysts have said the former is a more likely option, involving apossible international share offering. They stressed, however, that nosuch offer is likely for at least 18 months and probably longer.The most difficult aspect of the restructuring, according to bankers atCS First Boston, which is advising the government and Unipetrol, isplacing a value on the shares of Chemopetrol and Kaucuk and matchingthat to the shares of Unipetrol so that private shareholders in bothexisting companies get a full and fair price for their shares.The transfer of the refining interests to Czech Refineries and the saleof the stake to the consortium have been completed, which will allowthe investment programme to begin once Unipetrol has been incorporated.Sources close to the consortium said delays to the agreement on CzechRefineries - talks on the acquisition by the consortium were on and offfor over three years before a contract was signed last November - meantthat the $480m estimate for restructuring may have to be revise later.The sources said that any delay in incorporating Unipetrol would alsopush back the start date for the investment programme, which involvesheavy capital spending on an environmental clean-up and new equipmentat the refineries, because the programme is being carried out by theholding company, as the majority owner in the refining company, and notby the consortium.However, those involved in the creation of Unipetrol said they wereconfident it would emerge on schedule, although Unipetrol executivescautioned that private shareholders may not receive their entitlementto shares in exchange for the stakes they hold in Chemopetrol andKaucuk until the end of the year. In the meantime both Chemopetrol andKaucuk will retain their stock market quotations.Between them, Chemopetrol and Kaucuk have a market capitalisation ofabout $650m. With the addition of Benzina, the presence of theinternational consortium, and increased efficiencies resulting from theinvestment programme, Unipetrol is likely to be the fourth largestcompany in the country in terms of market capitalisation, behind SPTTelecom, the electricity utility CEZ, and Komercni Banka.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996CHERNOBYL CLOSURE AGREEMENTS SIGNEDUkraine on 20 December signed an agreement in Ottawa on the closure ofChernobyl after seven years of protracted negotiations with the G-7countries and the European Commission. The final text of the memorandumof understanding (MOU) was agreed in Vienna at the end of Novemberafter being stalled over two main issues: the date of closure and theextent of Western financial support. Ukraine finally signed underpressure after threats to withhold Western credits for economicrestructuring, say sources close to the talks.The total on offer to Ukraine is $2.307bn in grants and loans andrepresents only what had already been agreed. No new funding has beenmade available. Ukraine had earlier rejected an offer of just over $2bnin loans and grants made by the G-7 powers during talks in Kiev inNovember as inadequate and continued to insist on a minimum of $4bn.The MOU gives a financial breakdown including $498m in grantscomprising $43m for power sector restructuring, $102m for an energyinvestment programme, $349m for nuclear safety and $4m for a socialimpact plan. The $1.809bn in loans is to go to the energy investmentprogramme and includes Ecu400m from Euratom agreed at Corfu in 1994.This programme will cover completion of Unit 2 at Khmelnitsky and Unit4 at Rovno as well as rehabilitation of thermal and hydro plants,pumped storage projects and energy efficiency.The nuclear safety component is thought to comprise Tacis grantsalready agreed at Corfu from the 1995 programme and Tacis 1996 as wellas $200m from the EBRD-administered Nuclear Safety Account agreed atthe Naples meeting in 1994. This may be used for preparatory work atChernobyl to pave the way for decommissioning, including theconstruction of new waste treatment facilities. In principle, says theMOU, revenue-generating projects will be considered for loans and non-revenue-generating projects for grants.The final wording of the MOU was "deliberately vague" to allowdifferent interpretations, say Western sources close to G-7. Ukraineobjected to the deadline of 2000 as the date for closure and this wasomitted from the title in the final version, although it remains in thetext which says decommissioning will be undertaken within the "shortestpractically achievable time". Ukrainian officials say this is unlikelyto be by 2000.Ukrainian environment and nuclear safety minister Yuri Kostenko saysthat by 2000 only reactor shutdown will be possible. "Removal of thefacility and ensuring its ecological safety will take over a decade.Chernobyl will need tremendous sums for shutdown operations, runninginto billions of dollars over many years. This is why Ukraine sees thememorandum only as the beginning." he adds.Chernobyl, which produces over 5% of Ukraine's power exceeded itsannual target in 1995 producing a total of 11.5 TWh of electricity -some 5% above the planned figure.* Goskomatom, the Ukrainian state committee for nuclear power, is stillwithout a head, after former chairman Mikhail Umanets was dismissed inNovember. However he formally resigned in January which should ease theway for appointment of a successor. Meanwhile his deputy NurNigmatullin is carrying on with the day-to-day business and mayeventually take over. The other main contender is Valery Kukhar, headof the Presidential committee on nuclear policy and ecology.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996GERMANS PAY TOP PRICES IN HUNGARY AS EDF DIVERGESThe German consortium RWE/Energie Versorgung Schwaben (EVS) paid atotal of almost $600m for stakes in two electricity supply companiesand Matra power station, the daily Magyar Hirlap reported on 8 January.The sum included $358m for the Budapest supplier, ELMU, or 175% of bookvalue for the 46% stake, and $164m, 150% of book value, for the 49%stake in the north Hungarian supplier, EMASZ.According to the paper's figures, which have not been publicly refutedby APV Rt, only Matra power station failed to meet its book value, the38% stake selling at 77% of its nominal registered capital.Shortly after the sale of EDASZ and DEMASZ stakes to Electricite deFrance, the Hungarian press picked up on Austrian reports that EdF hadearlier made a secret agreement to pass on some of its shares to theAustrian power company Verbundgesellschaft. The reasoning is thattender rules restricted bidders from forming more than one consortium,and EdF were formally part of the consortium bidding for the 24% MVMstake. Thus EdF was unable to declare a formal consortium for thesupply companies.The economic daily Napigazadasag quoted an unnamed spokesman of EdF assaying that a 15% packet of the EdF-owned stake had been reserved forVerbundgesellschaft. The spokesman is also quoted as saying a partneris also being courted to take some of the stake in South Hungariansupplier DEMASZ owned by EdF, although the French company intends toremain the dominant partner in both supply companies.Tender conditions restrict owners from selling any of the newlyacquired shares for five years, or from obtaining shares from anysource other than APV Rt, unless permission is received for suchtransactions from the Hungarian Energy Office (MEH), the Competition(Fair Trading) Office, and APV Rt itself.The business bulletin Econews reported that APV Rt might be willing togive its consent to bringing in other partners provided "the moveserved Hungary's industrial policy". It also reported of a possiblelinkage in the wrangle between MVM and Verbundgesellschaft over thecontract to export Hungarian electricity to Austria in return for thedebt incurred due to the now-abandoned Danube barrage scheme. Austriahas appealed to the courts over the matter.An Austrian guarantee to drop the appeal "may be an important factor"in any APV Rt decision regarding consent for a share transfer, Econewsquotes an APV Rt official as saying. EdF Budapest representative PierreAbou told EEE there are "several potential partners" interested incooperation in the two supply companies, but "nothing is decided in anydirection. We wish to keep it discreet. When [negotiations] arecompleted we shall give priority to the Hungarian authorities. Theseare sensitive issues". Abou said the route to EdF winning the twotenders was "a long-lasting story. We have been working together in thepast with the two companies. It's not just a bid like that, for somefinancial reasons. We didn't just decide to bid last October. Youcannot bid just like that, especially in the power sector, you must beon the ground years before".Asked if he was concerned about the pricing conditions, Abou said "weare paying a big attention to this issue, that's absolutely normal, butwe are not that concerned. The principles in the law which state thatthe costs of transmission, generation and distribution must be coveredby the tariffs at each step. Plus the decree with its formulae ensuringnormal earning to the investors. If we had not found it acceptable, wewould not have bid, of course. I don't know any country where thispricing issue is not politically sensitive and can be left to itsnormal course, not in Britain, nor the US, and certainly not in thecountries in transition. We are relatively confident in the good stateof mind of the Hungarian authorities. Of course it will be sensitive inthe future, but they realise in the future energy prices must beconsistent with costs, and provide normal earning to the operators".* Contrary to information given to EEE last December (EEE 49/34), MVMsources say there was no move by MVM to cancel the long-term powerpurchase contracts. "MVM is very happy with these agreements," EEE wasinformed, "it was Schroders who were pushing for changes because theythought the bidders were not very happy with the contracts due to therisk allocation. There have been no changes from the contracts signedon October 10th".Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996EDF SECURES MOCHOVCE ROLEElectricite de France (EdF) has finally secured itself a role inSlovakia's drive to complete its controversial nuclear power station atMochovce, following the signing of an agreement in Bratislava beforeChristmas that will see the French utility provide technical andsupport services in the completion of the first two 440 MW reactors atthe plant.Work on finalising Mochovce is expected to restart early this yearafter months of delay caused partially by the row between Slovakia andthe EBRD over financing for the project. The signing of the agreementbetween EdF and Slovak Electricity (SE) means that French expertisewill now be applied to the project, even though the Slovak governmentrejected an offer of financing from the EBRD that involved EdF as amain contractor (EEE 48/2).It is still not clear whether the Slovak government has secureddefinite financing from Russia to complete the Soviet- designed plant.Moscow has offered $150m in technical and financial support to Mochovceas an alternative to the EBRD proposal, which would have cost DM1.4bn.The government rejected the bank's offer late last year in favour of analternative offer put forward by Slovak and Czech banks and engineeringcompanies which claims Mochovce can be completed for DM1bn. The Russianoffer of financing is a vital part of this alternative project.SE said at the signing of the agreement with EdF that the plant will becompleted to comply with the safety standards of the InternationalAtomic Energy Agency. The involvement of the French company may help toease fears that safety would be compromised if Western companies werenot to be used to complete construction of the Mochovce plant.Both the government and SE have stepped up their commitment to thecompletion of Mochovce to meet a big rise in demand for energy as theeconomy continues to expand. Electricity consumption has risen thisyear by around 8%. SE said before Christmas that it hoped agreementswith its banks and contractors would be signed in the spring and thatproduction of electricity at Mochovce would begin by the end of 1997 orearly 1998.Vladimir Grujbar, director of strategic planning at SE, said thatframework conditions for contracts with suppliers and banks would be inplace by the end of 1995 and that construction could be resumed inMarch. He said the company aimed to have the first block ready forcommissioning by December 1997. The company is currently hoping thatthe first reactor will become operational in the middle of 1998 and thesecond reactor nine months to a year later.Energoprojekt Praha, the Czech engineering firm, will be the generaldesigner for the project, while Skoda Praha will be the generalcontractor for the supply of plant and equipment. The Slovakconstruction group Hydrostav will be the main contractor for the civilengineering works at the site. Safety improvement studies will becarried out by Siemens of Germany and Framatome of France inconjunction with Skoda Praha and experts supplied by the Russiannuclear industry.Apart from the Russian offer of $150m in financing, additional fundingwill be provided by the Czech banks Komercni Banka and CeskaSporitelna, which are offering loans of around $200m and DM200mrespectively.* Slovakia's only operating nuclear plant at Bohunice generated 11,437GWh of electricity last year, exceeding its annual target by 0.33%, thenews agency TASR reported. The head of the plant's public and foreignrelations department, Dobroslav Dobak, said only four deviations fromstandard operational procedures had been observed, none of which wererelevant to safety concerns. The four blocks at the plant account forover half the country's generation which totalled 22,861 GWh last year,with the rest being divided by hydro generation (22.5%) and thermalgeneration (27.4%). Power imports increased to 3,786 GWh with domesticsales up 9% in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996NEW LAW COULD BOOST ROMANIAN OIL SECTORRomania has issued its long-delayed petroleum law which Westernanalysts say is satisfactory and expected to lead to an upturn in thecountry's oil industry."I think the new law is workable. We can work with it," Jean BernardSiri, general manager of Shell Romania Exploration BVsaid. Presidentlon lliescu has promulgated the law, which will become effectivestarting 28 March, the Official Gazette said.The law defines Romania's oil resources as public property, coversconcessions, taxes and royalties and puts local and foreign oiloperators on an equal footing, enabling them to secure oil blocksthrough public tenders. "It (the law) is a positive thing," a Westernanalyst said. "I don't mean that Romania will now see thousands ofinvestors rushing to put money in the oil sector but many will find itan incentive as they have solid legislation to deal with".Under the law, profits are exempted from tax during one year followingstart-up of production. Imported equipment and personal effects areexempt from customs duties. Oil operators will deal directly with theNational Agency for Mineral Resources (ANRM), the licensing authorityin charge of mineral rights administration.By mid-June, ANMR is expected to launch a tender offer for 14 onshoreand offshore blocks believed to contain hydrocarbons (EEE 50/22).Facilities include the possibility for oil operators to negotiateroyalties with the ANRM on a case-by-case basis. Annual tax onexploitation is set at some 3.0% of the value of output.Foreign operators are granted a series of privileges, including thepossibility to export the oil produced and to keep their hard currencyearnings in accounts abroad. They are also allowed to convert local leucurrency earnings - from local sales of oil - into hard currency on theinter-bank market and to transfer the amounts to foreign accounts.Development of the bill, initiated in 1993, has been slow mainlybecause of repeated reviews of its text following objections by bothgovernment officials and oil operators. The final version gives localand foreign oil operators equal access to the national petroleumtransport system. It makes no reference to international arbitration -a concern of foreign executives in the past - saying disputes should besettled by "competent courts, according to the law".* Romania produced 6.7mt of crude in 1995, little changed from theprevious year, Mediafax news agency reported. It quoted a seniorindustry ministry official as saying that natural gas production was19.09bncm last year, compared to 19.6bncm in 1994. In 1995 the countryimported 8.36mt of crude, compared to 8.12mt in 1994, the officialsaid. Gas imports were put at 6.63bncm, a sharp rise from the 1994total of 4.64bncm.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996HUNGARIAN POWER DEMAND RISES 2.5% ON 1994 FIGURESHungarian electricity demand grew by 2.5% in 1995 compared to 1994figures according to provisional MVM figures obtained by EEE. Totaldemand rose to 36,167 GWh, 897 GWh up from the previous year (35,270GWh), and 1,167 GWh (3.3%) above the MVM business plan. Peak load of5,731 MW occurred in the cold spell on 18 January.MVM provisional 1995 figures show almost 300 MW of the year on increase(and over 920 MW compared to the business plan) was produced by coaland lignite-fired stations, and 115 MW (12.8%) by the hydrocarbon firedplants. Imports increased by 381 MW. Commenting on the figures, MVMdirector of power plant operation Karoly Gerse told EEE the 2.5%increase in consumption could be put down roughly equally to increasingindustrial demand and colder weather in January and autumn last year.Industrial demand has been showing growth since about mid-1994, withboth new industry and older sectors contributing to the increase. Therevitalisation of chemicals, aluminium industry and some olderfactories such as the Raba engine plant in Gyor and light-engineeringaround Szekesfehervar are all believed to have contributed to demandgrowth. The service sector is also significant for the power sector,Gerse said, as increased use of air-conditioning equipment has meant ajump in demand of some 10 MW from 1993 to 1995 in the hot summermonths, resulting in a "much healthier [load-curve] for MVM".Domestic demand levels offDomestic demand is believed to have just about levelled off. While thedecline in average standard of living plus more modern machinery hasreduced demand in some ways, against this the new-moneyed class ismaking more use of domestic appliances like air-conditioning equipment.In addition, there has been increasing number of self-employed usinghome-based machinery since 1989.On the production side, the production manager said there is "a newphilosophy" regarding coal-fired stations. Integration of the coalmines with the stations has resulted in higher fixed costs, whilevariable operating costs have decreased. This makes it more economicalto increase utilisation of the coal-fired units in order to reduce theeffects of fixed costs. "In addition, although oil prices have notrisen so much, except for forint devaluation, gas prices have increasedsignificantly, so policy has moved more to coal, and somewhat more tooil," Gerse said.Questioned as to possible means of reducing production costs, he saidthe most effective would be to change the fuel structure, switching toimported steam coal, which would "significantly reduce prices".Politically, however, this is currently not a practical solution. MVMprofited from an 8% price rise (a two-month lag on consumer price risedue partly to slow bill-paying) on 1 January. A second 18% increase isdue in March, with a yet to be decided third hike in October orNovember.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996LUKOIL CONTINUES TO HARBOUR KAZAKH PIPELINE AMBITIONSLukoil, Russia's largest oil producer, has confirmed an interest injoining an alternative to the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC), thecreation of which is currently being considered by the Kazakhauthorities. The existing consortium, set up in 1992 by Kazakhstan,Russia and Oman with the aim of constructing a pipeline for thetransportation of oil produced by the Tengizchevroil (the joint venturebetween Chevron and Kazakhstan) to Russia's Black Sea port ofNovorrossiisk, has failed to raise the necessary funds.Alexander Vasilenko, a spokesman for Lukoil, said the company'scontribution to the new consortium came down to financing, offering itsconstruction facilities or crude swaps of early productions. Thespokesman said the latter option is the most acceptable for Lukoil. Theproposals are currently being considered by the Kazakh side.According to Vasilenko, a Lukoil delegation was supposed to leave forAlma Aty late last month to finalise the deal, but the trip waspostponed at the request of the Kazakh side. The spokesman refused toname the approximate date of the next meeting, saying only that itdepends on the Kazakh side's decision. He added that an agreement hasbeen reached at an intergovernmental level on the subject, which wasformally initiated in a letter sent by Viktor Chernomyrdin to theKazakh president. Vasilenko said that his company's plans in no waycontradict the obligations Russia has undertaken in the CPC, but only"makes them more detailed".Lukoil is already participating in a number of projects in Kazakhstanand the company's prime aim has always been to get a share in thedevelopment of the Tengiz field. Lukoil's possible participation in thenew pipeline consortium is viewed by industry analysts as a steptowards satisfying this ambition. Vasilenko refused to talk of hiscompany's interest in receiving a slice of Tengiz project. At presentKazakhstan is thinking of giving a part of its share in theTengizchevroil venture to some Western oil companies, with Mobil beingthe prime candidate, with the intention of breathing new life into thepipeline development by forming a new consortium for its construction(EEE 50/5).A meeting of the CPC directorate was scheduled to be held in Moscowbefore the end of the month, a source at Transneft, Russia's statepipeline operator which represents Russia's interest in the existingconsortium, told EEE. A possible agenda of the meeting is said toinclude the restructuring of the consortium's membership in the lightof the Kazakh's intention to form an alternative consortium. The newmembership composition concerns first of all of Western oil companies,such as Mobil and Chevron, but nothing was said about Lukoil'sparticipation. Earlier Chevron refused to enter the CPC on the termsproposed by the consortium - ie. that it was supposed to provide alion's share of the financing only for a 25% stake in the CPC.Chevron views stalemateChevron said on 19 January that it saw no end to the impasse in itstalks with the CPC, despite reports that a key stumbling block could beleaving the consortium. The Wall Street Journal reported that Dutch oiltrader John Deuss had agreed to resign as president of Oman Oil Co andappeared to be ready to leave the CPC as well. However, Chevronspokesman Mike Libbey said "our problem wasn't with Mr Deuss but withthe unreasonable business terms of the CPC". However, the presence ofOman in the consortium has long been seen as a key stumbling block bymany observers with the company standing to benefit considerably whenit was neither the source of the oil or directly involved in thedevelopment of the fields concerned. However, Chevron has said that itwill no longer just rely on a single route to get its Tengiz productionout with Libbey stating "multiple export routes are going to beneeded".Lukoil said on 12 January that it produced 57.5mt of oil in 1995, anincrease of 87,000t on 1994's level. A company release also said thecompany refined 19mt of oil in 1995, an increase of 1.8mt on 1994figures. The company produced 2.6mt of petrol, over 4.6mt of diesel andabout 5.3mt of mazut.* Russia and Azerbaijan have signed a long-awaited oil transitagreement, viewed as an essential step for developing the Caspian Sea.The delay in signing the agreement, which had been finalised lastautumn, was causing concern among members of the internationalconsortium which is exploiting the Azeri oilfields. The signatoriesblamed the delay purely on "technical problems". The Azeri governmenthas guaranteed that at least 5mt of oil a year will flow through theRussian pipeline system by the year 2002 for export onto world markets.The oil will flow through an existing pipeline infrastructure, whichruns from the Azeri capital of Baku through the troubled region ofChechnya to the Russian Black Sea port of Novorrossiisk. ValeryChernayev, the president of Transneft, the Russian pipeline operator,said this route was the best option. But concerns about the politicalinstability in Chechnya have ensured other outlets are being developedfor Caspian oil, via Georgia and Turkey.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RENEL RAISES PRICES ON BACK OF DEVALUATIONThe devaluation of the Romanian Lev is the justification for animpending rise in electricity tariffs, according to Romanian statepower company Renel.Current prices of Lev46/kWh for residential consumers and Lev110/kWhfor commercial consumers were calculated last year on an exchange rateof Lev1,910 to the dollar; due to depreciation towards the end of 1995the currency now stands at Lev2,583 to the dollar. A Renel spokesmansaid that any further fall would necessitate a price hike "soonerrather than later".Under an agreement with the IMF, electricity prices cannot be modifiedmore than twice a year. After the impending rise, prices are likely tobe Lev62/kWh for households and Lev150/kWh for commercial consumption.Meanwhile, according to end-of-year statistics released by Renel thismonth, domestic electricity consumption in 1995 rose by 7.4% comparedwith the previous year, with the private commercial sector accountingfor half of the increase. The company's thermal energy deliveries in1995 were up 5.6% from 1994. The residential heating share rose to 50%last year compared with 30% in 1989.To meet the mounting energy demand, Renel was forced to raiseproduction, particularly from coal-fuelled TPPs whose output was 3.8%over 1994. With 1995 electricity imports totalling 130 MW (averagepower), compared with total exports of 152 MW, Romania achieved anelectricity trade surplus, confining its external power dependence toimports of primary resources, a senior company executive said. Renel'semergency fuel stocks at the end of 1995 totalled 3mt of lignite,250,000t of black coal and pitcoal within "normal limits".Renel is set to increase its energy supply to Bucharest heating utilityRadet by 25%, to a total 12,600t calories, under a new contract to befinalised shortly. Under the contract's liability terms the companieswill be entitled to exact penalties from each other for the potentialmalfunctions of the heating system, Radet executive Gheorghe Dabelatold the press. Thus, Renel will incur penalties for failure to meetthe supply needs of Radet, while Radet will be liable for excessheating agent amounts, water hardness etc. The companies have yet toagree on payment terms, with Radet pushing to maintain the currentmethod of daily cheques due to unreliability. The contract will besigned as soon as this matter has been resolved.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UNOCAL BRIEFS PAKISTAN ON TURKMENIAN PIPELINE PLANSA team from Unocal has updated Pakistani officials on its plans tobuild oil and gas pipelines from Turkmenistan to Pakistan viaAfghanistan at an estimated cost of $8bn."There is developed gas in Turkmenistan with no market and there is aready market here in Pakistan," Richard Keller, president of UnocalPakistan, told Reuters on 17 January. "The project makes sense fromthat point of view," Keller said. "We are working to finalise routesfrom the technical and political perspective within the next fewmonths".Unocal, in 60/40 collaboration with Delta Oil Company of Saudi Arabia,plans to build a 1,271km gas pipeline from the Turkmen border to theSui gas fields in Pakistan's southwestern province of Balochistan.Turkmenistan, which signed agreements on the projects with Unocal andDelta in October (EEE 49/31), has earmarked the fully developedDaulatabad field, 160km from the Afghan border, with reserves of 45trillion cubic feet of gas - about double Pakistan's own official gasreserves - to supply Pakistan.The pipeline, with a capacity of 2bncf/d and six compressor stations,is expected to cost $3bn. Fluor Daniel has been retained as consultingengineers to establish a route, design and detailed cost estimate.Unocal also plans to build a 1,800km oil pipeline from Chardzhou inTurkmenistan to a marine terminal to be built at Gwadar on Pakistan'ssouthwestern coast. The pipeline will have a capacity of about onemillion barrels per day and cost an estimated $5bn. A detailed projectanalysis is due to be completed by November.Keller said Unocal was interested in helping to plan the Gwadarterminal, which could be used to export Turkmenistan's oil to growingmarkets in South and Southeast Asia. He said the financing of thepipeline projects had not yet been worked out, but financialconsultants JP Morgan would be talking with international lendingorganisations.Keller said Unocal would prefer to build both pipelines at the sametime to save construction costs. The pipelines would run parallel forpart of the route. Resource certification, planning and design wouldtake about a year, but he could not say how long it would take toclinch agreements with governments concerned and business partners. Itcould take a further year to complete financing and two years toconstruct the pipelines.These would cross Afghanistan, through territory now held by theIslamic Taleban militia, which captured western Afghanistan up to theTurkmen border from government forces last year. Keller said noofficial talks had been held with the Kabul government led by PresidentBurhanuddin Rabbani and stressed that Unocal wanted to stay clear ofAfghan politics, adding that the Afghan imbroglio was "the big questionmark in the minds of lenders. There would have to be a politicalsettlement, or something that would satisfy lending institutions,"Keller said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996POLES MAKE MORE COAL MOVESThe Polish government has abandoned the monopoly on coal tradinggranted to Weglokoks, Weglozbyt and Kopex and their subsidiaries lastyear (EEE 47/10). The decision came after pressure from the anti-monopoly office. From 15 December last all "reliable" firms are allowedto deal in coal.Nevertheless, the new rules encouraged coal companies to have directcontracts with power generators, district heating providers, cokingplants, cement works, steelworks, the state railways, and other largeusers. These contracts were expected to define quantities, quality,delivery dates, payment terms, and claims procedures, and they were tobe drawn up under Polish law. Reliable firms could act asintermediaries in this trade. In addition, the rules did not applywhere purchasers paid prior to, or upon, delivery.In an interview with the Rzeczpospolita newspaper, deputy industryminister Jerzy Markowski noted that the ministry could afford to dropthe monopoly rules because they had done their job. He said that theyhad persuaded the coal trading companies Weglokoks, Weglozbyt and Kopexto guarantee bank loans needed to pay the miners in December, and hadencouraged a number of coal companies to sign agreements which did notinclude any intermediaries.Meanwhile, Poland's socio-economic strategy council, a body advisingthe Cabinet, has approved subsidies of some Z8bn ($3.2bn), officiallyfor closing down uneconomic mines, contained in the restructuring planfor the mines proposed by Markowski (EEE 50/11). There was, however, asignificant split between academics who favoured centralising themining industry, and those who argued that mines should be left largelyto their own devices to see which ones were viable.The majority of the council favoured centralising. Neither was thereagreement over forecasts for coal demand; one professor warned thatdemand could fall by 30% if users adopted more energy efficientequipment; another set demand at 90-100mt/yr for the next few years.Current production is 130mt/yr, and the Markowski plan envisagescutting it to 110mt by 2000.At the same time, Markowski noted that the Budryk and Bogdanka mineswere due to be privatised as soon as his restructuring programme cameinto force. The two mines, which are the only ones not to be part ofthe holding company structures, would be taken over by the banks thathad been lending them money - notably Bank Przemyslowo Handlowy wKrakowie, and Powszechny Bank Kredytowy w Warszawie. The two mines areconsidered to be the most profitable in Poland.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUES STRUGGLES WITH SALE AMID CONTINUED PAYMENT PROBLEMSOnly 0.62% of shares in the Russian Unified Energy Systems (RUES) weresold off in October to December from the 4.5% stake offered at anationwide auction, a company statement said.According to Aleksander Lopatin, deputy head of the RUES securitiesdepartment, the state, which is a main company shareholder (holding 60%of the shares), initially intended to put twice as many shares up forauction but the company's management succeeded in persuading it tosplit the block into two lots. The second one of the same size will beoffered for sale in 1996. According to the auction, RUES received only14% of the R130bn proceeds, the rest going to the federal budget.The shares were offered for auction at their face value. At the sametime their price on the secondary market was 3-4 times lower than thisfigure. The statement said that all the shares were bought off by thecompany's employees "with their own savings".Judging by the present price of shares on the OTC market, the cost ofeach kW power capacity of the utility is valued at not more than $8.But according to the company's management, its real value is over$1,000.Lopatin said that most of the preparatory work on the company's ADRprogramme had been completed. RUES received the approval of the USSecurities and Exchange Commission (SEC) last May and from lastSeptember, work has begun on putting all documents in order. Formallyit is necessary to collect the signatures of the RUES board ofdirectors to sign an agreement with the Bank of New York, the company'spartner in the programme. At the same time, Lopatin refused to name theexact date of its official presentation, saying only that "it should befairly soon".In 1995, the Russian power generating sector received $2bn ininvestments, this year the figure is expected to grow up to $3-3.5bn.Low electricity tariffs (2-3 cents per kWh) keep foreign investors fromputting money into the industry. At the same time, RUES own investmentsare prevented by non-payments. In September, the government railedagainst cutoffs to main RUES non-payers and since then the debt to thecompany has increased by one third, reaching R32 trillion.Emphasis on Russian suppliesAccording to Anatoly Dyakov, president of RUES, in 1995 the companyinstalled about 1m kW of generating capacity, and built 14,000km ofpower transmission lines. "We've had no strikes or emergencies andwe've preserved all the jobs. We're operating on domestic equipment -all spare parts are Russian-made".Dyakov explains that, although new technologies are needed, the companyis insisting that everything should be produced at Russian factories."Western companies cooperating with domestic machine-builders haveunderstood us and accepted this condition," he notes.Nonpayment is the weak point, Dyakov admits, with customers owingR39,400bn and debts to suppliers totalling R31,200bn. "One of thebiggest nonpayers is the state itself in the budget-financed sphere,"he says. "We suggested a mutual offset but everything depends on thefinance ministry, which does not want to lose tax receipts into thetreasury".Dyakov adds that the power engineers were the main victims of agovernment decision in autumn to freeze the prices of electricity,natural gas and railway transportation. "On 1 October gas cost R257,000per 1,000cm. but on 6 October the gas industry set a different price -R275,000 excluding VAT. Overnight all our stations became unprofitable,now we're loss-makers". The government agreed that RUES could payGazprom at the previous price, but the gas company cut off supplies toelectrical stations, he explains. "But we have been strictly forbiddento cut off supplies, and as soon as users realised that they faced nopenalty they ceased paying us altogether". Nonpayments in October-November rocketed by R9,000bn, he complains.The planned establishment of a Federal power commission should help tosolve these problems, Dyakov believes. "It will be concerned not justwith electricity, but also with gas, coal and oil. Let them calculate,coordinate, harmonise the sectoral rates".Nevertheless, construction of new plants is continuing. The electricityrate includes an investment component of 13%. "But we don't have enoughfunds. We already owe the builders about R100bn. At the Kolyma hydroplant wages have not been paid for a year. They even introduced moneyof their own. We paid them off by barter. We took foodstuffs fromKrasnodar (they also owe us for electricity, and they haven't got moneyeither) and delivered them by plane to Kolyma. But in spite of this,the builders did get the fourth 180 MW power unit at Kolyma on stream".Dyakov would like to see a change in the price structure. "Before 1992the rate for the population was the highest at four kopecks per kWhwhile industry paid 1.8 and agriculture one kopeck. Now the ratio isreversed and industry subsidises the population". He hopes the paymentssituation will be resolved this year and more investment attracted tothe industry. However he has no illusions about investment from theWest. "We've got controlled rates, and they'll always remain so andwill be lower than in the West. Investors must be Russian ones. But sofar the R500 shares of RUES are selling at a price below their facevalue. I have suggested to the government that they should allow us tobuy the shares at face value, in payment of the budget debt. Thegovernment will replenish the budget and we'll accumulate those sharesand, when the market changes, sell them at a profit. They'll become asource of investment, I have no doubt". Dyakov says Russia'selectricity rates cannot be set at world levels and should take intoaccount the population's ability to pay. He also warns that if federalpower commission decisions go against the interests of the powerindustry, the management of RUES will fight this in the courts.While Dyakov acknowledges that each station under the RUES umbrella isa separate stock company, he resents the go-it-alone attitude of someof the more wealthy companies. Some Siberian companies are insisting onoperating independently. These companies run hydro plants which producecheap power. "The rates at our stations are totalled and an averagevalue is determined for power transfer to areas facing shortages," heexplains. "Irkutsk, Bratsk, and Ust-Ilimsk hydropower plants producethe cheapest electricity. The whole country built them and theirinclusion in the general system undoubtedly would lower the generalrate". But instead they are selling electricity within the regionseveral times cheaper. In Irkutsk one kWh of electricity costs therural population R8, while the price in Moscow is R130. Dyakov saysthat 52 member regions have electricity shortages, and only 20 have asurplus. "What would happen if all of them operated in their owninterests?" he asks. "Tearing the power industry apart means tearingthe country apart".Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996POLES SEEK POSTPONEMENT OF FUEL IMPORT LIBERALISATIONThe Polish government has asked the European Union for an extendedadjustment period for its oil refining and distribution sector (and itsagriculture), according to prime minister Jozef Oleksy. The governmentexpected neither to these industries to be in a condition to faceforeign competition soon and wants a postponement of a deadline forliberalising fuel imports to 1999 from 1997."If the deadline is not moved the fate of our refineries will be underthreat" industry minister Klemens Scierski said on 11 January. UnderPoland's association agreement with the EU, Poland should lift barriersprotecting the fuel market, including duties and quotas, by the end of1996. Foreign oil companies took the view that delaying theliberalisation of the Polish refining and distribution sector would cutdown their interest in investing in the country.Meanwhile, Poland's main refineries, Petrochemia Plock and RafineriaGdanska, were preparing to put up their petrol prices. They citedhigher oil prices, which had risen to around $18/bbl by the end of lastyear. The government could delay the proposed price rises by a maximumof three months.The refineries argued that oil prices accounted for up to 90% of theproduction costs of petrol, and said that they would considerabandoning the increases if oil prices fell below $17/bbl. APetrochemia Plock spokesman noted that the average price for oil paidby the refinery during the first nine months of 1995 was $16.99/bbl,falling as low as $15.60/bbl during the summer.At the same time, the Polish government has adjusted import tariffs onpetrol and diesel fuel. Duties on petrol imports from the EU, EFTA, andthe central European free market CEFTA (ie Czech Republic, Slovakia,Hungary, and Slovenia, as well as Poland) have been set at 15% for1996. This compares with 12% for the EU and EFTA in 1995, and 10% forCEFTA countries. The rate for other countries - such as Russia - goesback to 25%, having been temporarily cut to 15% last year. For dieselfuel, the rate from EU, EFTA, and CEFTA countries is 25%, which is areduction from 28% for the EU and EFTA, and a rise from 23.3% forCEFTA. The rate for other countries is 35%.The target rates for 1996 contained in Poland's association agreementwith the EU were 9% for petrol, and 21% for diesel. But there are nopenalties attached to failing to meet those targets. What does need tobe discussed with the EU are import quotas, and concessions forimporters. Talks were scheduled for early December, but were put off byEU officials until mid February.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996ROMANIA AND GAZPROM ESTABLISH JOINT VENTURERussian gas supplier Gazprom has drafted a bilateral Romania-Russiagovernment accord for the construction of a gas pipeline in Romania,according to Interfax news agency.Under the accord, Gazprom and Romanian counterpart Romgaz would set upa 50/50 joint stock company to design, finance, build and operate theline to carry Russian gas to consumers in Romania and neighbouringcountries. The 15-year deal gives the joint venture ownership of thefacilities it builds in Romania and provides for leasing and subsequentpurchasing of existing Romanian gas transport facilities, the reportsaid.The Romanian government would exempt the venture and its founders fromcustoms duty, income and land taxes and other charges linked tobuilding and operating gas production facilities. The Russiangovernment would exempt Gazprom from export duty on equipment andmaterials needed for the line. Natural gas exported to Romaniancustomers could not be re-exported without Gazprom's consent.Shortfall in suppliesRomania's supply of natural gas from the Russian Federation has beenshort by 2mcm/d since 31 December, according to Romgaz executive StafanMan. Russian suppliers have blamed the reduction, which represents ashortfall of 15% below contract levels, on extremely low outsidetemperatures, Man said.Romgaz delivers an average 38-40% of its total output to residentialconsumers, rising to more than half of its output during peak times.The company began drawing on underground reserves as early as Novemberand has had to raise daily deliveries by about 10% since the beginningof January, Man said.To add to the pressure, Bucharest's public finance board froze theRomgaz account last month over the company's failure to pay Lev200bn inoutstanding taxes, with the result that Romgaz is unable to afford anyexcess expenditure on its transport system whether for maintenance,operation or spare parts. Romgaz itself meanwhile is unable to recoverLev900bn in bill arrears, more than half of which is owed by statepower company Renel. Other major debtors include large plants in themetal-processing, machine-building and chemical industries. Domesticindustries would virtually grind to a standstill should Romgaz cut offsupplies, Man warned.A priority for the troubled gas company this year is the replacement ofpipeline. Nearly 40% of Romgaz pipes lack cathode protection, whichleads to early corrosion and could pose a serious blast threat,according to company official Ioan Husu. At present Romgaz operatesonly two mobile laboratories for the monitoring of cathodedeterioration, a wholly inadequate number given the size of thecountry's gas supply system, he said. The company is scheduled toreplace 200km of a total 11,000km of pipeline this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BULGARIA TO TEST REACTOR VESSEL AND GO AHEAD WITH STORAGEBulgarian officials announced in December that the country would agreethat three or four templets from the body of the controversial Unit 1at Kozlodui could be taken later this year. However, the EU is stillurging Bulgaria to close the reactor as soon as possible.According to Yanko Yanev, head of the national committee on thepeaceful uses of atomic energy, the tests will be done either bySiemens or Westinghouse. The operation will continue for 5-6 months andwill cost about $500,000-600,000. The European Commission is planningto cover these expenses. Speaking at a press conference, Yanev insistedthat Russian experts will be allowed to participate in all stages ofthe tests.National Electricity Company (NEC) acting chairman Trifon Tsvetkov said"we decided to seek ways for an earlier closure for tests of reactornumber one and we may close it around 15 May if the weather is warmenough". He said he had discussed carrying out the tests with EUofficials in Brussels and more talks were expected to take place beforethe end of the month.Unit 1 at the plant sparked international concern after it wasrestarted by the Bulgarians in October last year (EEE 49/14) afterseveral months safety upgrading work. The EU urged the country to closethe 440 MW reactor in return for compensatory energy supplies. However,the country is not currently linked to the Western European systemalthough it could receive power supply via the former Yugoslavia.On 15 January Bulgaria added it would not allow safety checks withoutthe participation of its own experts. "We will not agree to additionaltests of the vessel's metal (of reactor number one) without Bulgarianparticipation," Yanev told a news conference. "We also raised thequestion of participation by the reactor's producer (Russia) in thechecks," Yanev said.The EU Phare programme envisages aid of some Ecu40m for the Bulgarianenergy sector in the next four years, Yanev said, adding that half ofit would be allocated to nuclear safety upgrading. Yanev said a creditfor the modernisation of Kozlodui's two 1,000 MW reactors has also beendiscussed in Brussels, adding Bulgaria hopes to receive a $150m loanfrom the European Investment Bank for this.Low radioactive waste storage approvedMeanwhile, the Energoproekt R&D institute has developed a final draftfor the construction of a large storage facility for low-radioactivewaste at the Kozlodui plant. The project has been endorsed by theenvironment ministry and partial financing from the EU is already inplace. Construction should be completed in 18 months, according toofficials.The project provides for building a storage facility for two bodies oftotal capacity 10,000cm. It will hold 2,000 steel-concrete containersmade by the Bulgarian company Balbok. Six wells will facilitate regulartesting of the level of radioactivity of underground water.Comprehensive safety measures against earthquakes and other accidentshave been provided for. Waste and refuse with low and mediumradioactivity will be kept in the storage, ie waste clothes andinstrumentation, oil, resins and valves.For the present, no construction of storage facilities for highly-radioactive waste has been planned. However, this may become necessaryif Moscow starts returning spent fuel from the Kozlodui plant. Thebilateral Bulgarian-Russian agreement on nuclear energy cooperationcontains such a clause. A plant for recycling radioactive waste isalready under construction at the plant. with technology supplied byWestinghouse. The project is co-financed by the EU.* Bulgaria has made progress in meeting recommendations of theInternational Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in upgrading safety at fourreactors at Kozlodui, an IAEA representative said on 19 January. A five-day IAEA mission has been visiting the plant to collect information onthe implementation of safety measures recommended by the agency in1991. "We found that the plant feels very concerned with the resolutionof the safety measures and progress has been accomplished in severalareas of concern" said Georges Norvez, head of the mission. Norvezstressed that there was still much work to be done to fulfils all theIAEA requirements. "Completion of the modifications planned in 1996 and1997 will be a very separate step" he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996MOL FIGURES FAIL TO DAMPEN OPTIMISMMOL's three-quarter figures proved something of a disappointment whenannounced last month. These were the first figures to be releasedfollowing the partial flotation of the company in November-December(EEE 51/5).MOL had nine-month net sales of Ft 231.7bn producing operating profitsof Ft6.8bn. Whilst third quarter revenues were normal given theseasonal nature of gas sales, the operating profit was only Ft0.3bn upon the six-month figure of Ft6.5bn. After tax profit figures, atFt3.2bn at the end of June, fell to Ft2.3bn at the end of September,paint an even less rosy picture.Despite the apparent poor three-quarter figures, MOL managementmaintains year end after-tax projections of Ft6-7bn will be achieved.(All these figures are to Hungarian Accounting Regulations, HAR) Three-quarter natural gas sales stood at 8bncm, 3.8bncm from domesticproduction, and MOL projects 1995 domestic production will be up on thebusiness plan, with 1996 production down some 9-11% on 1995 figures.Petrol sales were 13% up on 1994 nine-month figures, with diesel salessimilarly 6% up.MC Securities reportHowever, a report by the London based MC Securities chastises MOLmanagement for not showing better financial nouse prior toprivatisation. "A profits downgrade so soon after privatisation is nota good way to begin life as a private company," the report concludes,saying the revisions to forecasts were "both unfortunate and quiteprobably avoidable". The report still maintains, however, that MOL"remains a fundamentally sound company," and forecast 1995 after tax(according to International Standards, IAS) profits at Ft6.9bn, risingto Ft21.5bn in 1996. MC Securities puts the poor three-quarter figuresdown to a number of factors, but highlights that between privatisationand the publication of the nine-month figures, provisions were made forbad and doubtful debts of some Ft3bn. In addition, MOL's increasing itsvolume of stored gas, with 275mcm injected into storage before thewinter season.In spite of the marginal increase in domestic production, MC predicts a3% increase in gas imports in 1995 to fulfil the increased storagedemand. Both the gas and the storage means higher incurred costs, andthe additional inventory losses are not an allowable provision for taxpurposes in Hungary, the report states. It is the above two factorswhich raise the ire of MC Securities' analyst, since both were clearlyknown in advance. The report downgrades MOL 1995 earnings on an IASbasis to Ft6.9bn, "a significant reduction from the Ft10.2bn forecastat the time of the international offering".The report, whilst noting increased export sales, also debunksHungarian press reports of "considerably improved" domestic salesfigures for the first nine-months compared to 1994 results. It pointsout that Hungarian sales "rose by less than inflation over the sameperiod, indicating MOL continues to lose market share slightly or facesmargin pressure in the domestic market". MC Securities notes a numberof hopeful signs, including the stabilisation in the former Yugoslavia,which is likely to lead to improved MOL revenues. Its conclusions,written on 4 January, state "MOL remains an attractive European oilcompany at its current price of Ft1,220 per share".Somebody must have done some reading. Later in the month the price hitFt1,945, although this was seen as something of a technically freakprice. By mid-month, the price was at a more sustainable Ft1,400 pluslevel.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCEAccording to the World Bank's first progress report on its work toprotect the environment in Central and Eastern Europe* "it was clearfrom the start in the region that environmental improvements would belinked to economic and social changes, and solving the priorityproblems had to be balanced with resources availability".As a result, the report notes, when the World Bank, the EuropeanCommission, the OECD and the environment ministers of Central andEastern Europe endorsed an Environmental Action Programme for the 25countries of the region at a meeting in Lucerne in 1993, it was agreedthat the Programme would be based on two premises.The first is that all investments made in the field assume economic andenvironmental policies are complementary and not competing (forinstance it is understood that phasing out subsidies is good for theeconomy, conservation and pollution). The second premise is that inorder to narrow the range of what the most pressing environmentalconcerns are, attention should be focused on just those priorities thathave human health consequences - namely lead pollution, and pollutioncaused by airborne dust and sulphur dioxide, and drinking watercontamination. The report says these "priority problems" have now"largely been identified", but a considerable amount of work remains tobe done to solve them.As a member of the task force implementing the Environmental ActionProgramme, the World Bank has contributed in a variety of ways. It hashelped 11 countries draw up national environmental data actions plans,beginning with Bulgaria in 1991, and most recently assisting the KyrgyzRepublic and Moldova. It has also helped governments developappropriate incentives and regulatory policies as part of the Bank's$5.7bn structural adjustment lending programme between 1990-1995.For instance, a $300m World Bank structural adjustment loan to Polandhelped liberalise coal prices which, together with a decline inindustrial production, reduced demand for coal, and increased it forenvironmentally preferable fuels. This fuel switching, in turn, waslinked to a reduction in CO2 emissions and emissions of other airpollutants.The report notes that sometimes structural adjustment operationsinclude explicit environmental measures. For instance, a $15m creditfor the Kyrgyz Republic approved last year lays down that highlypolluting companies must do environmental audits and provides localbanks with guidelines on how to screen companies to find out if theyare eligible for sub-loan applications.$1.36bn in loan commitmentsTurning to project financing, the report says the Bank has made $1.3bnin loan commitments for 12 projects in the region that are specificallyenvironmental since 1990. Of these 12, five are in the energy sectorand account for 70% of the total. All five were meant to mitigateindustrial or "brown" environmental problems like air pollution andurban environmental problems.Another of the projects was for improvements in general environmentalmanagement (10% of the total), and another for emergency oil spills sothat the region has a response capability. This last category amountedto $99m or 8% of total environment project financing, and was entirelyabsorbed by one project - the Komi oil pipeline spill in Russia (EEE42/7).The Bank has also supported 27 general projects that includeenvironmental components. One of these is the Czech Power andEnvironmental Improvement Project which requires that CEZ, theprincipal generator, undertake actions that should result in a 90%reduction in sulphur oxides and an 80% reduction in fly ash by the year2000.The World Bank is also supporting environmental improvements in itscapacity as an implementing agency of the Global Environment Facility(GEF). In one case, the World Bank is helping Poland prepare itsratification of the Framework Convention on Climate Change with a $25mGEF grant that will help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, particularlythose of CO2. The project will help finance the conversion of small,coal-fired boilers in old residential buildings. Local air quality isexpected to vastly improve as a result of the project with the almosttotal elimination of SO2 and particulate emissions in towns, and asignificant reduction in emissions of nitrogen oxides.Meanwhile in regional programmes, at the request of the G-7, andworking with the IEA and the EBRD, the World Bank has prepared a studyon nuclear safety and electric power requirements in six countries -Armenia, Bulgaria, Lithuania, Russia, Slovakia and Ukraine. The reportis part of an ongoing effort to help the region develop long-termenergy strategies and ensure that safety issues and energy issues areaddressed in a coordinated way.Patterns of pollution changingLooking ahead, the report notes that patterns of pollution are changingin the region. It says, "With an increase in the number of cars in theregion, and a decrease in heavy industrial production, traffic isbecoming a main cause of lead pollution, accounting for as much as 84%of lead pollution in Hungary, 61% in Bulgaria and 40% in Poland".Indeed the Bank is now financing research on projected traffic growthin Central and Eastern Europe and on traffic emissions and theireffects on human health. It is also researching the feasibility andcost of reducing the lead content in petrol. The results of thisresearch will influence decisions on future investments by the Bank inthe region. For instance, a comprehensive pollution abatement projectis being prepared for Bulgaria that includes measures to reduceemissions from a copper smelter, to substitute coal fuel for naturalgas in urban areas, and to cut down on airborne lead emissions bypromoting the use of unleaded petrol.Finally, the report says the Bank will be increasing its role as abroker of deals, and agreements to finance environmental projects. "Forexample, the World Bank can provide guarantees to mitigate specificpolitical risks in countries, and in this way encourage privateinvestments in support of the environment".* The World Bank and the Environment in Central and Eastern Europe 1990-1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996POLES RAISE PRICESDomestic prices of electricity and gas rose by an average of 14% fromthe beginning of this year, according to calculations by Poland'sfinance ministry, but this figure covers a reasonably wide range ofindividual tariff changes.Thus, the price of one kWh under one industrial night tariff rose by25%, from Z0.04 to Z0.05 (from 1.6 to two cents), while under anotherit was up by 20% from Z0.05 to Z0.06 (from two to 2.4 cents). An all-day industrial tariff showed a 12.5% rise from Z0.08 to Z0.09.Domestic tariffs generally showed smaller rises, though the prices wereinevitably higher. Thus, the price of one kWh for households in blocksof flats rose by 12.5% from Z0.16 to Z0.18, while the tariff forelectrical heating rose by 11% from Z0.18 to Z0.20 for peak rate and by12.5% from Z0.08 to Z0.09 for the night rate.At the same time, from the beginning of this year, users of communallyheated water will be charged on the basis of water meters countingtheir consumption, where these exist. The public works ministry hasestimated that use of hot water drops by approximately half when metersare installed.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996HUNGARY SECURES 1996 SUPPLIESHungary has secured its gas and oil supply for 1996, Laszlo Pal,chairman of Hungary's oil and gas monopoly MOL said on 11 January."Hungary's gas and oil supply for 1996 is already guaranteed, and weare negotiating future deliveries," Pal told Reuters in an interview.Hungary will buy seven billion cubic meters of gas from Russia thisyear. "The contracts have been signed," Pal added. He said MOL had apreliminary agreement with its Russian partner, Gazprom, whichguaranteed coverage of Hungary's gas needs until 2010. Talks havealready started covering the 2010-2015 period.Pal said Hungary was presently getting all its gas from pipelinesdirectly from Russia, but a new pipeline connecting the westernHungarian town Gyor with Austria's Baumgarten will open within the nexttwo years. Russian gas was also expected to be transported through thenew pipeline as it was cheaper than north European gas, Pal said. "Aslong as our relations with Russian suppliers remain normal theirposition will not be at risk," Pal added.Hungary had preliminary agreements on all of its oil imports for thisyear. "The contracts will be finalised within the next few days," Palsaid. The chairman declined to name Hungary's import partners but saidRussia would remain the main source, though oil has already arrivedthrough the Adria pipeline from Adriatic seaports. The mere existenceof the Adria pipeline had helped MOL to negotiate better terms withRussia he added.Hungary buys the Russian oil below the world market price at discountlevels similar to its neighbours, Pal said. Hungary's oil imports for1996 will be 5.5mt (roughly equivalent to 110,000bbl/d), of which 1mtare likely to arrive through the Adria pipeline. Hungary covers some20% of its oil consumption from its own wells.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996OILGATE ENQUIRY CLEARS MINISTER OF TRADE AND MOL CHAIRMANThe enquiry conducted by the Hungarian Prime Minister's office into theaffair dubbed "Oilgate" by the Hungarian opposition found"shortcomings" in various activities of the people and committees underinvestigation, but no evidence or even suspicion of illegal activity(EEE 51/17).The announcement, on 22 December, appeared to clear industry ministerImre Dunai, and his predecessor Laszlo Pal, now MOL President, ofallegations of conflict of interests and of using their positions tobenefit private businessmen close to their party who are involved inoil trading activities. But parliament has decided that a cross-partycommittee will also launch an enquiry into the matter.The report says the goals of those concerned were correct, but therehad been "faults in implementation", because even the appearance ofwrongdoing should have been avoided. The stated goal of the report wasto establish whether personal relationships existed which would have inany way prejudiced the interests of Hungary. The committee of enquiryconducted hearings with Dunai, Pal and Otto Hujber, chairman of theentrepreneur group within the Socialist Party and former head of acommittee in charge of an operation to repay Russian debt to Hungary.In a nutshell, the report notes a number of points regarding conflictof interest issues which involve Pal, Dunai and Hujber, and theiractivities to reduce Russian debt and the trade imbalance betweenHungary and Russia involving bartered Hungarian goods. But critics saythe report generously judges the dubious aspects of these activities as"shortcomings" rather than irregularities or illegal activity.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT APPROVES FUEL AND ENERGY PROGRAMMEA federal programme for fuel and energy development up to 2000 has beenapproved by the Russian government. Officials noted that the fuel-and-energy complex is responsible for a quarter of Russia's industrialoutput and exercises considerable influence over the budget as well asaccounting for more than a half of Russia's export potential.The first stage of the programme for 1992-1995 focused mainly on thedenationalisation of power plants. A new legal basis for market reformswithin the fuel-and-energy complex is being developed.However many problems still remain, officials admitted. Only 40% of thefunds set aside for the programme have so far been made available andnon-payments difficulties are blocking progress. In 1995, only 1.5% ofthe finance allocated to the sector was made available and outstandingdebts to sector enterprises increased 3.8 times over 1994 to R89,500bn.These enterprises in turn owe R99,600bn.Customers pay only for 23% of the gas received, 40% of coal and 60% ofelectricity. The government has also set a three-week period for animprovement in the federal programme for exports within the sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996POLISH PARLIAMENT SENDS ENERGY LAWS FOR MORE STUDYPoland's lower house of parliament on 11 January sent two draft laws onenergy production and sale, aimed at adjusting the sector to the marketeconomy, to committees for further study.The bills, one prepared by the government and the other by a group ofdeputies, envisage gradual liberalisation of energy prices, and providea legal framework for letting private investors buy into the industry.The government-sponsored draft provides for creating an EnergyRegulation Office (URE) that would issue licences for energyproduction, transmission, distribution and sales. The URE, togetherwith the anti-monopoly office, would also make sure that energy priceincreases are justified. The bill proposed by the group of deputiesobliges energy producers to sign long-term contracts with end-users tostabilise the market.Under the drafts, the national grid is to remain state-owned, whileother energy companies could gradually be privatised to ensure muchneeded investment. The grid will be obliged to connect to itself allenergy producers with URE licences.The government-backed bill cedes control over the production anddistribution of heating from the industry ministry to the constructionministry and local governors. Analysts said the parliamentarycommittees were likely to merge the two draft laws into one bill in aprocess that could last months.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996WORLD BANK LAUNCHES $100M BOSNIA AID PLANThe World Bank announced a $100m "Emergency Recovery Project" forBosnia in December to jump-start the war-shattered country'srestoration in the first quarter of 1996.The money, to be co-financed between the Bank and other donors, will betargeted at key government agencies, medium and small enterprises andseverely disadvantaged residents. The programme was announced inSarajevo by Michel Noel, chief of the Bank's country operationsdivision, as NATO activated its peace mission to bring 60,000 troops toBosnia.Bosnian officials said they hoped the project would be part of a $517mrequest they will be making at a donor conference in Brussels tosupport the government in the first three months this year. That sum isonly a fraction of the total $5.1bn the World Bank estimates will beneeded reconstruction over the next three years (EEE 50/7).Noel said that about $4bn of that had been projected for territoryadministered by the Moslem-Croat Federation. The balance would go tothe Serb republic which makes up the remainder of the post-war Bosnianstate.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996ENERGY PRIVATISATION FUND ESTABLISHED IN BULGARIAAt the end of December, 16 companies and 19 private investors inBulgaria registered a private energy privatisation fund with registeredcapital of Lev10m.The Energy Insurance company, Trade and Savings Bank, Risk Engineering,7M Finance House and the two major national trade union amalgamationsare among the fund's shareholders. In a private capacity, leadingofficials in the power industry are also shareholders of the fund. Theformer director of the National Electricity Company, Dyanko Dobrev, hasbeen elected chairman of the governing board.The managers of the fund have declared their intention to conductmarket studies in the companies from the energy sector included in thegovernment's mass privatisation lists, and to invest in at least sevenmajor companies. They will seek to attract the interest of the ordinaryinvestor to the energy sector, says Nikita Shervashidze, chairman ofthe supervisory board of the fund.Since it was constituted and until its court registration, the fund hasfinanced the privatisation evaluation of about 70 companies. Over100,000 people are employed in the power industry or in relatedindustries, with their privatisation vouchers worth over Lev2.5bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BLACK SEA ENERGY CENTRE OPENSThe 11 countries surrounding the Black Sea region took a major steptowards energy sector cooperation last month with the officialinauguration of the EU-funded Black Sea Regional Energy Centre (BSREC)in Bulgaria.The opening of the Sofia-based Centre underlines the increasingimportance of the region as a key transit area for energy suppliesflowing westwards into Europe, while for Bulgaria, it marks a steptowards future accession to the European Union.The Centre aims to coordinate the energy sector activities of themember countries and to act as a focal point for inward investment tothe region. Multinational cooperation from EU financing institutions,local banks and private enterprises is being sought for the first 12projects. EU support totalling Ecu2.5m for the first 2-3 years is beingprovided through three funding programmes - Synergy (Ecu1m), Phare(Ecu1m) and Tacis (Ecu0.5m).The Centre's creation stems from an EU-sponsored energy conference heldin 1994 which stressed the need for energy-sector cooperation betweenthe EU and the Black Sea region to "strengthen political and economicstability and promote peace and greater prosperity in the region".These aims have now been backed up by the European Energy CharterTreaty to which all BSREC members have signed and which provides aframework for energy trade, cooperation, investment and joint ventureswhere no legislative support exists.Plans for the Centre to be used by a Balkan's Task Force to investigateoil and electricity interconnections in the region, and the "pivotalrole" they plan in energy interconnections between Asia and Europe,were also announced at the inauguration. An EU Ministerial meeting isplanned for spring-1997 to examine the BSREC region's importance foroil and gas transit from the Caspian Sea to EU.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996FLOODS HIT ROMANIAN FACILITIESHeavy flooding earlier this month caused extensive damage to low andmedium-tension overhead wires, natural gas pipeline and oilwells inmany parts of Romania. At Prahova, north of Bucharest on the mainBucharest-Brasov road, a landslide severed the community's connectionto the main gas pipeline, with resulting gas leaks posing a severethreat of blasts.State company Romgaz said there was no stopgap solution and estimatedthe broken pipe would take at least 20 days to repair. Severalcommunities in the area are currently without gas supply, whileconsumers in Ploieste and Bucharest have been affected by lowered gaspressure.The floods, resulting from the sudden thawing of heavy snow, alsohalted operations at eight oil wells in Olt County. Electricity linesin several counties were severely damaged, cutting off supplies. Waterlevels in hydroelectric plant reservoirs were up 3% to an average of50.7% of total volume, with the highest rises reported in the east ofthe country at Stejaru - 71% of total volume. The government hassubmitted to parliament an amendment to the 1996 budget in order tocover the cost of repairs.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIA'S 1995 CRUDE OUTPUT DOWNRussia's 1995 crude oil output slipped 4% on 1994 levels, statestatistics committee figures showed on 16 January. Russia's totaloutput of crude oil and gas condensate in 1995 was 307mt, according tothe figures.Russia's total crude oil exports to countries outside the Commonwealthof Independent States were 96.04mt in 1995, up from 91.9mt in theprevious year, the committee also said. Of this total over 81.97mt wereexported by Russian oil companies, over 6.49mt by joint ventures and7.2mt under government contracts. The largest exporters were Lukoil,Surgutneftegaz and Yukos which accounted for 13.89mt, 8.66mt and 7.8mtrespectively.The committee, whose figures were quoted by Interfax news agency, saidthe total figure included Russia's state and commercial exports, aswell as Russian oil shipped through Kazakhstan on the way to non-ClSdestinations.Interfax news agency quoted committee figures as saying that Russia'stotal crude exports in 1995 were 122.3mt, a fall of 4.6% on the 1994total. Crude exports to members of the CIS totalled 25.5mt according tothe figures. Committee figures also showed that Russia refined 183mt ofoil in 1995, which it said was 2% below 1994's level. Total oil productexports fell to 45.3mt in 1995 compared to 47.3mt the previous year.Natural gas output in 1995 was 595bncm, it said, also a 2% drop on1994's level.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996MOLDOVA COURTS CASH FOR OIL DRILLING AND EXPORT PORTMoldova is courting foreign investors to help tap its crude reservesand build an oil outlet to the West, a senior energy official said on12 January.Nikolai Chyorny, general director of Tiras-Petrol, the state oilcompany, said that some oil from the project would eventually head forEuropean refineries, especially in Greece and Romania. "Both projectsare sure steps towards consolidating Moldova's economic independence,"he said .US Redeco Ltd won a 20-year concession last summer to begin drilling inMoldova's southwestern Valeni oil field in the first quarter of 1996(EEE 45/20). Chyorny said annual production from the venture couldreach 120,000t (roughly equivalent to an average 2,400bbl/d). Moldovacurrently imports 98% of its crude and oil products. Moldova's knownoil reserves total an estimated 10.6mt, but the government hopeRedeco's exploration will lead to discovery of new reserves.Terminal SA, a Moldovan-Greek joint venture, has said it will beginconstruction of a $38m oil terminal with an annual capacity of 1.2mt onsouthern Moldova's tiny Danube coast in Giurgiulesti later this year.The terminal could berth oil tankers bound for the Black Sea and theMediterranean before the end of the year.Chyorny said Redeco would invest $25m over each five year period of itsconcession and give Moldova a portion of the crude extracted. Under theterms of the deal, Moldova will receive 20% of the amount of oilextracted each year for the first 10 years. Domestic annual consumptionhas fallen to 2.5mt of oil from 4mt  a few years ago.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIA-CHINA ENERGY DEAL ATTRACTS MOSCOW'S ATTENTIONMoscow has hinted that a giant oil and gas deal with China could be inthe pipeline, but industry analysts said that Russia faced a long,expensive road to tapping the world's fastest growing energy market.Interfax news agency said on 29 December Russian President BorisYeltsin may sign an initial $8bn deal to supply China with Russian oiland gas during a visit to Beijing next spring. The deal couldeventually involve building pipelines through some of Siberia's andMongolia's most remote areas.Investment bank ING Barinas said in a report this month that Russia wasideally positioned to meet Asia's energy needs. It said China, whichbecame a net oil importer in 1994, might need to meet 45% of its oilneeds through imports by 2010. "Russia in the long run is strategicallypositioned to become one of the major, if not the major, supplier tosome of the Asian markets," said Craig Kennedy, senior consultant atCambridge Energy Research Associates in Moscow.Interfax said the project could send oil and gas from the westernSiberian regions of Sakhalin, Irkutsk and Yakutsk to China and beyond.The deal could include construction of pipelines going as far asChina's Pacific Coast, which could allow Russia to export oil to othercountries in Asia.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UKRAINE CONFIRMS RUSSIAN OIL FLOWING VIA DRUZHBAA Ukrainian pipeline official confirmed on 10 January that limitedsupplies of Russian crude had resumed flowing to the Czech Republic andSlovakia through the Druzhba (Friendship) pipeline."Oil started flowing to the Czech Republic and Slovakia on Tuesdayevening. We have been paid to transport 125,000t of oil to thesecountries," said Lubomyr Bunyak, director of Ukraine's part of thepipeline.Oil supplies through the pipeline were suspended on 1 January becauseof a transit tariff dispute between Ukraine and Russia. The Slovak firmTranspetrol, operator of the pipeline in Slovakia, said on 10 Januarythat oil supplies had resumed to both countries.Slovnaft officials have said they plan to refine some 420,000t of crudein January and about 5mt in 1996. In 1995 the firm refined some 5.1mtof crude. Bunyak added that Hungary had paid Ukraine to transport511,000t of oil, which would take about 20 days. Supplies to Hungaryresumed on 4 January.Bunyak said future oil supplies through the pipeline were uncertain anddepended on talks with Russia on new transport tariffs introduced byUkraine on 1 January. Russia says the unilateral tariff rise violatedterms of contracts between Russia's producers and consumers. AnatolyKovtun, a senior official of state committee on oil and gas, repeatedcalls for Russia to discuss the tariffs.Ukraine has said it will stand firm by its new tariffs. Yevhen Dovzhok,head of the state committee on oil and gas, also said representativesof Russia's Fuel and Energy ministry had agreed to meet theircounterparts in Kiev in the week beginning 15 January. Dovzhok saidthat Ukraine had signed contracts with 28 Russian exporters totransport 7mt of oil through the pipeline to customers in Central andEastern Europe."This is probably the lowest transit tariff in Europe," he said. "If wedidn't raise it, there would be no sense in transporting oil becauseprices for land and electricity have increased. The new tariffs are notaimed at quick profits".Ukraine increased tariffs on 1 January to $5.20/t transported viaUkraine's 715km stretch of the pipeline, from $4.73/t. Last year 17mtof Russian crude passed through Ukraine's section of the pipeline,Dovzhok said.* Slovakia is negotiating with unspecified producers to import crude inthe hope of ending its complete dependence on Russian oil, Slovakindustry minister Jan Ducky said on 15 January. "We have been innegotiations about the diversification of our oil supplies, either fromthe Ingolstadt or Adria pipelines, but I do not expect oil to come fromsources other than the Druzhba, due to several reasons, in the nearfuture," Ducky told a news conference. He did not say with whichsources Slovakia was negotiating. Ducky said that the main obstacle todiversifying was price. "One tonne of oil coming through the Adriapipeline would be, due to transport fees, more expensive by about $14.On the other hand, oil via the Ingolstadt pipeline would be moreexpensive by about 20-30%," he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996CZECHS AWAIT INGOLSTADT SUPPLIESThe Czech Republic should begin receiving some 140,000t of crude oilthrough the Ingolstadt pipeline by the end of January, industry andtrade minister Vladimir Dlouhy said on 5 January.Dlouhy said the Ingolstadt pipeline, linking the Czechs with theTransalpine oil link in Germany, is currently being tested beforecommercial opening in April. "The level of usage should range around140,000t, or 170,000cm for January, and rise to around 300,000t inFebruary or the first half of March," Dlouhy told a news conference.It is expected that the Czech Republic's two major refineries - Kaucukand Chemopetrol - will import 2-3mt of the country's annual consumptionof 7mt of crude oil through the new pipeline, ending virtually completedependence upon Russian supplies through the Friendship pipeline. Thatsupply has been subject to several interruptions including the mostrecent which began on 8 January after an administrative row overtransport tariffs broke out between Russia and Ukraine (see separatestory).Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIAN PIPELINES SPILLWorkers have brought under control Russia's third publicised oil spillin as many months, limiting losses from a pipeline near the Urals cityof Perm to 200t of crude, the emergency situations ministry said on 12January.The pipeline, in the Tyoplaya Gora village 170km northeast of Perm,burst on 11 January at midmorning local time after a bulldozer carryingout work in the area slammed into it, ministry spokeswoman TatyanaTimoshenkova said."There are no threats to the environment and the situation is undercontrol," she said, adding that the spilled crude had been pumped backinto the Surgut-Polotsk pipeline, which she said was now functioningnormally. In a separate incident, about 100t of oil spilled on 8January from a pipeline near the southern town of Saratov, the ministrysaid. Workers were still cleaning up the area.In late December, 100-460t of crude spilled from a pipeline under theBelaya River in Russia's southern Ural Mountains and mixed with water.The spill has not contaminated the Volga river, Itar-Tass news agencyquoted a local official as saying. Ice and water hampered efforts todetermine how much oil leaked from the pipeline.Interfax quoted Bashkortostan region's environment and emergenciesminister Rustem Khamitov as saying the accident was worse than reportedby pipeline officials, and that 620-630t of liquid containing 100-150tof pure crude had been cleaned up by 8 January.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996US COMPANY BACKS TALLINN PIPELINECoastal Corporation is backing the construction of an oil pipelinelinking the Tallinn port of Muuga with an oil depot located in the sea-port town of Maardu, some 8km southwest of the Estonian capital,economy ministry officials said 8 January.The project is a joint venture between the state owned oil group Esoiland Coastal Corporation. Financing from the venture, which will beconducted by Esoil's subsidiary Termoil, will be supplied by the UScompany via its Tallinn-based subsidiary Coastal Baltic Holding.Economy ministry officials put the cost of the Muuga-Maardu pipelineplan at between $18-20m. The pipeline will have a 1.2-1.5mt/yrcapacity, officials said. Under the plan, which was ratified by Esoiland Coastal Corp in Tallinn on 14 December, the construction programmewill include a oil terminal, pipeline and oil tanks."We expect to have all the necessary approvals by the end of the month.Working on this schedule, the pipeline, terminal and oil depot shouldbe in place and operating by year-end 1996" said an Esoil official.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996MAZEIKAI HIRES US COMPANY AS FINANCIAL ADVISOR FOR MODERNISATIONLithuania's Mazeikai refinery has recruited the US firm PublicResources Infrastructure (PRI) as its financial adviser ahead of thestate oil company's plan to raise $110m from overseas banks to partfinance a $250m plant modernisation programme.According to officials, PRI was selected following a competitiveinternational tender which drew 11 candidates from seven countries. PRIis tasked with raising $110m in two tranches over a two year period.The first loan tranche, to be raised from banks in Europe and the US in1996, will amount to a $30m ten year loan. The second tranche, also a10-year loan, will comprise $80m and be raised in 1997, officials said.At least 40% of revenues generated from the first tranche will be usedto strengthen Mazeikai's working capital base. The second tranche willgo to supporting the company's investment programme. Mazeikai Nafta,the refinery's operating company, has confirmed that the company isengaged in talks with London-based Nomura Europe. According to MazeikaiNafta, the company is interested in "exploring and exploiting" thepotential of raising additional funds via an international bond issue.Mazeikai Nafta was hit by more than 20 stoppages in 1995, caused byboth technical problems and breaks in supply from its Russian partnerLukoil, which holds concessions for 60% of the refinery's 10.8mt/yrcapacity. Managers are eager to replace outdated technology, much ofwhich was installed in the early 1970s, with modern Western oilhandling and processing systems. The company is also anxious to switchto cleaner technology, and increase its ability to process unleadedpetrol for the home and export market.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996CZECH REFINER PAYS NO DIVIDENDCzech oil refiner Chemopetrol Group will not pay a dividend on 1994profits and is unlikely to pay a dividend until 1998 at the earliest,company officials said at the end of December.Company director Dusan Nepejchal said that on 29 December, shareholdersat an extraordinary shareholders's meeting had voted not to pay adividend on 1994 gross profit of K1.9bn. He said that shareholders hadalso agreed to cooperate with the International Oil Consortium (IOC) inCeska Rafinerska (CR), which is to be created at the beginning of 1996.The refining operations of Chemopetrol will be separated along withthose at Kaucuk to form CR.A 49% stake in CR will go to IOC, the consortium comprising RoyalDutch/Shell, Agip SpA and Conoco, which bought the shares for $173mwith an additional $480m in investment over the next five yearspromised (EEE 50/23).The remaining 51% stake will be held by Czech firm Unipetrol, a holdingof Chemopetrol, Kaucuk and petrol distributor Benzina. ChemopetrolGroup posted a K4.6bn crown gross profit for the January-Novemberperiod of which the firm's refining division accounted for more than50%. The company expects its full year gross profit to reach K5bn. Thecompany intends to raise its basic capital up to K9bn next year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SLOVAK REFINER PLANS MAINTENANCESlovak petrochemical group Slovnaft said on 8 January its plannedmaintenance for 1996 is considerably greater than last year, but theeffect on the market would be negligible.Slovnaft spokesman Lubomir Zitnan refused to reveal exact details ofthe refineries' maintenance plans, but said delays of plannedmaintenance helped the company's 1995 bottom line. "This year'smaintenance volume will be considerably higher, because it will alsoinclude some of the 1995 maintenance plans, which we had put off forthe year 1996 and obtained a profit from (the delay)," Zitnan toldReuters."We plan to refine approximately 5mt of crude oil in 1996, out of thecompany's installed capacity of 7.2mt/yr," he said. Slovnaft'spreliminary 1995 total volume of refined crude was 5.1mt.* Slovnaft said on 5 January it had posted preliminary full year 1995pre-tax profit of SK3.5bn, the firm's best result in its century-longexistence. "We expect the final figures in a few weeks, but we can saynow the year 1995 was the best in Slovnaft's 100-year history," companyspokesman Lubomir Zitnan said. He added that profits were boosted by anincrease in refinery products retail sales and a year-on-year increasein petrol sales of 100,000t. In 1994, Slovnaft recorded gross profit ofSK3.14bn and a net result of SK1.58bn on sales of SK28.94bn crowns. In1995, sales firmed to SK32.0bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996LATVIAN PETROL TAX TO FUND ROADSLatvia's cash-strapped government has proposed increasing the exciseduty levied on petrol to fund a $1bn road and rail developmentprogramme to begin mid-1996, the transport ministry said on 4 January.The excise tax proposal was presented by the transport ministry to thegovernment on 21 December. The government hopes to rake in $20m/yr fromthe increased tax plan.The tax changes envisage a rise in gasoline and diesel related exciseduties of $0.4/t. This would lead to a 10% rise in the pump price onpetrol and 15% for diesel. Petrol pump prices would rise to $0.12/litreand $0.8/litre in the case of diesel. "The tax will be of broadadvantage to all. The government plans to use 50% of taxes raised fromthe scheme on road improvements. Latvia's roads are not in good repair,and need new investment," said Vilnis Millers, deputy director of thetransport ministry's highways' department.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UKRAINE NAMES IMPORTERSUkraine has authorised three commercial importers to buy gas fromRussia's Gazprom this year as part of a sweeping plan to reduce thestate's role in energy supplies, Interfax-Ukraine news agency said on 9January.It quoted sources as saying the firms - Yedyni Energetychni Systemy,Interhaz and Ukrazakordonnaftahaz - had signed contracts with Gazpromto buy a total of 37.6bncm of Russian gas in 1996. The importers willpay wholesale prices of $80 per 1,000 cubic metres. Ukrainian state gascompany Ukrhazprom, which until this year had a monopoly on all gassupplies, will itself import 10bncm this year.The government, burdened by non-payments for gas by domestic consumers,resolved last year to ease the state's responsibility for gas suppliesfrom 1 January. Ukrhazprom will supply gas only to organisationsincluded in the state budget and for heating homes - about 30% ofUkraine's total gas use.Ukraine plans this year to import about 70bncm of gas - 50bncm fromRussia and the rest from Turkmenistan. Domestic output is forecast atabout 18bncm of gas. Ukraine last year imported 66bncm of gas - 53bncmfrom Russia and 12bncm from Turkmenistan.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BULGARIAN/RUSSIAN GAS JOINT VENTURE ADMITS NEW SHAREHOLDERSTopenergy, the Bulgarian/Russian joint stock company for exportingRussian natural gas to the Balkans, changed its rules late on 11January to open up to a wider range of stake holders."Now the formula of the company is ... an increase in the shareholders'capital followed by the admittance of new shareholders," Gazprom'srepresentative in Topenergy, Bogdan Budzuljak said after the meeting.Topenergy doubled its share capital to Lev120m in November (EEE 50/28).Under the 11 January agreement, Gazprom will keep its planned 50% stakeand the other half will be distributed among Bulgarian participants.These include a 25.1% government stake, down from an original 50%. Cash-strapped Bulgargas could not raise the funds to buy the 50% stake.Bulgarian government economic adviser Vladimir Zheglov said theremaining stakes were distributed among the new shareholders who paidfor them on 8 January. They will assume full shareholder rights withina week. Zheglov said the powerful business conglomerate Multigroup andits gas arm Overgas Inc, which is half owned by Gazprom, will have8.25% each. State-owned Bulbank and First Private Bank will have 3.2%each and the private firm Himimport 2%."A three quarters majority will be needed for taking a decision forliquidation of the company, while two thirds will be required forincreasing the capital," Zheglov said. Budzuljak said the Russian sideinsisted on some easing of fiscal regulations, including taxation ofinvestments. "Otherwise we will need a long time to earn $300m, whichwe must invest in the infrastructure, in widening the transiting gassystem, telecommunications, reconstructing the existing systems and thecompressor stations for regulating gas volumes," Budzuljak said.Topenergy discussed its business programme, which includes theregistration of gas distribution centre for the Balkans, in Sofiawithin a few months, Zheglov told reporters. "It will be the strongestcentre after the Russian one, which will distribute natural gas in fourdirections - to Serbia, Macedonia, Greece and Turkey," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996LATVIJAS GAZE SIGNS 1996 AGREEMENTLatvijas Gaze has signed a final agreement on procuring Russian gassupplies covering 1996 with supplier Gazprom, officials of the Latviancompany said, describing the deal as a "good one for Latvia".The deal follows four rounds of talks during the final quarter 1995,which resulted in the signing in Riga on 17 December of a letter ofagreement, Latvijas Gaze said. Under the agreement reached, Latvia hascontracted to purchase 3.2bncm of gas at a price of $77.50 per 1,000cm,2.95 cents per cubic meter more than the price of last year's supplies.Latvijas Gaze's $16m debt to Gazprom proved a sticking point in pre-agreement talks. An additional $5.2m in late payment penalties has beenadded by the Russian supplier to the debt, which Latvijas Gaze hasagreed to repay in full during the first quarter of 1996.The agreement will also permit Gazprom to use the Latvijas Gazeoperated Incukalns gas reservoir to store its gas, under a lease wherethe Russian company will pay 5.90 cents per 1,000 cubic meters stored.Currently, Incukalns stores 1.7bncm of Russian gas, and Gazprom plansto increase this amount to around 2.5bncm by year-end, according toLatvijas Gaze's CEO Adrians Davis.Both sides also reached agreement on a transit price for natural gastransit shipments via Latvia. Gazprom will pay a rate of 50cents per100km.The Latvian Privatization Agency (LPA), which has been tasked with semi-privatising Latvijas Gaze, confirmed that Gazprom has "verbally agreed"to acquire a stake in Latvijas Gaze when state shares come up for saleduring the first half of the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996MOL GIVES RIGHTS TO OPERATE TRANSIT PIPELINE TO PANRUSGAZMOL is to transfer the rights to build and operate the Hungariansection of the planned transit pipeline linking Russia with Italy tothe Hungarian-Russian joint venture Panrusgaz, which is effectivelyheld 50:50 by MOL and Gazprom. The agreement to transfer the rights wasmade during a visit by Gazprom President Rem Vyakhirev on 9-10 January.Vyakhirev told the daily Nepszabadsag the results of his trip were"good, at any rate significant. These were extraordinarily importantnegotiations. Many questions over our joint operations have beenaccumulating over the past six months. The most important concerns thejoint construction of the Hungarian section of the transit pipeline."He said a tri-partite agreement had been signed to the effect that MOLand Panrusgaz should sign a contract by 20 March on guaranteedquantities of Russian gas deliveries to Hungary until 2010 in exchangefor the pipeline cooperation rights.A MOL source confirmed the accuracy of the report to EEE. Vyakhirev, inresponse to a question regarding any Gazprom interest in theprivatisation of the Hungarian gas sector, said his company "as good asit is, was unable to buy up all of Europe's gas industry. Ifdistribution is in reliable hands, that is favourable to us asproducers and suppliers." Regarding the possibility of barter deals, hesaid "We haven't ruled out the idea. We need to keep working on thistheme. Panrusgaz will work on evaluating the opportunities."The proposed route for the pipeline will cross into Hungary fromSlovakia and run though east and southern Hungary for an estimated 220-230km before entering Slovenia.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996NORWEGIAN DENIAL ON POLISH TALKSThe Norwegian state oil and gas company Statoil has said that there areno negotiations between the Norwegian gas negotiating committee andpotential Polish buyers. The Norwegians added that they had notreceived any bid to buy gas from Poland.There had been suggestions that the completion of the NERTA pipelineacross northern Germany might bring Norwegian gas to within strikingdistance of the Polish border, and that Poland could use this todiversify its gas supplies (EEE 51/21).According to an analysis by the newspaper Rzeczpospolita, access to theNERTA pipeline would put Polish Oil and Gas (PGNiG) on the wrong sideof the battle in Germany between Ruhrgas (which owns the NERTApipeline), and Gazprom's allies around Wintershall. At the same time,Gazprom and Wintershall are PGNiG's partners in Europolgaz, which is tobuild the Polish section of the pipeline bringing gas from the Yamalpeninsula in Russia to the Midal-Stegal pipeline in Germany built byWintershall and Gazprom.The newspaper further suggests that Wintershall and Gazprom may havedifficulty in selling all of the gas that they can pipe into Germany -up to 57bncm/yr - unless third party access is introduced, or unlessGazprom negotiates a suitable deal with Ruhrgas when the two companies'existing agreement comes up for renewal in 2008. In thesecircumstances, it suits Gazprom to sell gas to Poland.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIAN GAS DELIVERIES CAUSE PROBLEMS FOR BULGARIAN INDUSTRYThe pressure in the gas pipeline bringing natural gas from Russia toBulgaria, via Ukraine, Moldova and Romania, dropped sharply at thebeginning of January causing widespread failures and problems forindustry across Bulgaria. At the gas control and distribution centre inKardam, near the border with Romania, the pressure fell from 36-36.5atmto 19-20atm on 2 January.Similarly, the pressure of the second pipeline, transiting Russian gasvia Bulgaria to Turkey, also fell considerably. Large cities likePlovdiv, Velingrad, Bourgas, Tirnovo, Vratsa, Razgrad and others werereceiving between 50% and three times less than the normal quantitiesof gas.The Neftochim refinery in Bourgas received gas at 12atm instead of thenormal 20atm pressure, while heat-supply companies across the countryexperienced difficulties and were compelled to reduce heat supply tocustomers.Romanian, Ukrainian and Russian officials maintained there was nointerruptions or decreases of gas supplies, but industry ministerKliment Vouchev pointed out that the pressure of Russian gas hadconsistently been supplied at a reduced rate for several years duringthe peak demand season.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UKRAINE BEGINS RESTRUCTURINGFollowing the dismissal of coal minister Viktor Poltavets in November(EEE 51/23), Ukraine has wasted no time in beginning the restructuringof its coal industry.On 21 December the ministry's board meeting under the new minister,Sergei Polyakov, decided to create 26 state-owned joint stock companiesbased on existing mining and ore processing facilities and to establishthree state-owned mine-building companies on the basis of existingcombines. Shares in the new companies will be issued to a valueequivalent to the cost of the property of the businesses involved.At least 51% of the shares will be held by the coal ministry.Incorporation of these new companies will be approved by the anti-monopolies committee and the economics ministry. The new joint stockcompanies will be able to sell their products and draw up their owninvestment policies.Polyakov noted that much still needed to be done and the downward trendof production was continuing. Only 77.1mt of coal were produced in thefirst 11 months of 1995 - 15.6mt less than target and 9.9mt less thanin the same period of 1994. A review has also begun of wages in anattempt to defuse growing tension over late payments and low productionrates.* Ukraine is to increase imports of coal from Poland this year in anattempt to reduce the power of the Ukrainian miners, according to theministry of foreign economic and trade relations. The Lvov railway inwestern Ukraine is being modernised to cope with the extra load. Itbrings in around 200 wagons of Polish coal a day and in the first sixmonths of last year handled 5.3mt compared with 2mt for the whole of1994. This year Ukraine's imports of Polish coal are expected to total15mt.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UKRAINE RECONNECTED TO RUSSIAN POWER GRID AFTER LEAK REPAIRSUkraine was reconnected to the Russian unified grid system on 18December, two weeks after the link was severed by Moscow following asurge in Ukrainian consumption due to the shutdown of Unit 1 atZaporozhye (EEE 51/24). On 3 January all six units at Zaporozhye wereoperating for the first time since Unit 6 was commissioned lastOctober. Since then one or more of the reactors has been closed downfor routine maintenance or following an accident.The disconnection on 4 December was caused by a leak of radioactivesteam. A remote controlled monitoring system has now been installed inUnit 5 at the workstation of the ministry of environment and nuclearsafety. The system, was provided by the German environment ministry.Reconnection to the Russian grid pushed current frequency up to 49.7Hzin the day and 50Hz at night. It had dropped dangerously low to 49.2Hzafter disconnection. Ukraine's nuclear plants would all beautomatically disconnected if frequency drops below 49.15Hz.Ukraine's other nuclear plants have also had problems. On 19 Decemberfire caused closure of Unit 1 at Khmelnitsky while Unit 3 at Rovno wasclosed for maintenance on 28 December. Unit 3 at South Ukraine wasdisconnected from the grid on 21 December due to a fault in the safetycontrol system and then had its capacity reduced on 1 January afterreconnection. The capacity of Units 1 and 2 had been reduced on 13December following problems with the turbine cooling system.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UKRAINE RADIOACTIVE LEAK UNDETECTEDA radioactive leak at a Ukrainian nuclear power station whichcontaminated a small area within the plant remained undetected forweeks, an official at the plant said on 5 January.Duty officer Vyacheslav Kruglov from the Southern Ukraine power plantsaid that authorities had discovered the leak in a steam pipe at thestation's third reactor on 3 January. The reactor was shut down andcontaminated topsoil over an area of about 30 square metres collectedand buried.The incident at the station, 350km south of Kiev, ranked one on theinternational seven-point scale. Regulatory agencies said there was nodanger to local residents or the environment. "The leak of radioactivewater took place in mid-December, but on January 3 we found it andcleaned it up. There was a hole in the pipe - the joint was poorlysoldered and the pipe was old," Kruglov said.An official from the government nuclear regulatory agency said theincident gave no cause for concern. "Such things happen at nuclearstations. It's no reason for the world to worry," said the official,who declined to be named.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996POLES SET FOR ROWS OVER COAL PRICINGPoland's power generators have so far held off the mining companies'demands for higher coal prices. In January, they are paying on thebasis of the much disputed "import equivalent" price of $32/t, writteninto a long-term agreement signed towards the end of 1994. However, theissue is far from settled and fresh arguments over the matter arecertain.Essentially, the problem is that the mining companies assumed that thezloty would continue to fall against the dollar, and that the agreementwould deliver ever higher zloty prices. The figure of $32/t was chosensince it was reckoned that a higher price would enable the powergenerators to import coal more cheaply; it was also reckoned, at thetime, to leave some profit for the coal miners.The problems started towards the end of the third quarter last year,when the effects of a firmer zloty, which had started to climb againstthe dollar in the middle of last year, started to work through to thepricing formula. The miners started asking for an average increase of13% in coal prices (with some asking for up to 50%).The power generators, meanwhile, want to stick to the long-termagreement, especially as the electricity price increase scheduled forthis year is well below expected inflation. Of a planned rise of 14%,the power generating industry will get just 9% - the rest being anincrease in value added tax - and inflation being forecast at 17% forthis year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BELCHATOW CONSIDERS EXPANSIONThe Belchatow power station and the Belchatow lignite mine are indiscussions with Polish industry minister Klemens Scierski and deputyindustry minister Herbert Gabrys about whether to build two  370 MWgenerating blocksat the site, and whether to start an open cast lignitemine at Szczerow.The case for the two blocks is that from 2003 onwards, each year, twoout of the 12 generating blocks at Belchatow (with a capacity of 360 MWeach) are due to be closed down for refurbishing. This would coincidewith a time when Poland's energy demands are expected to be rising, sothe loss of the two blocks could hinder growth. Furthermore, Poland'spower requirements would continue to rise after 2010, so the additional740 MW of capacity would not go amiss.The new lignite mine - with estimated reserves of 700mt - would ensurethe viability of Belchatow until 2060. Without it, the site wouldprobably run out of lignite in 2016. The financing of the project willdepend on signing long-term power sale contracts with the grid companyPolskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne SA (PSE) at appropriate prices. It ishere that the proposed project could run into difficulties since PSE isexamining several tens of applications for long-term power sales.If the new project were to go ahead, the two new generating blockswould be owned by a separate company in which the existing ElekrowniaBelchatow would be a shareholder, along with a strategic investor; theywould be expected to arrange the financing, and would need the powersales contract to guarantee bank borrowings. The industry ministry issaid to have received offers from a number of Polish and foreigncompanies willing to take a stake in the new project.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BULGARIA FORMULATES INVESTMENTSThe Bulgarian Committee on Power Engineering (CPE) has drafted aninvestment programme for the period ending 1998 and presented it to thegovernment for approval. The programme is based on the governmentstrategy for the energy sector until 2020, approved late last year (EEE50/9).The total investments for this period planned by the CPE are 30% lowerthan the ones provided for in the strategy (Lev31.362bn for 1996,Lev29.75bn for 1997 and Lev21.797bn for 1998).The CPE investment programme includes rehabilitating old units of theMartisa Iztok 2 power engineering complex and the launch of Unit 8, aswell as the two units of the Chaira pump-storage water power system.Investments to begin completing the second nuclear power plant inBelene are also provided for. According to provisional estimates, theinvestments required total $1.3bn.CPE acting chairman Konstantin Roussinov says that in the past fiveyears investment in the sector (Lev7.5bn) has been at the expense ofreserves set aside earlier. If funds for building new capacities arenot increased, he warns, there will be a shortage of capacity in 1999,and as early as 1998 there will be a shortage of electricity.The situation is complicated by the unrealistically low amortisationnorms which were calculated on the basis of asset evaluation in 1992.The sector is in danger of being completely decapitalised, Roussinovwarns. If the amortisation norms are raised, this could bring up to 30%of the investments needed for the CPE programme with the rest financedby government credits or subsidies, the official believes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996KRASNOYARSK SENDS POWER TO MONGOLIA VIA NEW LINKElectricity is now being supplied to Mongolia's western districts fromKrasnoyarsk through a new transmission line via the shortest routewhich crosses the territory of Tuva."The Mongolians built approximately 200km of a 110 kv powertransmission line, from the town of Ulangom to the border with Russia,and we added another 50km to the line," said Yuri Ushenin, senior staffmember at the centre. "It took a little over a year to do the wholejob. However the start of energy exports should bring considerablebenefits for the people of Krasnoyarsk".On the domestic market, 1.3 cents is charged per kWh, whereas Mongoliapays the Russians for electricity at the world price of five cents. Thedifference enables the Krasnoyarsk authorities to keep down the chargesfor electricity for their customers". At present Mongolia consumes only2 MW of energy, but demand is increasing and in some two or threemonths it intends to increase imports by some 50%, Ushenin added.* The Sibirenergo grid is about to commission a new high-voltagetransmission line, according to Samuel Zilberman, Sibirenergo deputydirector-general. A substation has already begun operating on the Itat-Barnaul power transmission line, as a first step towards accomplishingthe major task of transmitting Siberia's surplus power to districtsexperiencing shortages, he explained. This will mean the wider use infuture of electricity from a chain of hydro plants on the Angara andthe Yenisei rivers and from heat-and-power stations of the Kansk-Achinsk fuel-and-power complex. Zilberman said that in 1995 more than 7TWh was lost because Siberia's hydro plants are not yet able totransmit power to the districts most in need.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RADET PLANS PIPE OVERHAULBucharest heating utility Radet plans to invest Lev50bn this year inthe modernisation of its distribution system. The project, financedwith Lev40bn from Radet revenues and Lev10bn from the local governmentbudget, involves the replacement of battered pipes and the bringinginto service of new reservoirs.By June the company hopes to have completed a Lev2.5bn upgrade of athermal plant supplying heat to the Bucharest Press Building. The plantwill be equipped with new meters and a computer system, Radet executiveGheorghe Dabela said. The company also hopes to complete constructionof a pipeline from the Progresul plant to the Rahova area where manyhouseholders are currently without heating facilities.Also on Radet's schedule for 1995 is the modernisation of 25 thermalstations, the installation of residential meters, and the replacementof 1,000 heat exchangers and 100km of pipeline. The new pipes will befully insulated to cut down on heat loss during distribution. A moreextensive overhaul of its entire system, with potential financing fromthe World Bank and the European Investment Bank (EIB), is currentlyunder consideration at Radet. According to Dabela, the EIB hasdiscussed the possibility of a loan up to $40m for the project whichwould begin in 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UKRAINE RAISES PRICESRetail gas prices for domestic users rose 34% in Ukraine from the startof the year which means customers will now be paying 60% of the actualcost of the gas. The retail price of coal was also increased by anaverage of 24% while electricity charges rose 29% to Ker6,400/kWh inurban areas and Ker6,000/kWh in rural districts.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIA AWAITS IMF AGREEMENTTalks between Russia and the International Monetary Fund are continuingand will end on 31 January, a finance ministry official said on 19January. "The talks are going on as you would expect," Anton Tolstikov,deputy head of the ministry's international financial organisationsdepartment, told Reuters. The IMF delegation currently visiting Moscowis reviewing Moscow's performance under the existing $6.25bn standbyprogramme, whose last tranche is due to be paid out shortly, and alsonegotiating a new three-year loan, likely to be $9bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996AZERI 1995 OUTPUT DOWNAzeri crude oil output fell to 9.16mt in 1995 from 9.56mt in 1994,Interfax news agency quoted the state oil company SOCAR as saying on 5January. Natural gas production was 6.64bncm, up from 6.37bncm in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UKRAINIAN OUTPUT DOWN ON 1994Ukraine's natural gas and crude oil output in 1995 dipped slightly on1994 levels, a spokesman for the state committee on oil and gas said.Preliminary figures put gas output at 17.44bncm last year, down from18.3bncm in 1994. Combined crude and gas condensate output was 3.94mtin 1995, down from 4.2mt the year before.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996FRONTIER OPTIMISTIC ON POLISH CONCESSIONFrontier Oil Exploration said it had identified moveable oil at twopreviously tested structures on its concession in the onshore Balticregion of Poland. A firm has estimated that the Gladysze-1 site hasprobable and possible reserves exceeding the company's minimum targetof 25mbbl. Frontier Oil said it plans to acquire additional drillsite-specific seismic data and drill appraisal wells this year to test oneor both the Gladysze structures.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996CONCESSIONS IN POLAND LINED UPTexaco, trading in Poland as Wielkopolska Energia SA, and Medusa Oiland Gas, trading as Medusa Poland Spzoo, were likely to obtain oil andgas exploration concessions in Poland. Texaco's concession was expectedto cover central Poland, while Medusa's was expected to be in theCarpathian mountains in the south of the country. Elsewhere, thedirector of Polish Oil and Gas' Geonafta geology division, MarekHoffmann, estimated that Poland's gas reserves were of the order of150bncm.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SOCAR GETS PIPELINE CONTROLThe Azeri government has authorised the transfer of control over thecountry's oil and gas pipelines to state oil company SOCAR, the Turannews agency reported earlier this month. It said the decree includesthe Azeri section of the Baku-Grozny pipeline which the internationalconsortium developing offshore fields plans to use to transport earlyoutput of up to 70,000bbl/d late this year. The pipelines were formerlyowned by the state.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996LUKOIL CONSOLIDATES MOST SHARESAbout 90% of shares in NK Lukoil subsidiaries had been consolidatedinto shares in the parent company by 1 January, public affairsexecutive director Alexander Vasilenko said. Lukoil began the processof exchanging shares of subsidiaries for parent company shares lastyear. Lukoil is considering placing up to 15% of its shares, worthabout $600m, on the London Stock Exchange or the New York StockExchange, according to a published report. The Independent on Sundayreported that Lukoil officials said the company was in talks with bothexchanges and expects to make a decision within the next few months.Any listing would take place around the end of the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SLOVENIAN COMPANY STARTS SHARE SALESlovenian petrol company Istrabenz commenced the sale of shares valuedat ST2.5bn ($19.8m) on 5 January. The sale is scheduled to last until 4March and is open to individual and corporate investors from Sloveniaand abroad. The sale is part of the company's privatisation process inwhich 39% of shares will be sold to employees, 47.7% to domestic andforeign investors, while 13.3% will be retained by the state. Istrabenzcurrently holds around 23% of the petrol retail market and manages anetwork of outlets in a joint venture with OMV and had net profits of$11.1m in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996FIRST HYDRO-TEXACO STATION IN LITHUANIAHydro-Texaco, the 50:50 joint venture oil marketing and developmentcompany owned by Norsk Hydro and Texaco Scandinavia, has opened itsfirst filling station in Lithuania, Hydro-Texaco officials said. Thenew station, along with a self service shop and restaurant, was opened4 January outside Vilnius. Start-up costs were put at $1.6m. Hydro-Texaco expects to see a return on its investment in six to seven years.Hydro-Texaco plans to develop a network of 20 filling stations inLithuania, a company official said. The Lithuanian oil operation willbe supplied by Norsk Hydro affiliated refineries in Sweden and Denmark.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIA REDUCES BELARUS PRICESGazprom has reduced gas prices to $50 per 1,000 cubic metres from $53,the president of Belarus state company Beltopgaz Eduard Tofkinets saidearlier this month. Gazprom cut the price, which is linked to gastransit through Belarus to central Europe, due to an increase in thevolume of gas being transported through the country and also because ofa customs union between the two countries, he said. "Thanks toGazprom's price cut and Beltopgaz's savings in transporting gas, thegovernment has decided to reduce gas prices for domestic consumers by8.5% this month," he said. Tofkinets said Belarus owed Gazprom $562m asof 1 January for gas imports.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIAN COAL PRODUCTION FOR 1995 TOTALS 250.1MTCoal producing companies belonging to the state-owned Rosugol coalconcern produced a total of 250.1mt last year, a decrease on the259.7mt produced in 1994. Of the 1995 total 104.9mt came fromunderground pits and 145.1mt from open-cast mines. The Kuzbass insouthwest Siberia was the biggest coal-producing region with 93.5mt.The Pechora field in the Arctic produced 22.2mt and the Kansk-Achinskfield in Siberia 30.6mt. Losses of over R13bn have been registered bythe Chelyabinskugol coal company in the Urals with production cut byhalf to 1mt due to stoppages, payments problems and low morale due towage arrears.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996MAJOR RUSSIAN SHALE PRODUCER FACES CLOSUREThe Leningradslanets joint stock company, one of northwest Russia'sbiggest shale producers has been unable to extend its contract with theBaltic regional power plant in Estonia - its main customer - and isfacing closure. The company supplies shale in return for electricity.Bureaucratic delays have prevented the signing of a new agreement toreplace the one which expired at the end of 1995. The entire populationof Slantsy in the Leningrad region depends on the mine for itslivelihood.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996US SUPPORT FOR ARMENIAN COAL INDUSTRYThe US Agency for International Development (USAID) is to providetechnical assistance of $3m to develop Armenia's coal fields. Theagreement, signed with the environment ministry is for theestablishment of an advanced laboratory for coal analysis and acomputer centre to help to assess Armenia's coal-production potential.Geophysical and drilling equipment is to be supplied by the USGeological Survey which will also train Armenian specialists. USAIDpreviously granted $1m to help to develop a coalfield at Dzhadzhur(Leninakan) with proven reserves of 200,000t.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996RUSSIAN PLANT OPERATORS WARN OF PROTEST ACTIONRussia's nuclear power plant workers have threatened to shut down thefacilities unless they receive wages unpaid for three months. Energyconsumers owe the sector about R2,500bn ($555m), according toRosenergoatom officials. Despite these problems, there was an increasein production last year, according to Rosenergoatom. Total productionwas over 99 TWh compared with 97.8 TWh in 1994. However this is stillonly 85% of the production figure for 1990. Russia's plants alsosuffered fewer incidents in 1995 with only four rated on theInternational Nuclear Events scale compared with 13 in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996OBJECTIONS TO RUSSIA'S FAR EAST NUCLEAR PLANTThe governor of Russia's far east Maritime Territory, YevgenyNazdratenko, has described a Russian-Canadian project to build anuclear plant in the area as hasty and ill-considered (EEE 50/29)."Before passing judgement on such a project, our government shouldcarry out a referendum to learn whether our residents want this plantor not," he says "The time has passed when economic projects could beimposed upon regions without the consent of their population".Nazdratenko says it would be better to allocate funds for thecompletion of the Bureiskaya hydro plant in the Amur regionBack to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996CERNAVODA EXPECTED TO START THIS MONTHRomania's first nuclear reactor at Cernavoda, beset by delays in recentmonths, is expected to become operational this month, the country'sfinance minister said earlier this month. However, Florin Georgescu didnot elaborate on when the plant, being built by AECL and Ansaldo Spa,would actually supply power to the grid. A senior Renel official saidrecently that he expected it to be connected by mid 1996, some sixmonths behind schedule.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996CZECH DRAFT LAW ON NUCLEAR TAXOn 3 January the Czech cabinet approved a law on nuclear energy and ionradiation that would tax nuclear power plants, industry ministerVladimir Dlouhy said. According to the law, which has to be approved byparliament, every nuclear energy producer would have to pay a specialfee to the finance ministry. The money is to be used to build a wastestorage facility. Dlouhy said he expects annual revenues of aroundK600m and added he did not expect energy costs to rise by any more thanthree or four percent because of the law which should becomeoperational at the start of next year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996IGNALINA PLANT IN FINANCIAL TROUBLESUnit 2 at Lithuania's Ignalina plant was closed down on 7 Januaryfollowing an inspection which identified a leak in the cooling water.The plant is also facing problems following the suspension of operationby the Lithuanian Joint Stock Innovation Bank (LAIB). Staff salariesare being paid late and payments from customers are also delayed, butnormal operation of the plant will not be affected, says plant directorViktor Shevaldin. There had been fears that fuel supplies would beaffected as the plant used LAIB to transfer payment. However thegovernment has made funds available and the plant has enough fuel untilthe end of January.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996POWER PRODUCTION DOWN AT ARMENIAN NUCLEAR PLANTArmenia's nuclear power plant in Metsamor, which began operating againin October after being mothballed for six years, is being forced towork at low capacity because of the instability of the powerdistribution system, according to plant director Suren Azatyan. He saidthe plant's Unit 2 could increase its capacity from the present levelof 310 MW to 376 MW only if the power distribution system is stable andreliable, but present fluctuations make it impossible.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996NO POWER CUTS FOR BULGARIABulgaria's National Electricity Company vowed it would not allow anypower cuts and shortages this winter. According to NEC acting chairman,Trifon Tsvetkov, the country has sufficient generating capacities incoal, gas and nuclear fuels to prevent the cuts. At a press conference,Tsvetkov told journalists that electricity consumption in 1995 was up12% compared to 1994 levels. The NEC is expected to have finished the1995 financial year with a loss of Lev2bn instead of the projectedLev9bn. But this was achieved by saving some expenditure on repairworks on generating capacities which will have to be dealt with thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BULGARIA TO SET UP AN INSURANCE POOLThe Bulgarian Committee on Power Engineering (CPE) is planning to set upa pool of insurance companies to cover the energy sector, according toRoument Ovcharov, deputy head of the CPE. In particular, the pool willcover civil liabilities in case of an accident with nuclearinstallations. Setting up such an insurance institution was one of therequirements of the Vienna Convention, Ovcharov said. CPE chairman,Konstantin Roussinov, has informed the government of its intentions andhas contacted several institutions including the State InsuranceInstitute, the specialised Energy insurance company and two privateinsurers. The National Electricity Company holds a 50% stake in Energy.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SERBIAN ELECTRICITY UP IN 1995The Serbian electricity supply company, EPS, said it produced 33.6 TWhof electricity last year, an increase of 6.6% over 1994 levels, Tanjugnews agency reported on 4 January quoting a statement by the company'smanagement board.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SWISS AGREEMENT FOR UKRAINEUkraine and Switzerland have signed an inter-governmental agreement onSwiss financial assistance for Ukrainian hydro plants. SFr40m was madeavailable under the agreement to help upgrade plants and implementreforms.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SLOVAK DESULPHURISATION DELAYThe installation of desulphurisation equipment at the Novaky powerplant in Slovakia is running behind schedule with a new target date ofJune 1997 instead of early this year. Delays have been caused becauseof technical problems according to a company spokesman as well asincreased costs.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-10IA059-000323-B030-80http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey92.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230327 text/html 96751HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:00:48 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:29 GMTContent-length: 96564Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey92.html Sample Issue Copyright EC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNet January 24, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AUTO-OIL STRAIN BEGINS TO SHOW (1541 words) ALL EYES ON BOLOGNA FOR POWER PROGRESS (532 words) EU LOOKS EAST TO SECURE OIL AND GAS SUPPLIES (1317 words) ENERGY WHITE PAPER TAKES PRAGMATIC APPROACH (2133 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW VISIONS OF THE ENERGY FUTURE IN 2020 (996 words) NEW R&D CALL LAUNCHED FOR RENEWABLES (403 words) BRUSSELS UPDATES NOTIFICATION RULES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY INVESTMENTS (590 words) GAS TRANSIT BODY SET UP AFTER YEARS OF DELAY (216 words) CHERNOBYL CLOSURE DEAL SIGNED (380 words) COMMISSION APPROVES DUTCH ENERGY TAX LEGISLATION (175 words) RECHAR II BOOSTS COAL REGENERATION IN FRANCE/GERMANY (220 words) ITALY PROMISES TO PUSH ON IEM AND ENERGY NETWORKS (446 words) MINISTERS EXTEND EIA RULES TO NUCLEAR REPROCESSING (231 words) MINISTERS BALANCE BUDGET ON R&D FUNDS (165 words) MEPS PUSH FOR NUCLEAR SAFETY GUARANTEES IN FREE TRADE DEAL (265 words) DEBATE ON JET R&D PROGRAMME PUT OFF UNTIL FEBRUARY (267 words) EIB FUNDS TRANSMISSION PROJECTS IN GREECE (213 words) BOOST FOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC AND WIND POWER IN SPAIN (115 words) EIB LOANS IMPROVE AIR QUALITY IN THE UK AND CZECH REPUBLIC (196 words) EU FOSTERS ENERGY LINKS WITH PAKISTAN AND CHINA (209 words) EUROGAS CALLS FOR WITHDRAWAL OF COMMISSION'S IRP PROPOSAL (230 words) NEW COAL BODY EURISCOAL WELCOMES ENERGY WHITE PAPER (221 words) FRENCH DISTRIBUTORS PUSH TO SHOP AROUND FOR POWER SUPPLIES (378 words) EIA DIRECTIVE CALLED INTO FRAY OVER UK NUCLEAR WASTE PLANS (253 words) LARGE USERS THREATEN EC ACTION OVER PROPOSED GAS LEVY (337 words) NEWS ENERGY LOBBYISTS BREATHE EASY OVER REGULATION (115 words) UK INDUSTRY BACKS NATURAL GAS VEHICLES (114 words) EDF/EDISON FINALISE ISE TAKEOVER (98 words) EU SIGNS AGREEMENTS WITH THREE BLACK SEA COUNTRIES (106 words) COMMISSION VETS BP/SONATRACH DEAL (67 words) FIRST R&D FUNDS RELEASED FOR CLIMATE STUDIES (99 words) EU SCIENTISTS APPEAL FOR MORE ENERGY RESEARCH FUNDS (121 words) GREECE TENDERS SIX OIL CONCESSIONS (134 words) SAUDI ARABIA URGES EU TO SCRAP ENERGY TAXES (120 words) NO EIA NEEDED FOR LUDMIN WASTE STORE (81 words) GO-AHEAD FOR ARGENTINE NUCLEAR DEAL (52 words) EU/MOROCCO PLAN ENERGY COOPERATION (80 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW BRUSSELS TACKLES GREEN TRANSPORT COSTS (110 words) NEWS ELEKTROWATT/LANDIS TAKEOVER SCRUTINISED (50 words) CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996AUTO-OIL STRAIN BEGINS TO SHOWRelations between the oil and car industries and the Commission arebecoming increasingly strained as Brussels prepares its auto-oillegislation.The three parties, who collaborated together in the two-year auto-oilprogramme to discover the most cost-effective means of improving airquality, are due to meet tomorrow to discuss how the programme'sfindings should be translated into legislation.While accepting the need to control emissions of particulates and ozoneprecursors from road transport, as well as urban NOx, the twoindustries are concerned that the principle of cost-effectiveness isbeing threatened by growing political pressure to act on air quality.They believe that the measures being considered by Brussels to cutvehicle emissions after the year 2000 are too ambitious and couldresult in unacceptable costs for both industries.Commission officials counter by saying that the results of the auto-oilprogramme are only one of a series of factors that must take intoaccount when the actual legislation is drafted.The auto-oil programme was set up in 1993 to investigate what needed tobe done to reduce levels of urban carbon monoxide (CO), NOx, benzene,particulates and the regional problem of tropospheric ozone from roadtraffic by the year 2010. The oil and car industries collaboratedtogether for the first time to study the impact of vehicle technologiesand fuel quality on reducing all emissions, while the Commissionexamined the air quality of seven representative European cities - TheHague, Cologne, London, Lyon, Madrid, Milan and Athens.When the results were examined, it became clear that NOx, and latterlyparticulates and ozone precursors, would cause the main problems,whereas existing legislation could keep CO and benzene below acceptablelevels by 2010 (ECE 81/2).In its initial calculations, the Commission worked out that the NOxproblem in four of the cities, The Hague, Cologne, London and Lyon,could be solved by technical changes to heavy goods vehicles (HGV) andlight commercial vehicles (LCV) - cost-effective as they were low innumber but high emitters - along with improved inspection andmaintenance procedures. No changes were needed to fuel quality, andlocal non-technical measures, such as road pricing and cheaper publictransport, were also not necessary.While this strategy, known as the `Lyon' package, imposed costs on thevehicle industry but left the oil industry relatively unscathed,vehicle manufacturers were relieved that it excluded measures onpassenger cars. Overall, implementing the Lyon package would costindustry Ecu 1.647bn a year over fifteen years.But the problem with this package, for the Commission, is that it didnot solve the urban NOx problem in Madrid, Milan and particularlyAthens, where emissions needed to be cut by 55% from 1990 levels by2010. According to Commission calculations, even if the maximum numberof local non-technical measures were added to the Lyon package, theproblem of NOx would still not be solved in the three cities. As eachcity was chosen as representative in terms of geographical location andvehicle fleet, this would mean that a substantial number of Europe'scities would fail to curb NOx emissions by the required amount.Indeed, such was the problem in Athens that even the maximum technicalchanges to vehicles and fuels - the `best available technology'solution - which would cost industry Ecu 9.6bn a year over 15 years,plus the maximum amount of non-technical measures, would still notsolve the city's NOx problem. This is mainly due to the age of thevehicle fleet, and the fact that by 2010 a large number of cars willstill not have catalytic converters.Therefore, the Commission is arguing that tighter NOx standards need tobe imposed at European level to ensure that, when the full range oflocal non-technical measures are added, Milan and Madrid at least areable to meet future air quality targets (in Athens, some parts of thecity centre may have to be closed to traffic entirely in order to hitthe mark).In the Commission's view, the need for these tighter standards isreinforced by the need also to control emissions of particulates andozone precursors, such as overall NOx and volatile organic compounds(VOCs).While curbing particulates and ozone precursors has been an aim of theprogramme from the beginning, analysing the results of both pollutantswas complicated by a lack of data and the absence of a clearly-identified international reduction target.Recent evidence, however, has increasingly underlined the threat ofparticulates - particularly PM10s, tiny particles of dust less than 10microns in diameter emitted by diesel exhausts - and tried to quantifytheir danger to human health. In the UK, recent research by the ExpertPanel on Air Quality Standards (EPAQS) recommended a standard of 50micrograms per cubic metre as a 24-hour average for PM10s, and this ispresently being examined by a Brussels committee to see if it isacceptable as a European standard.At present, the maximum daily mean value for PM10s in many Europeancities is 100-150 micrograms/m3, meaning that in some cases reductionsof 50-66% would be needed to meet this new target. This could not bemet by just the Lyon package.For ozone, existing legislation will cut levels significantly by 2010,but the impact of additional measures will be small, as over the next15 years the contribution of road traffic to NOx and VOCs willdecrease, compared to that from stationary sources. This may putpressure on the Commission to set more stringent standards for powerstation emissions during its ongoing review of the Large CombustionPlant (LCP).Nevertheless, in order to get the maximum hourly ozone levels down tobelow 180 micrograms/m3 - the target set in directive 92/72/EEC onozone pollution - the Commission believes that all sources of NOx andVOCs need to be cut by 70-80% on 1990 levels.Consequently, more stringent measures than the Lyon package are beingconsidered at a European-wide level, which look set to bump up thetotal cost of the package from Ecu1.6bn to nearer Ecu4-6bn a year overthe same period.Three-quarters of the cost of the final package is still likely to fallon the vehicle industry. The package will contain all the elements ofthe Lyon package, but is also likely to necessitate technical changesto passenger cars, not just HGVs and LCVs. Depending on the severity ofthe measures, this could increase the manufacturing price per gasolinevehicle by between Ecu42.7-Ecu340. In addition, member states may beencouraged to introduce fiscal incentives to encourage furtherimprovements in vehicle technology from 2005.But the oil industry will not escape unscathed. It will have to improvefuel quality, particularly diesel to reduce particulates, but also, andmore expensively, gasoline. On present calculations, however, the oilindustry is likely to get away with the least stringent fuelimprovement package, which would cost it Ecu9.4bn for gasoline, andEcu5.2bn for diesel - a total of Ecu14.6bn over 15 years. Some costswill also fall on national administrations for improved inspection andmaintenance procedures.But car and oil industries are not prepared to accept this without afight. Both argue that the Lyon package would meet NOx emissions in 90%of European cities - the Commission says 75% - and represents themaximum technical changes that should be imposed at a European level,with the gaps closed by local measures."There is no reason to impose Europe-wide more [stringent standards]than what is needed by France, even for Italy and Spain", says CarloCucchi of the European Automobile Manufacturers Association (ACEA).To do this would violate the cost-effectiveness principle of the auto-oil programme. "The Commission's ambition is to reach the best possiblelevel of air quality. It should not be to make industry spend as muchmoney as possible in order to fulfil political ambitions", said ACEA ina statement last month. NOx reduction measures would reduceparticulates by 50%, while for ozone the solution should take intoaccount stationary as well as mobile sources, says ACEA.Even though figures suggest that the most stringent measures would addonly 3-5% to the present purchase price of vehicles (excluding tax),car manufacturers worry that consumers will refuse these higher prices,and say that absorbing them would wipe out profit margins.The oil industry is similarly concerned. While believing it is notnecessary to go further than the Lyon package to control NOx, oilindustry association Europia says it is prepared to discuss furthermeasures for particulates and ozone. But they must be cost-effective;the oil industry "will not accept an invalid and politically-drivensolution", says Europia's Michel Flohic.Inevitable divisions within the Commission are also complicatingmatters. Environment directorate DGXI is pushing for high European-widestandards plus later fiscal incentives to tackle air quality, whileindustry directorate DGIII is concerned that political pressure fromthe European Parliament and the Council could fold such a two-stepapproach into one, imposing unacceptably high standards on industry. Inturn, energy directorate DGXVII, concerned about the impact on thealready-beleaguered oil refining industry, is asking for more cost-effective research on the fuel quality proposals.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996ALL EYES ON BOLOGNA FOR POWER PROGRESSThe Italian presidency is waiting to test the water at the informalenergy council meeting at Bologna early next month before deciding whatshould be done to push forward on the vexed issue of electricityliberalisation.Meeting today with Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis, Italy'sindustry minister Alberto Clo said that it was not realistic at thepresent time to push for a special meeting of energy ministers to solvethe liberalisation issue ahead of the scheduled Energy Council on 7May, said a Commission official. Clo has recently held meetings withboth the French and German governments.The option of a special ministerial meeting was pushed by Papoutsis atthe end of last year when the 20 December Energy Council made noprogress on the issue, due largely to domestic political problems inFrance (ECE 84/1). It was supported by a majority of member states, butFrance and Greece had reservations.That no progress was made at the December Council came little surprise.Political problems in France left the government with no room tomanoeuvre on distributor access - the key sticking point in thenegotiations. France is refusing to allow distributors to shop aroundfor their power under the new rules, while liberalisers, such asGermany and the UK are insisting on distributor access to ensure faircompetition.Some observers even feared that the situation had worsened, as France,backed by Greece, took the opportunity to issue a unilateraldeclaration that it considered energy to be a public service, angeringGerman officials who then reiterated the need for greater opening ofenergy markets and more competition.Only Presidency conclusions were issued from the meeting, but these atleast were upbeat, saying that negotiations had reached a final stageand that adopting a common position should be possible at the nextCouncil meeting.The issue will now be discussed informally over lunch in Bologna, andRome will then decide how to take matters forward. The Italians face anawkward juggling act, however, in coming up with a compromise that allparties can accept.Papoutsis, along with the liberalisers, would find it hard to endorseany weakening of the Spanish compromise, which would be roundly opposedby other Commission members, notably Competition Commissioner Karel VanMiert.And while French Industry minister Franck Borotra recently told thepress that a directive is needed as soon as possible, he warned "thereis no way that we will step back from our position which is based onthe single buyer ... the monopoly of transport and distribution belongsto the state".* Meanwhile ministers did come to a common position on 20 December, aspredicted, on efficiency standards for fridges and freezers. Ministersproposed that three years after the adoption of the directive, suchappliances must have improved their efficiency by15%. A year later,more stringent standards would then come into effect. This result istougher than the Commission's proposal, but falls short of the morestringent measures pushed for by Strasbourg (ECE 84/2). According toPapoutsis, the 15% improvement in energy efficiency will result insavings equivalent to the total electricity generation of Greece by2020.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EU LOOKS EAST TO SECURE OIL AND GAS SUPPLIESThe increasing importance of the Black Sea region as a key transit areafor energy supplies flowing westwards into Europe was recognised by theEU last month with the official inauguration of the Black Sea RegionalEnergy Centre (BSREC) in Bulgaria.Opened by Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis and Bulgarian PrimeMinister Zhan Videnov on 18 December in Sofia, the Centre aims tocoordinate the energy sector activities of the 11 member countries*surrounding the Black Sea and to act as a focal point for EU, foreignand local energy investment to the region."The establishment of the Centre has been the first region-wideinitiative of the European Commission in the Black Sea region. Ibelieve it is an important step for future cooperation in the energysector between the countries of the European Union and those of theBlack Sea region," Papoutsis said at the inauguration.The increasing value of the Black Sea region for the EU into the nextcentury was further strengthened with the announcement by Papoutsis oftwo fast-track measures to "pave the way for real progress on energyissues in the region".One is the creation of a Balkans Energy Interconnections Task Forcewhich will use the Centre to study oil and electricity interconnectionsin the Balkans, and the "pivotal role" they play in the energyinterconnections between Asia and Europe. Funding for the Task Force isexpected to total Ecu0.5m, the bulk of which will come from a newallocation of Synergy funds.As Papoutsis put it, the Black Sea region is "the most important arearegarding the transport and trading of oil, natural gas andelectricity", and one which the EU hopes will be transformed into "theenergy highway between east and west".Papoutsis also announced that a Ministerial meeting will be held inspring-1997, at which five energy-related issues will be discussed and"translated into policy statements".These comprise: the need for adopting the interim or final results ofthe Balkans Energy Interconnections Task Force; the increasingimportance of the Black Sea and the Balkan region for oil and gastransit from the Caspian Sea to the EU; the economic problems of theBlack Sea region, particularly those relating to energy allocation andpricing; the potential for a systematic implementation of the EuropeanEnergy Charter and Treaty; and the need to maintain and deepenpolitical and economic goodwill between the EU and the Black Seacountries.The role of land-locked Azerbaijan and Black Sea transit countries tothe west looks set to become particularly important to the EU, asWestern oil companies vie to exploit the extensive energy reserves inthe Azeri part of the Caspian Sea for west European markets.The need for energy-sector cooperation was agreed by the 11 members ofthe Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) in June 1992. A declarationof intent formally establishing the Centre was signed in September1994, following an energy conference on the Black Sea region held byenergy directorate DGXVII at Chalkidiki in Greece in May 1994.All 11 members of BSEC signed up to the Centre with the EuropeanCommission acting as a twelfth member. It was agreed that Bulgariawould host the Centre for a preliminary period of three years and that,as a compromise, Romania would assume chairmanship of the biannualsteering committee - the chair will subsequently be allocated inalphabetical order. The Centre's initial work programme for 1995 wasadopted at the first steering committee meeting in Sofia on 24 February1995 (ECE 75/11).EU cooperationThe Centre has five main aims in its role as a focal point for energy-centre activities to develop cooperation between the Black Sea regioncountries and the EU:* to promote energy policy applications and market reform withreference to the European Energy Charter;* to promote investment in the energy sector of the Black Sea regionand promote funding opportunities and joint ventures;* to provide the energy sector of the Black Sea region with easy accessto EU institutions and vice-versa;* to become the home of Black Sea region initiatives by social partnerswho want to link up with their European counterparts;* to provide coordination services on request for the EU's Synergy,Phare and Tacis programmes.The EU is backing the Centre by providing financial assistance ofEcu2.5m towards start-up and operating costs for a preliminary 2-3years via three funding programmes: Ecu1m from Synergy, Ecu1m fromPhare and Ecu0.5m from Tacis.All three programmes - together with the energy demonstration programmeThermie - are using the Centre as a base from which to coordinatefunding and attract multinational investment from financinginstitutions such as the International Bank for Reconstruction andDevelopment (IBRD), the European Investment Bank (EIB), foreign andlocal banks and private enterprise. The European Bank forReconstruction and Development (EBRD) is also being tapped fortechnical assistance.To date, only part of the Centre's 1995 work programme is up andrunning (see table). Three of the four planned 2-day workshops wereheld towards the end of 1995 (ECE 81/11), while work is in progress forthe remaining projects. According to a spokesman, proposals for the1996 work programme have been submitted to Phare and Tacis fornegotiation and are in the process of being approved.Energy Charter TreatyIn addition to promoting energy policy applications and market reform,the EU hopes the Centre will facilitate "producer/consumer dialogue" inline with the objectives of the European Energy Charter Treaty.So far, all BSREC countries have signed the Treaty and its associatedprovisions, which provide a framework for energy trade, cooperation,investment and joint ventures in the Black Sea region, where nolegislative support exists. The 11 members were urged by Papoutsis inDecember to ratify the Treaty as soon as possible."Concerns over security of supply, environmental protection andincreased trade in a competitive framework are shared by all countries.The implementation of the European Energy Charter Treaty can create theconditions for improved energy trade and cooperation in the region," aCommission spokesman said in Sofia.Regional stabilityAside from energy, the hope is that the Centre will also be a valuablemeans of strengthening stability and promoting peace and prosperity ina region characterised by political turbulence."We deeply believe that energy, apart from the specific benefits, canalso act as an important catalyst for political and economiccooperation and stability," Papoutsis said in December.For Bulgaria especially, the Centre marks a firm step towards futureaccession to the European Union, in which energy constitutes astrategic factor."We have declared our readiness to work for the future of united Europestep in this direction," Bulgarian prime minister Zhan Videnov declaredat the inauguration.* The 12 members of BSREC are: the European Commission, Albania,Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Romania,Russia, Turkey and Ukraine.Project title                           EC programme1. Energy action plan for theBlack Sea countries                     Synergy2. Energy efficient technologiesfor the hotel sector                    Thermie3. Study on the electrical interconnectionof the Caucasus countries and Turkey    Tacis4. Workshop: Recent market reformsand prospects*                          Synergy5. Workshop: Financing energy efficiencyprojects*                               Synergy6. Workshop: Energy pricing policiesand their impact*                       Synergy7. Workshop: Energy sector surveys      Synergy8. The European Energy Charter Treatyand energy sector development*          Synergy9. Major project: Energy and theenvironment in the west coast of theBlack Sea                               Phare10. Seminar: Implementing the EnergyCharter principles on transit andmarket reform                           Phare11. Seminar: Market reforms in the gasand electricity sectors, formingoverall energy policy                   Phare12. Legal and institutional frameworkpromoting inter-state energy tradeand hydrocarbon transport networks      Tacis* completed during 1995.Source: BSRECBack to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996ENERGY WHITE PAPER TAKES PRAGMATIC APPROACHThe increasing integration of the Community calls for a set of commonenergy aims, defined at Community level, to ensure that member statesdo not pursue conflicting energy policies, and that national energypolicies tally with the wider, overall objectives of Union economicpolicy.This is the main conclusion of the Commission's white paper on energypolicy, approved by Brussels in December. Brussels argues that commonenergy aims are increasingly important due to the Community's growingdependence on energy imports, and because the energy sector is subjectto crises which necessitate the need for flexible and consistentcollective action.As a first move towards defining common energy aims, the Commissionadvocates a three step process - setting up a programme to monitorenergy trends, thereby ensuring that all energy policy decisions aremade on the basis of shared analysis; establishing how such cooperationwould work in practice; and setting up an Energy ConsultativeCommittee, consisting of key players in the energy sector, in order todebate the various ideas.But the white paper is pragmatic as to how this common policy isimplemented. Aware that member states are unlikely to endorse a newrange of energy powers in the Treaty, the Commission sets out a five-year energy work programme which can be implemented under existingtreaty instruments, highlighting those areas where policies at EC levelcan promote the key aims of security of supply, competitiveness andenvironmental protection. The programme, to be updated every two years,consists of a mixture of already-proposed and new legislation.Delays energy chapter debateThe Commission is careful to stress that actions at Community levelshould only be taken "if they bring added value". The paper makes itclear, however, that while the Commission has a large number ofinstruments in the energy sector, there are considerable gaps thatcould hamper energy policy development.But it leaves the controversial issue of whether energy needs its ownchapter in the Treaty - and thereby stronger legal powers - to a laterreport, to be issued before the start of the InterGovernmentalConference in March.The energy work programme is based on four main policy areas - marketintegration, managing external dependency, promoting sustainabledevelopment, and supporting energy research and technology.Energy liberalisationThe most important element in market integration is the long-awaitedliberalisation of the electricity and gas markets, which the Commissionbelieves will benefit energy consumers by lowering prices. Where publicservice obligations allow an opt-out from competition "it will be ofprime importance to ensure their full transparency", and the papersuggests that "general criteria" may need to be established to judgesuch cases.Liberalised electricity and gas markets will also need to be closelymonitored to ensure that the market is working properly, that differentnational systems offer comparable market access, independent generatorsget a fair deal and national electricity and gas regulators cooperatewith each other. To ensure this, the Commission proposes using existinglegislation which requires member states to notify Brussels ofinvestments, imports and exports, in order to set up a data basenetworked between administrations.Much to the delight of the oil industry, who originally suggested itvia oil industry association Europia, the Commission will also developenergy impact assessments, to ensure that policy decisions in othersectors, such as environment, social and fiscal fields, are notdamaging to energy sector investments. The Commission will also draftguidelines to support energy network projects at a pan-European levelwhich have a Community interest.Brussels also plans, via two Commission decisions this year, to ensurethat overall energy policy aims are fully taken into account when theCommunity sanctions energy sector loans from the European InvestmentBank, and the Cohesion fund.Still on investments, there is a ray of hope for the oil refiningindustry, whose viability has recently been affected by overcapacity.The Commission is worried that if the refinery market starts tocontract - which is already happening with the recently-announcedcutbacks from BP - the Community could be short of oil products in acrisis situation. The paper comments "the Community needs to keep thissituation under review and, wherever possible, ensure that theregulatory regime it imposes on this sector, does not furtherjeopardise its competitive position." With this in mind, DGXVII hasbeen critical of fuel quality measures proposed under the auto-oillegislation (see page one).Elsewhere, more work also needs to be done on compiling standards forenergy products to ensure that they meet quality and safetyrequirements. This is particularly the case for energy efficiency,where various national measures, not copied by other member states,have become barriers to trade. This year the Commission will proposethat energy efficiency becomes an essential requirement in new andexisting directives on energy consuming equipment. An energy workinggroup under standardisation bodies CEN and CENELEC will also be set upto look at the scope for further standards to promote energyefficiency, renewables and energy transportation.Managing external dependencyMeasures in this area are grouped under three headings - crisismeasures, diversification and developing international relations.While there is presently no need for new oil crisis rules, theCommission believes that the existing legislation on oil stocks andtheir management, which dates from the late 1960s and 1970s, needs tobe updated in the light of the new Union members and the various newtreaties. At present there are no gas crisis measures, but theCommission made it clear in its recent communication on gas security(ECE 82/1) that something needs to be put in place. The white paper,however, confines itself to merely continuing to study the issue.Communications on both sectors, and possible proposals for oil, areplanned for next year.This year the Commission plans to improve the rules governing thesupply of nuclear materials into Europe. Efforts will be made in soon-to-be-negotiated nuclear trade agreements with Russia and other CIScountries to guard against an influx of nuclear materials at lowprices. There are also plans to strengthen chapter six of the Euratomtreaty which obliges all member states to notify nuclear supply dealsto the Euratom Supply Agency.Under diversification, the Commission treads carefully, aware that anyattempts to define the fuel mix would be fiercely resisted by memberstates. The paper restricts itself to commenting that diversificationwill be improved when the internal energy market comes into effect, andproposes the repeal of a 1970s directive restricting the use of fueloil for electricity generation, saying this would give generators moreflexibility.The Commission is upbeat about the future of coal, saying that in thenext decade an important share of domestic coal in the Community willbe competitive, and stressing the importance of developing new cleancoal technology. A new proposal on developing such technology is duethis year, along with one on maintaining the relevant parts of the ECSCtreaty when it expires in 2002.Nuclear should remainOn nuclear, the Commission acknowledges the problem of publicacceptance, but stresses that nuclear should remain part of the fuelchoice. At some point, the Commission will submit a proposal to promotethe signing of the IAEA international convention on the safe managementof radioactive wastes, and is planning an action plan to tackle thewhole issue of nuclear waste, including research. Next year there mayalso be a proposal to harmonise the conditions under which radioactivesubstances are transported as well as a communication on nuclearstandardisation. The paper also reiterates support for nuclear fusionand reprocessing, and promises that the long-awaited indicative nuclearprogramme (known as the PINC by its French acronym) will be releasedthis year.A whole raft of measures are planned to beef up energy's role ininternational relations, in the light of the Community's growingdependence on energy imports. Aside from pushing the ratification ofthe Energy Charter Treaty, and the signing of Charter Treaty numbertwo, the Commission plans to issue a communication and proposals thisyear to strengthen the Community's role in the International EnergyAgency (IEA), allowing EC members to develop common positions on energyissues when particular Community interests are at stake.There will also be proposals starting next year to ensure that energyissues get funding in the various external financial instruments forcooperation and assistance that the Community signs with othercountries. This will be followed in 1998 by a proposal on security ofinvestments, to be studied with the financial institutions, memberstates and industry. In the meantime, the Commission plans to pushahead with new nuclear agreements on trade and R&D.Further strengthening energy cooperation with other countries, theCommission plans to create a Euro-Mediterranean Forum to identifypriorities for investment in the region, and will next year produce astrategy for energy cooperation with Asia, and the ALURE programme forenergy cooperation with Latin America. The paper also stresses thatevery effort must be made to relaunch negotiations for a Free TradeAgreement with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC),which foundered mainly on the GCC opposition to the proposed carbon-energy tax.Upgrading the energy sector will also play an important part inpreparing the eastern European countries for joining the Community, andmoney could be available from the Save and ALTENER programmes for this.Sustainable developmentHere the paper talks about the contribution of fiscal measures, energyefficiency and renewables.The Commission stresses the importance of internalising external costs,as highlighted in the white paper on Growth, Competitiveness andEmployment. While many such costs have already been reduced viaemission limits, voluntary agreements and civil liability the papercomments that "where necessary, further consideration should be givento the introduction of economic instruments", to ensure that thepolluter pays. This, however, should always be balanced by a cost-benefit analysis.But while internalising external costs is the Commission's "preferredoption", attempts to actually impose fiscal instruments, such as theproposed carbon-energy tax, have run into all sorts of technical,practical and political problems.Consequently, the paper notes that "other instruments need to beconsidered". These include voluntary agreements with industry, a policyoption which has become increasingly attractive to the Commission overthe past year and which will be the subject of a forthcomingcommunication; voluntary industrial audits; and an increasing role forstandardisation bodies. To be acceptable at European level, voluntaryagreements "must be fair, give an economic advantage to participatingfirms, reliable, representative of the entire sector involved,compatible with competition results and it must be possible to monitortheir results".On energy efficiency, the Commission intends to push ahead withexisting measures, such as the proposal on integrated resource planningand the Save 2 programme, but will also introduce new proposals. Thisyear, Brussels plans to push for international agreements to harmonisethe energy consumption of various technologies, using the internalmarket argument that it will prevent distortions of competition. Inaddition, it will examine whether existing rules that allow memberstates to apply for exemptions in excise duties for developingenvironmentally-friendly products (directive 92/81/EEC) are sufficient.Next year, there will be a communication setting out a strategy forpromoting co-generation. In 1998, the Commission plans to review thewhole issue of taxation policy and energy efficiency.Renewables, notes the paper, will constitute the main long-termsustainable energy source. In addition to plans for a follow up to theAltener programme, there will be communications on both renewablespolicy and the role they can play in regions and urban areas.Three of the measures in the five year plan involve the results of theauto-oil programme - the communication on the programme itself, and theplanned directives on fuel quality and vehicle emissions. A furthertwo, the framework directive on air quality and the proposed emissionlimits for liquid fuels, are linked to this initiative.Energy technology and researchThe Commission intends to publish proposals this year for the fifth R&Dprogramme, to replace the current fourth R&D programme when it finishesin 1998. There are also plans to set up new task forces to strengthenlinks between energy and other technologies which could be useful. Asthe old OPETs (Organisations for the Promotion of Energy Technology),which disseminated information no longer exist due to the stalemateover Thermie 2 funds, the Commission will this year propose a new, muchsmaller energy dissemination network, via energy agencies anduniversities, with funds from the main fourth framework programme.There are also plans next year for a communication outlining a globalR&TD strategy for the Community.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996VISIONS OF THE ENERGY FUTURE IN 2020After extensive research into the possible shape of the energy sectorin 2020, officials in energy directorate DGXVII have concluded that anenergy policy is needed "to ensure that energy investments and choicesmade today remain coherent and rational into the future".European Energy to 2020 is the wide-ranging economic research on whichthe conclusions of the white paper are based. Over a two year period,DGXVII's energy policy officials modeled four possible energy futuresto 2020, taking the view that a scenario-based approach was the bestway to tackle the energy sector at a time of change and uncertainty,when it was unclear what impact factors like environmental protection,global markets and geopolitics would have on the future energy scene.The study looks at four scenarios: conventional wisdom, a business-as-usual scenario projecting the continuation of current trends;battlefield, in which the world reverts to isolationism and powerblocks, with increased risk of political disruption to energy supplies;hypermarket, where market forces, liberalism and free tradepredominate; and forum, an environmental scenario where globalintegration allows collective public action to deal with environmentalthreats. The consequences for competitiveness, security of supply andenvironmental protection, the three key aims of energy policy, variedwidely according to each scenario. But various key findings emerged.Even though three out of the four scenarios (all but conventionalwisdom) assumed that global warming is proven by 2005, in all but forumrising energy consumption will result in increased CO2 emissions by2020, despite the growth of natural gas. Only under the forum scenariowill CO2 emissions be below 1990 levels in 2020. While underbattlefield they will have only risen by 4%, under conventional wisdomand hypermarket the rise is 15% and 18% respectively. The paperconcludes "one clear result is that radical measures will be needed ifEurope's target of CO2 stabilisation is to be achieved".While the availability of energy resources is not a problem, futurepolicy will have to tackle the fact that, in all scenarios, decliningindigenous energy production leaves Europe increasingly dependent onimports by 2020, especially for gas. The degree of dependence varies,however, from 55% in forum (only slightly up from today's 50%) to 70%under the hypermarket free trade scenario.All scenarios indicate that energy demand growth will remain modest,with both conventional wisdom and forum showing average annual growthrates of 1.6% - slightly less than the growth seen over the last 20years. Under battlefield, demand growth drops to 1.3% after another oilprice shock stifles economic growth, while hypermarket envisagesslightly higher growth at 1.8%.Any demand growth that does occur is mainly due to the transportsector, which is also the single largest contributor to CO2 emissionsto 2020. Depending on the scenario, transport accounts for between 42%-55% of incremental final energy demand, and between 38% and(effectively) 100% of future CO2 emissions. The report concludes that"the policy significance of transport remains substantial and needs tobe addressed with urgency".Turning to the future fuel mix, the news is good for renewables, andbad for nuclear power. Renewables grow fast under all scenarios - evenunder conventional wisdom their contribution grows threefold -exceeding nuclear's contribution by 2020. But for nuclear power, onlyforum, with its radical emphasis on environmental protection, offersany prospects for long-term growth. Under the other three scenarios,unless current attitudes change, "nuclear growth will fade and declinein the long-term".The future belongs to gas and electricity. Gas is the fastest-growingfuel under all scenarios, with demand at least doubling, mainly forpower generation (see table). In final energy demand, the overridingtrend is a growing penetration of network energies such as electricityand distributed heat. Oil consumption grows very slowly under allscenarios, largely fuelled by the transport sector, while coal usedeclines largely due to its environmental impact under conventionalwisdom and forum (where demand falls by 75% by 2020) and due to thegrowth of gas in hypermarket.At the end of the study, each scenario was analysed to see how far itmet the three key energy policy aims. Overall, the policy-heavy forumscenario was the winner, resulting in "a very attractive energyfuture". Rather to the surprise of DGXVII officials, the resultsindicated that high economic growth is compatible with wide-ranging CO2reduction policies, without compromising security of supply. The studycomments that "the forum scenario illustrates the compatibility ofdoubling GDP between 1990 and 2020 while lowering CO2 emissions by 11%and maintaining the lowest import dependency". While energy prices willbe much higher under the forum scenario, the actual cost to industry,and therefore the impact on competitiveness, will be considerablylightened by increased energy efficiency. By contrast, relying solelyon market forces in hypermarket would boost economic wealth to the samelevel, but CO2 emissions would be 17% above 1990 levels, while importdependency would be the highest of any of the scenarios. Overall,solely relying on market forces may be attractive economically in theshort/medium term, but "the model results show hypermarket as beingunsustainable as a long term energy future".Battlefield highlighted a "turbulent" future, dominated by concern oversecurity of supply. While moderate economic growth plus thecontinuation of nuclear meant that battlefield fared well in terms oftotal energy demand and CO2 emissions, the study comments that thescenario "is not a progressive one", and would not stimulate thedevelopment of new technologies. Business-as-usual is also notadvisable, as it cannot be guaranteed that the trend towards energy-intensity gains and greater efficiency in power generation willcontinue. While energy costs drop, both import dependency and CO2emissions rise substantially, making the conventional wisdom scenariounsustainable.Scenario          % of total         Gas                  production         consumption                                     (mtoe)Conventional         40                218Battlefield          35                176Forum                31                157Hypermarket          51                2901992                6.4                 31Source: European Energy to 2020, European Commission.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996NEW R&D CALL LAUNCHED FOR RENEWABLESResearch Commissioner Edith Cresson announced on 16 January that up toEcu30m is to be released for renewable energy research.The move follows severe criticism of the first call for energy researchtenders under the Fourth Framework Programme, when renewables onlyattracted a small part of the funding (ECE 81/14).It was claimed at the time that projects deemed worthy of support byexpert assessment panels had been unaccountably downgraded byCommission officials. The 16 January announcement was an attempt tomake amends by disclosing that money will also be available to helpprospective applicants improve the quality of their proposals - andeven suggesting that Commission officials were on standby to help.The main funding covered by the announcement is being made availableunder the JOULE programme, the specific non-nuclear energy programmethat now forms part of the overall Fourth Framework R&TD Programme.Cresson's announcement was timed to coincide with publication in the ECOfficial Journal of a call for research proposals in three selectedareas: photovoltaic solar energy, wind power (in particular the designof generators) and biomass energy (in particular combined heat andpower production with systems based on biomass gasification).The Commission statement said "this initiative will make it possible toconsolidate the position of renewable energy sources under the JOULEprogramme, the aim being to earmark for these energy sources at least58.6% of the total amount of funds available."Given the inadequate quality of projects submitted, especially in theabove areas, renewable energy sources accounted for only 45% of theprojects selected by the Commission last July. The budget of Ecu25-30mfor the call for proposals launched today will make it possible tobridge the gap".The statement added that the Commission had also drawn up a "reservelist" to fund additional renewable energy projects in 1996 - "dependingon the funds available" - and would launch a series of "practicalinitiatives" such as seminars, conferences and information schemes.These would be designed to "facilitate the preparation of proposals",which were often submitted by smaller enterprises, and to improve thequality of those proposals.Researchers were invited to submit preliminary versions of theirproposals of their projects as soon as possible (ahead of a finaldeadline of 15 May) - "so that the Commission can give them the bestpossible advice concerning the preparation of the project files".Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996BRUSSELS UPDATES NOTIFICATION RULES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY INVESTMENTSThe Commission has revised the rules obliging member states to notifyBrussels of their energy project investment decisions, giving nationalgovernments more time to supply the information.The revised version of Council regulation 1056/72, which obligesnational governments to notify the Commission annually of investmentslikely to have a Community impact in the oil, natural gas andelectricity sectors, came into force on 24 December last year, the dayafter it appeared in the Official Journal. The regulation covers oilrefineries and power plants over a certain size, along withtransfrontier or submarine electricity and gas lines (see table).The main change to the regulation is that member states have a few moremonths to communicate the information to Brussels, with the deadlineextended from 15 February to 15 April. The deadline for industry'sreports to national governments has been shifted from 15 January to 15March. This deadline does not apply, however, if governments get theinformation from another source - another change.While the Commission proposed to repeal a whole raft of other energylegislation dating from the 1970s last summer, on the grounds that itwas outdated, it argued that this notification procedure should remainas it was the only official source of information on energyinfrastructure developments across the fifteen (ECE 80/5). Suchinformation was essential in order to carry out policy reviews, arguedBrussels.Under the law, national governments are obliged to notify Brussels ofinvestments in the electricity sector within five years of their start,and within three years in the case of oil and gas projects.PETROLEUMRefining- distillation plants with a capacity of not less than 1mt/yr;- extension of distilling capacity beyond 1mt/yr;- reforming/cracking plants with a minimum capacity of 500t/day;- desulphurisation plants for residual fuel oil/gas oil/feedstock/otherpetroleum products.Chemical plants which do not produce fuel oil and/or motor fuels, orwhich produce them only as by-products, are excluded.Transport- transfrontier oil pipelines as well as projects of common interestidentified under the guidelines established by application of Article129c of the Treaty.Pipelines for military purposes and those supplying plants outside thescope of refining are excluded.NATURAL GASTransport- transfrontier gas pipelines as well as projects of common interestidentified under the guidelines established by application of Article129c of the Treaty;- terminals for the importation of liquefied natural gas.Gas pipelines and terminals for military purposes and those supplyingchemical plants which do not produce energy products, or which producethem only as by-products, are excluded.Distribution- underground storage installations with a capacity of not less than150,000,000m3.Installations for military purposes and those supplying chemical plantswhich do not produce energy products, or which produce them only as by-products, are excluded.ELECTRICITYProduction- thermal power stations (generators with a unit capacity of 200 MW ormore);- hydro-electric power stations (power stations having a capacity of 50MW or more).Transport- overhead transmission lines, if they have been designed for a voltageof 345 kV or more;- underground and sub-marine transmission cables, if they have beendesigned for a voltage of 100 kV or more and constitute essential linksin national or international interconnecting networks;- projects of common interest identified under guidelines establishedby application of Article 129c of the Treaty.Source: Official Journal.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996GAS TRANSIT BODY SET UP AFTER YEARS OF DELAYAlmost five years after the gas transit directive became law, theCommission has finally set up the expert committee foreseen in thelegislation to advise gas companies on the transit rules, and to act asthe conciliation body for any disputes.In a decision which came into effect on 23 December last year, sevendays after its publication in the Official Journal (OJ), the Commissionestablished the 20-member unpaid committee. The list of members will bepublished in the OJ but it will consist of 15 representatives of thehigh pressure natural gas transmission grids (one from each memberstate), three independent experts, one person from Eurogas and one fromthe Commission.The role of the committee, which will meet at least once a year, pluswhenever conciliation is needed, will be to examine the technical,financial and legal conditions of transit within and outside theCommunity, and to help the Commission draft an annual report on theworkings of the transit directive.For conciliation, in the event of a dispute between two parties, thecommittee will be cut to six members - the Commission, two of the threeexperts and three grid representatives. The committee will then giveits verdict, which will be non-binding, within three months of thedispute being notified.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996CHERNOBYL CLOSURE DEAL SIGNEDUkraine has finally signed an agreement to close Chernobyl after sevenyears of protracted negotiations with the G-7 countries.The total deal, worth $2.307bn in grants and loans, is no higher thanthe offer made by the G-7 in Kiev in November, which Ukraine rejectedas inadequate while continuing to demand a minimum $4bn (ECE 83/6).The final text of the memorandum of understanding (MoU), signed inOttawa on 20 December, was agreed in Vienna at the end of Novemberafter being stalled over two issues: the closure date and the extent ofWestern financial support. Sources say Ukraine only agreed to signafter threats were made to withhold western credits for economicrestructuring.The MoU comprises $498m in grants, with $43m for power sectorrestructuring, $102m for an energy investment programme, $349m fornuclear safety and $4m for a social impact plan. The $1.809bn in loanswill go to the energy investment programme and includes Ecu400m fromEuratom, agreed at Corfu in 1994, for completing reactor 2 atKhmelnitsky and reactor 4 at Rovno, as well as rehabilitating thermaland hydroelectric plants, pumped storage projects and energyefficiency. In principle, the MoU says, revenue-generating projectswill be considered for loans and non-revenue-generating projects forgrants.The nuclear safety component is thought to comprise grants from the1995 and 1996 Tacis programme agreed at Corfu, and $200m from the EBRD-administered Nuclear Safety Account agreed at Naples in 1994. These maybe used to pave the way for decommissioning, including the constructionof new waste treatment facilities.According to G-7 sources, the final wording of the MoU was"deliberately vague" to allow for different interpretations. AfterUkraine objected to the closure deadline being 2000, the phrase wasomitted from the title in the final version, though it remains in thetext which says decommissioning will be undertaken within the "shortestpractically achievable time".Ukrainian officials say closure is unlikely to be achieved by 2000."Removal of the facility and ensuring its ecological safety will takeover a decade. Chernobyl will need tremendous sums for shutdownoperations, running into billions of dollars over many years. This iswhy Ukraine sees the memorandum only as the beginning," Ukrainianenvironment and nuclear safety minister Yuri Kostenko said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996COMMISSION APPROVES DUTCH ENERGY TAX LEGISLATIONThe Commission has given the green light to Dutch legislation whichallows an energy tax to be levied on small-scale energy users.Under the legislation, a tax will be levied on consumption of the first50,000 kWh of electricity and the first 170,000m3 of natural gas, orthe equivalent consumption of gas oil, medium-heavy oil (paraffin) andliquified petroleum gas (LPG). Revenue generated by the tax will beredirected to taxpayers through reduced capital and labour tax.The new tax applies to small-scale users only, such as privatehouseholds and small businesses, and aims to reduce CO2 emissions andencourage energy saving practices. Large-scale electricity users, andthose who exceed 170,000m3 of gas consumption, are exempt in order tooffset losses in competitiveness at international level and becauseother measures exist to reduce energy consumption by heavy-users.Last year the Commission approved Dutch plans to exempt certainactivities from environmental tax legislation, such as groundwater andwaste contributions, on the basis that the state aid did not affectinter-EU trade (ECE 78/12).Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996RECHAR II BOOSTS COAL REGENERATION IN FRANCE/GERMANYThe Commission has approved over Ecu13m in aid for on-going projects inthree former coal mining regions in France under the Rechar IIregeneration programme, following a proposal from Monika Wulf-Mathies,Commissioner for regional development and cohesion.The former coal-mining region of Lorraine is to get Ecu10.9m fromRechar II, of which the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) iscontributing Ecu10m and the European Social Fund (ESF) Ecu0.85m,representing 44% of the total cost of the programme. The funds areprovided until end-1997, with Ecu4.9m going to projects which encourageemployment and Ecu5.9m to new businesses which reuse industrial wasteland and restructure urban areas.A second project, running under the Ecu2.7m Languedoc-Roussillonprogramme in the Ales coalfield, will get Ecu1.018m from Rechar IItowards infrastructure and vocational training projects, while a thirdallocation of Rechar II funds worth Ecu1.146m, goes towards an Ecu4.4mproject in the Albi-Carmaux coalfield in the Midi-Pyrenees. Fundingwill help promote new businesses, improve the environment, and develophuman resources. Both funding allocations are provided until end-1997and include contributions from the ERDF and ESF.* Former coal-mining communities in Germany will also get Ecu6.2m underthe Rechar II programme. The aid will help the Saarbruckenconglomeration and the Saarlouis and Neunkirchen districts improveenvironmental rehabilitation, stimulate employment and developindustrial sites.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996ITALY PROMISES TO PUSH ON IEM AND ENERGY NETWORKSEnergy issues did not feature prominently in the presentation to theEuropean Parliament of Italy's priorities for its six month EUpresidency.But Italian foreign minister, Susanna Agnelli, told MEPs that: "Thepursuit of a coherent strategy for growth, competitiveness andemployment must involve implementation of the major infrastructureprojects and the completion of the liberalisation processes in thetelecommunications and energy sectors".She also stressed that Rome would concentrate on improving Europe'strans-frontier energy links. "Our priority is to see through thelegislative procedure at present undergoing conciliation with theEuropean Parliament regarding guidelines for the trans-European transport and energy networks."We realise that in these areas every effort will have to be made tomobilise an increased volume of private investment and to explore thepossibility of greater resources being made available in the Communitycontext, too."In a later reference to energy, Agnelli also mentioned the Community'snew Mediterranean partnership programme, launched at last year'sBarcelona conference. She said that energy resources would be thesubject of one of a series of meetings to be held by the two sides onalignment of their economies.A document compiled by the ministry for foreign affairs in Rome on thepriorities of the Italian presidency and circulated ahead of theAgnelli speech, said the Dini government would "strive to obtain thefinal approval of the guidelines for trans-European networks."The presidency would also "foster balanced discussion in the Counciland constructive dialogue with the European Parliament on any availablemargin for increasing appropriations under the current financialperspectives ... or, possibly, on the need for the financialperspectives to be revised."There would also be discussion on supplementing the budget of theFourth Framework R&TD Programme - "a further decisive factor in theCommunity's action to make Europe's economic system more competitive,"although the document went on to say that the Commission proposals tofocus the extra resources on "a very limited number of strategicobjectives, with particular reference on the information society, willhave the Presidency's wholehearted support".The document continued: "Market liberalisation is a prerequisite forlasting growth: it will be the Presidency's paramount concern to seethat a legislative framework is defined that will ensure theliberalisation of key sectors such as telecommunications and energy,while respecting the need to guarantee universal service at affordableprices."However, neither Agnelli's speech nor the Rome document made anyreference to energy taxes, other than an oblique reference in thedocument to the need to "refine new instruments and objectives forsustainable development" through interaction with other EC policies"whether economic, fiscal, industrial or cooperation."Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996MINISTERS EXTEND EIA RULES TO NUCLEAR REPROCESSINGAt their meeting on 18 December last year, environment ministersapproved a common position on the revision of the environmental impactassessment directive. Germany alone voted against.Ministers agreed to extend the list of projects which require amandatory impact assessment (those in annex I) to include nuclearreprocessing plants and nuclear waste storage sites, as proposed by theCommission.But ministers also agreed to support a number of additions to the annexproposed by the European Parliament. These include extending the needfor such an assessment to nuclear fuel fabrication and enrichmentplants, and the dismantling of nuclear power stations.In the oil and gas sector, ministers also agreed to widen annex I tocover extraction of petroleum (over 500t a day) and natural gas (over500,000m3/day); pipelines for the transport of gas, oil or chemicalswith a diameter over 800mm and a length of more than 40km; andinstallations for the storage of petrol or chemical products with acapacity over 200,000t.In the power sector, annex I was widened to include all power linesover 225 kV and longer than 15km.The council also agreed a number of additions to annex II, for whichimpact assessments are not mandatory, but depend on the discretion ofthe member state.The common position will now go back to the European Parliament forsecond reading.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996MINISTERS BALANCE BUDGET ON R&D FUNDSThe Council has agreed to an increase in funds for the Fourth FrameworkR&D programme to take account of Austria, Sweden and Finland'saccession to the EU.According to a Commission spokesman, however, the increase does notrepresent a new injection of funds but merely incorporates into the ECbudget the money already paid to the research programme by the threecountries since joining the European Economic Area.In a common position formally approved on 30 November, ministers agreedto register an increase in research funds for the programme of 6.5% -up Ecu800m on the original budget of Ecu12.3bn. This involves adding6.87% to research projects and a maximum rise of 4% for staff andmanagement costs. The result is an increase of Ecu718m for the EC non-nuclear Framework Programme, and a further Ecu82m for the Euratomnuclear research Programme.While the Euratom increase is effective immediately, the EC programmehas to get second reading approval from the European Parliament.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996MEPS PUSH FOR NUCLEAR SAFETY GUARANTEES IN FREE TRADE DEALThe European Parliament's foreign affairs committee has suggested thatthe EU should exploit the framework of a new trade regime between theCommunity and Slovakia to press for safety guarantees on thecontroversial Mochovce nuclear power plant.The idea was aired in a Strasbourg plenary debate on 15 January whenthe assembly discussed proposals for agreements with the Czech andSlovak republics aimed at ensuring that their trade competition rulesare aligned with those of the EC.Foreign affairs committee spokeswoman, Dutch Green MEP Nel van Dijkreminded colleagues of their vote on 16 March 1995 when they demanded"that there must not be any doubt as to the safety of the plant co-financed by the EC" and called for "strict compliance" with EC safetystandards.Her committee wanted the future of the plant to be discussed within thejoint `association council' created to oversee movement toward EC-Slovak free trade within ten years, under an agreement which came intoforce in February 1995.However, van Dijk said that despite her committee's "criticisms" of theBratislava government regarding Mochovce and the treatment ofminorities, her colleagues would go along with the assembly'sendorsement of the proposals.Commissioner Hans van den Broek, who is responsible for EC traderelations with central and eastern Europe, said he would raisemisgivings voiced by MEPs on a forthcoming visit to Bratislava.But he offered no immediate prospects of talks on Mochovce in theassociation council, saying that disputes between the two sides wouldonly go before the Council "as a last resort".Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996DEBATE ON JET R&D PROGRAMME PUT OFF UNTIL FEBRUARYEuropean Parliament discussion of proposals to extend the JointEuropean Torus (JET) thermo-nuclear energy research project at Culhamto the end of 1999 has been postponed.Some MEPs objected to suggestions that the proposals should be endorsedon the nod, without debate. Time will have to be found at a futuresession, probably the 12-16 February plenary.Several of the other amendments to the project's statutes are technicaland result from the accession of Sweden and Finland to the EC.Moreover, the Parliament has little influence over a project whichoperates under the umbrella of a special Joint Undertaking.However, some MEPs are likely to use a debate to voice criticism ofCommunity support for nuclear fusion research, including the suggestedEcu226m for JET in the years 1997-1999.The issue of "discriminatory" salaries paid to UKAEA staff working atCulham alongside better paid Community employees is also likely to geta further airing.In discussions on the 1994 Community budget, Strasbourg sought tofreeze almost Ecu60m of Community funds for JET in an attempt topressure the Joint Undertaking to amend its employment rules.Although a subsequent ruling from the European Court of Justice upheldthe legality of the employment arrangements, the Parliament voted torelease the funding on the basis of a 'note of understanding' the somerules would be changed.Budgets committee rapporteur, Irish MEP John McCartin will say in hisreport to plenary that the Commission has to date failed to provide areport on enactment of the changes, suggesting that the requirementshave not been fulfilled.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EIB FUNDS TRANSMISSION PROJECTS IN GREECEThe EIB is providing Ecu63.8m in loans to two generation andtransmission projects in Greece, in order to reduce the country'sdependence on imported energy supplies.The first project comprises Ecu62.2m in long-term loans being providedto the Greece Public Power Corporation (PPC), to extend and reinforcetransmission and distribution networks and improve the reliability ofelectricity supply. Under the project, 21 interconnections will be madeon the mainland system and nine submarine interconnections will be madewith the Aegean islands. The work is part of a five-year developmentprogramme by PPC to which the EIB has already committed Ecu62.2m in1993.The second project involves construction of a privately-owned 2.5 MWhydro-electric power station at Tsivlos in northern Peloponnese. SomeEcu1.07m in grant finance is being provided to the project by the EIBunder the financial mechanism of the European Economic Area (EEA).Electricity generated by the station will feed into PPC's national gridand replace the region's dependence on thermal energy.The station is the first in Greece to be owned and operated by aprivate company and will serve as a pilot project for 50 otherpotential investments throughout the country. The project is receivinggrant support through the Thermie programme for its use ofbiodegradable lubricants.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996BOOST FOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC AND WIND POWER IN SPAINThe EIB is backing renewable energy in Spain by providing Ecu26.7m inloans towards eight projects in the north-east of the country.Funding will support construction of seven small hydro-electric powerstations and one wind park in the Comunidad Floral of Navarra, as partof a general EU policy to develop domestic renewable resources.Under the deal, Energia Hidroelectrica de Navarra will get the bulk ofthe loan for five hydro plants along the Ebro River and two along theAragon and Arga tributaries, generating an estimated 24.3 MW inadditional capacity. The wind farm is an extension of an ongoing pilotproject near Pamplona, and will add 17 MW of installed capacity.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EIB LOANS IMPROVE AIR QUALITY IN THE UK AND CZECH REPUBLICFollowing years of deliberation, the EIB has finally approved a Ecu360mloan towards anti-pollution equipment at the Drax power station in theUK, the largest coal-fired plant in western Europe.EIB assistance was originally requested by the station's UK owners,National Power, to install six flue-gas desulphurisation units andreplace existing burners with low NOx burners at the Yorkshire plant.But since the plant is already two-thirds completed, and the 40 jobswhich the loan was intended to create have already been allocated,National Power is now deliberating whether to take up the loan.Once up and running later this year, the 3,750 MW capacity station isexpected to reduce its SO2 emissions by 225,000t/yr and NOx emissionsby 55,000t/yr enabling the UK to exceed its national target forreducing both emissions, says National Power.* An Ecu200m EIB loan to Czech power utility CEZ will enable thecountry's largest lignite-fired power stations to be upgraded in linewith international emission standards. Funding will install flue gasdesulphurisation equipment at the plant, reducing SO2 emissions by 90%and improving air quality in the `Black Triangle' region and inneighbouring Germany and Poland.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EU FOSTERS ENERGY LINKS WITH PAKISTAN AND CHINAPower generation projects in Pakistan and offshore exploration projectsin China are getting a total of Ecu79m in EIB loans, under a three-yearenergy programme linking the EU with 30 Asian and Latin Americancountries.Under the first deal, Ecu24m will upgrade and connect Pakistan's Ghazi-Barotha hydro-power plant on the Indus River with the nationaltransmission grid, generating 6,600 GWh/yr of much-needed low-costelectricity for the region. Co-financed by the World Bank, the AsianDevelopment Bank, OECF of Japan, Kreditanstalt fur Wideraufbau and theIslamic Development Bank, the EIB loan is the second for electricitydevelopment projects in Pakistan.The second EIB loan to China, involves Ecu55m for offshore oil and gasexploration at the Ping Hu field, including pipeline constructionlinking the field with a satellite city of Shanghai. EIB funding forthe project, the first for China, is part of a larger loan worthEcu770m being co-financed by the French Government, the AsianDevelopment Bank and the Exim Bank of Japan.The EIB has set aside Ecu750m during 1994-1996 for energy projects inAsia and Latin America, of which Ecu36m has been committed toelectricity projects in Pakistan, Ecu55m in India, Ecu46m to naturalgas transport projects in Indonesia and Ecu58m in Thailand.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EUROGAS CALLS FOR WITHDRAWAL OF COMMISSION'S IRP PROPOSALEurogas, the European association of the natural gas industry, hascalled for the Commission to withdraw its proposal on integratedresource planning (IRP), approved by Brussels in September last year(ECE 81/1).Eurogas argues that the proposed legislation, which would obligeelectricity and gas distributors to draw up plans evaluating demand-side as well as supply-side measures, is "unnecessary, potentiallyharmful and discriminatory".Eurogas argues that there is no role for EC regulation in this field asthe natural gas industry already promotes a wide-range of energyefficiency services, including industrial energy audits and advice toconsumers on how to cut back on energy use.Moreover the proposal as it stands is discriminatory, says Eurogas, asit hits the gas industry and not competing fuels, which oftencontribute more per unit of energy produced to greenhouse gasemissions, the ultimate target of the legislation.The legislation could also harm the gas sector by introducingbureaucracy to the marketplace. Eurogas attacks the whole premise ofthe proposal, saying it is based on old studies from the US which onlyrefer to electricity, and which cannot be extrapolated to gas.Instead of the proposed legislation, the association says that a moresensible approach would be to launch a serious study of the energymarket in Europe, possibly leading to EU moves to strengthen existingenergy efficiency policies.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996NEW COAL BODY EURISCOAL WELCOMES ENERGY WHITE PAPEREuriscoal, the new Brussels-based association set up to promote coaluse in Europe, has welcomed what it sees as the strong support given tocoal as a future energy source by the Commission's energy white paper.In a statement, Luc Bohyn, Euriscoal's director, drew particular noticeto the paper's statement that "coal can be expected to maintain itsshare of global energy supply due to its inherent price advantage".Bohyn said that coal was ideally placed to fulfil the three mainobjectives of European energy policy, as it was competitive, clean andcompared to other fossil fuels, offered by far the best security ofsupply.Coal's main problem, he said, was convincing the public that it couldnow be burned cleanly. He stressed that CO2 emissions from coal burningin the European Union were hardly more than 0.2 % of the overall world-wide emissions.As such emissions were a global problem, Europe should concentrate onexporting technology and know-how to countries such as India and Chinain order to improve their fuel efficiency, rather than imposing a CO2tax in Europe.Euriscoal (the European Importers and Suppliers of Coal) was set upearlier this year by companies from the UK, Spain, France and Belgiumin order to promote future coal use, particularly for electricitygeneration.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996FRENCH DISTRIBUTORS PUSH TO SHOP AROUND FOR POWER SUPPLIESFrance's independent power distributors - which number around 180 andaccount for about 5% of the total power used in the country - havestarted lobbying to become "eligible consumers" under any deregulationof the electricity supply market prompted by European legislation.Speaking on their behalf, ANROC, which represents about 100 of theindependents, stressed the virtues of public service, endorsed theargument about long-term investments, and agreed that these wereincompatible with third party access.Nevertheless, ANROC warned that the definitions of "independentproducers" and "eligible consumers" adopted by the French authoritiesso far could undermine the existence of these independent bodies, andcould have long-term implications for all local authorities.The association emphasised that the law foresaw a key role for localauthorities in the distribution of electricity in their areas,irrespective of whether they used their own utility for the purpose orwhether they used the services of Electricite de France (EdF). Thesecompetences were an essential part of the local authorities' powers forplanning and maintaining economic development of their districts.The independent producers were concerned that the government MP JacquesVernier believed that "non-nationalised distributors must in no case beconsidered eligible consumers, since this would allow them to negotiatetheir own electricity, which would risk serious price differencesbetween communities, depending on whether they had their own utility".The trade unions are also largely hostile to the independents'position. If the independent distributors become eligible consumers,and their businesses prosper, other communities will want to do thesame. If they get into difficulties, EdF will be asked to cover theirlosses, argued a joint position paper prepared by the CGT, FO, CFDT,and CFTC trade unions. In the long-term, equal prices throughout thecountry would become impossible, and the grid would be threatened withbreak-up, the union argued. The independents countered that anequalisation fund could resolve the problem.Many of the independents were set up at the beginning of the century,well before EdF was created in 1946. In total, they cover 2,800communes (local authorities) and serve some 3.4m people.ANROC is one of the associations that brings them together, as does itsEuropean counterpart Confederation Europeenne des Distributeursd'Energie publics Communaux (CEDEC).Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EIA DIRECTIVE CALLED INTO FRAY OVER UK NUCLEAR WASTE PLANSThe Irish government is urging the Commission to investigate plans byUK Nirex to examine the geological suitability of Cumbrian rock forstoring Sellafield nuclear waste.State-owned Nirex wants to build an underground Rock CharacterisationFacility (RCF) at Sellafield, with a view to constructing a long-termnuclear waste repository, but Ireland says the plans present a "totallyunacceptable intrusion into the health, environmental and economic well-being of the Irish people" because of the site's proximity to the Irishcoast.Ireland's energy minister Emmet Stagg, recently gave evidence to thiseffect at a public enquiry held on the issue in Cumbria. Ireland hassustained a long-running campaign against the Sellafield plant for anumber of years.In a recent letter to environment directorate DGXI, Dublin calls on theCommission to examine Nirex's environmental impact statement whichIreland believes contravenes the European environmental impactassessment directive on three counts - it considers the RCF only ratherthan the whole waste repository programme; it fails to provide thedirect and indirect effects of the planned RCF and the largerprogramme; and it fails to give adequate information about alternativelocations or options for the project during the site selectionprogramme.The Irish government has said it is prepared to take the case to the EUand international courts if the UK public inquiry, due to end inFebruary, does not endorse Ireland's point of view. Such a decisioncould be challenged under Euratom Treaty rules on marine wastedisposal, Dublin believes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996LARGE USERS THREATEN EC ACTION OVER PROPOSED GAS LEVYLarge energy users in the UK have warned Energy Minister Tim Eggar,that they will challenge under EC competition rules any attempt toimpose a levy on gas customers in order to compensate British Gas forits take-or-pay contracts.The Energy Intensive Users Group (EIUG) has written to Eggar sayingthat such a levy, as a mechanism to support British Gas via taxation,would constitute state aid and so would have to be cleared by theEuropean Commission. "Were such a provision to appear in the licenses,EIUG members would clearly have to consider taking action under theArticle 92 EEC," says EIUG chairman Ian Blakey.He pointed out that the fossil fuel levy, a similar mechanism levied onbehalf of the former Nuclear Electric, had first to be cleared byBrussels. The EIUG has copied the letter to the Commission.The idea of the levy arose in press reports earlier this month, andEIUG's suspicions have been aroused by the publication of draftshippers licenses with a blank page.British Gas has long been arguing for some help to compensate forexpensive take-or-pay contracts it negotiated with North Sea producerswhen it was a state-owned monopoly in charge of the UK's security ofsupply. British Gas argues that it should not have to shoulder theburden of the take-or-pay contracts alone, now that the government haschanged the rules of the game and introduced competition.But large users say that for years they have suffered from monopolypricing by British Gas, "making substantial contributions to thecompany's impressive financial record over the years sinceprivatisation".Moreover they argue that a levy would ease pressure on British Gas torenegotiate its supply contracts with North Sea gas producers, a movewhich is "essential to the future of market-based gas supply".Consumers would benefit from lower prices if British Gas managed to geta better deal from producers, the large users believe. According to anEIUG spokeswoman, Eggar has yet to reply.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996ENERGY LOBBYISTS BREATHE EASY OVER REGULATIONAttempts to regulate the lobbying of MEPs suffered a setback this monthwhen proposals drafted on behalf of the rules committee by Labour MEPGlyn Ford were referred back to committee following a voting session inStrasbourg. The report called on Parliament to keep a register oflobbyists for public inspection, applying without exemption to allthose who use the Parliament buildings. In exchange for completing aform, lobbyists would receive a pass, renewable annually. Each lobbyistwould also have to disclose gifts offered to members, assistants orofficials worth more than Ecu1,000/yr per person and `assistants' wouldhave declare that they "neither represent nor defend any interestsother than those connected with their duties".Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996UK INDUSTRY BACKS NATURAL GAS VEHICLESThe UK Natural Gas Vehicle Association (NGVA) is backing the UKgovernment's decision to reduce road fuel duty on natural gas by 15%.The move follows the recent UK budget which imposed an 8.2-20.1%increase in duty on leaded, unleaded, super unleaded and diesel in abid to cut CO2 emissions, but a cut in duty on compressed natural gasand liquid petroleum gas to encourage it as a road fuel. TheAssociation's executive director Fred Parker said that NGVA members -who include vehicle and engine manufacturers, system suppliers and gassuppliers - are poised to increase the use of natural gas vehicles incompany fleets and to develop a gas refuelling infrastructure.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EDF/EDISON FINALISE ISE TAKEOVERElectricite de France (EdF) and Italy's Edison have became officialjoint owners of a 75% stake in Ilva Servizi Energie (ISE), theelectricity generating arm of Italian steel-making group Ilva. Finalconfirmation of the deal was dependent on certain conditions beingremoved which has now been done. The Commission approved the takeoverunder EU merger regulations last year after being satisfied that theresulting combined market share for electricity supply would not exceed5% (ECE 78/20, 77/9). ISE has a total power generating capacity of 600MW, with a 500 MW gas-fired thermal station under construction atTarante.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EU SIGNS AGREEMENTS WITH THREE BLACK SEA COUNTRIESGreater mining cooperation will be part of three separate partnershipagreements with Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia signed by the EU. Eachagreement establishes a framework for developing political and economicrelations with the EU and sets out 25 areas for mutual cooperation ofwhich mining is one. It also facilitates trade through the mostfavoured nation treatment and provides for technical assistance throughthe Tacis programme. To date each country has received Ecu300m from theEU in technical assistance and humanitarian aid. The new agreementsfollow on from similar partnership agreements with Russia, Ukraine,Moldova and Kyrgyzstan, endorsed by the European Parliament last month(ECE 84/15).Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996COMMISSION VETS BP/SONATRACH DEALA joint venture company set up by British Petroleum (In Salah) Ltd andAlgerian state oil and gas company Sonatrach is being investigated bythe Commission. The venture plans to research, explore and marketAlgerian natural gas. Since the two companies are involved in allaspects of oil and gas production - from exploration to refining,transportation and marketing - the deal could infringe EU competitionregulations.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996FIRST R&D FUNDS RELEASED FOR CLIMATE STUDIESThe Commission has approved the first funding tranche worth Ecu217m tothe environment and climate aspect of the 1994-1998 Fourth FrameworkR&D programme. Awarded in response to a proposal from ResearchCommissioner Edith Cresson, funding will go to 318 R&D projects. Thesebuild on previous research programmes including research intominimising damage caused by natural disasters such as ozone depletion,global warming and contaminated land through an assessment ofenvironmental quality, environmental technology and sustainabledevelopment. The environment and climate aspect of the Fourth FrameworkProgramme has a total budget of Ecu532m - 4.3% of the entireProgramme's budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EU SCIENTISTS APPEAL FOR MORE ENERGY RESEARCH FUNDSScientists are calling on the EU to boost funding for oil and gasresearch, which they say currently receives only 6% of researchfunding, despite the two fuels contributing to over 60% of the EU'stotal energy needs. The campaign is being coordinated through theEuropean Network for Research in Geo-Energy (ENeRG), formed in 1993 topromote R&D and demonstration work in oil and gas technology. The bodysays the oil and gas research budget was cut from Ecu310m to Ecu220m inthe most recent research programme drafted by the Commission. Otherleading European research groups involved in the campaign include theInstitut Francais du Petrole, the German Petroleum Institute, Norway'sRogaland Research, and the UK's Petroleum Science and TechnologyInstitute.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996GREECE TENDERS SIX OIL CONCESSIONSGreece has invited bids from foreign companies for six concessions foronshore and offshore oil exploration in the west of the country whereseismic studies and test drilling have shown promising results. Thethree onshore blocks are in the north-west Peloponnese, while theoffshore blocks are in the Ionian Sea off Katakolo, in the Patras Gulfand off the island of Paxi. The concessions are offered under a new lawimplementing the provisions of the hydrocarbons licensing agreement,which opens up oil exploration to competitive tender within the EU.Under the new arrangements, Greek state exploration company, DEP-EKY,will take a 12% stake in each concession, with the remainder being madeavailable to foreign oil companies and private Greek investors. Thedeadline for submitting proposals for test drilling is the end of May1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996SAUDI ARABIA URGES EU TO SCRAP ENERGY TAXESA Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) member has repeated the Council's callfor the EU to abolish plans for CO2/energy taxes on imported energyproducts (ECE 82/22). Speaking at a meeting of the United NationsConference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) this month, Saudi Arabiasaid the taxes were an obstacle to a fair world trade regime and werebeing introduced "under the cover of environmental pretexts". The GCCsays its members will suffer the most of all oil producers if the EUimposes the CO2 tax, with total estimated losses exceeding $17.7bn by2000. The EU imports a fifth of its crude oil from the GCC states whichcomprise Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatarand Oman.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996NO EIA NEEDED FOR LUDMIN WASTE STOREThe interim storage facility being built at Ludmin near Greifswald inGermany is a temporary store for nuclear waste, and therefore does notneed to be assessed under the environmental impact assessmentdirective, the Commission said in a written parliamentary answer at theJanuary plenary session. The Commission said that it was satisfied thatLudmin was correctly classified as a temporary site as Germany wasactively pursuing other plans for permanent nuclear waste storage sitesat Konrad and the Gorleban salt-domes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996GO-AHEAD FOR ARGENTINE NUCLEAR DEALAt the General Affairs Council on 4 December, the Council authorisedthe Commission to negotiate a nuclear cooperation agreement withArgentina on the peaceful use of nuclear power. The previous nuclearcooperation agreement between Argentina and the EU expired on 5November 1983 without ever having come into read effect (ECE 80/3).Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996EU/MOROCCO PLAN ENERGY COOPERATIONEnergy cooperation will play a part in the recently-finalisedassociation agreement between the EU and Morocco. Cooperation willfocus on renewables, energy saving, research, and efforts to moderniseenergy networks, interconnecting them with the Community. The agreementwill gradually establish a free-trade area between the EU and Moroccoover a 12 year period, and will strengthen political dialogue. Alongwith similar agreements recently signed with Tunisia and Israel, it ispart of the EU's drive to strengthen its Mediterranean policy.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996BRUSSELS TACKLES GREEN TRANSPORT COSTSThe Commission has released a report on policy options forinternalising the external costs of transport*. Saying that transportpolicy is at a crossroads, and that the current policy isunsustainable, the green paper looks at pricing rather than regulationin the hope of encouraging new environmentally-friendly modes oftransport. At the moment, the report says that the polluter does notpay when it comes to road transport, whose costs in terms ofcongestion, accidents and air pollution cost the Community almostEcu250bn a year. Road taxation falls short of covering these costs, andthe report advocates a fairer pricing system.* Towards fair and efficient pricing in transport.Back to Headline List CopyrightEC ENERGY MONTHLY via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996ELEKTROWATT/LANDIS TAKEOVER SCRUTINISEDThe proposed takeover of German firm Landis & Gyr by Elektrowatt, partof CS Holding, is being investigated by the Commission to see whetherit infringes merger regulations. Elektrowatt is involved in theproduction, distribution and trade of electricity while Landis controlsutilities for companies active in the energy sector.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-11IA059-000323-B030-112http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey82.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230403 text/html 28557HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:02:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:21 GMTContent-length: 28370Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey82.html Sample Issue Copyright ELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ========== Jordan verdict overturned (302 words) UK plaintiffs' legal aid reinstated (205 words) ====================== California PUC news release on cellular tower emissions (414 words) RF Briefs: California (393 words) RF Briefs: Florida (92 words) RF Briefs: New Jersey (715 words) RF Briefs: Wisconsin (112 words) ======== 1995 DOE Contractor's Review: Final installment (237 words) 1995 Contractor's Review: Policy Studies (310 words) Critical review of power frequency-cancer link (281 words) ============= Car interference worries needless, say UK experts (247 words) New European EMC regulations take effect (244 words) Hong Kong government considering alternative routes for troubled power line (192 words) CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Jordan verdict overturnedThe decision in Jordan v.  Georgia Power and Oglethorpe Power,rendered in the utilities' favor in May 1994 after a DouglasCounty Court jury trial (See EMF Keeptrack V.6, no.11, June 1,1994), has been overturned by the Georgia Appeals Court.  The newruling reopens the case, but it is uncertain in which court thecase will be retried.In the 1994 decision, the 11 person jury found that power lineelectric and magnetic fields were not the proven cause of NancyJean Jordan's non-Hodgkins lymphoma.  Judge David T.  Emersonissued a directed verdict on the property devaluation portion ofthe case, writing that power lines had not devalued theplaintiff's property.The plaintiff's attorney, Robert Shields of Doffermyre, Shields,Canfield & Knowles in Atlanta, Georgia, brought an appealchallenging the judge for permitting defense witnesses to presenthearsay evidence.  The witnesses in question were two doctors,who testified that the consensus of the scientific community isthat electric and magnetic fields do not cause cancer.  Theappeals court agreed with the plaintiff, saying that the doctorsdid not identify the community of experts and did not say how theconsensus was reached.  Douglas County Superior Court judge DavidEmerson "committed reversible error" in allowing the testimony,said the appeals court.  He did not err in dismissing counts oftrespass, nuisance and property damage claims.The court also ruled that jurors for the new trial must bescreened, and might not be allowed to participate in the case ifthey belong to Oglethorpe Power's membership cooperative,Greystone Power.  In order to disqualify jurors, the plaintiffsmust prove a financial benefit will result from membership.Georgia Power attorney Robert Pennington said he planned toappeal the decision to the Georgia Supreme Court.Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996UK plaintiffs' legal aid reinstatedThree families in Britain who claim power lines caused theirchildren's leukemia have gained back the right to legal aid intheir cases against electric companies.  Ray Studholme, whose13-year old Simon Studholme died of leukemia in 1992, toldreporters, "It's brilliant news.  Hopefully we well now be ableto bring this case to court."The families, who live in Bolton, Birmingham and North Yorkshire,were granted legal aid in 1993, but the aid was withdrawn thissummer after the National Grid and regional electric companiesappealed.  The High Court in London restored the aid December 9.The case may take up to two years to come to trial.Solicitor Martyn Day is representing the families.  Day iswell-known for taking on large companies over environmentalconcerns.  After the recent decision, he told the press,"Although I accept the legal right of the National Grid to try tostop legal aid being granted, I think there is a moral issue hereand I believe it was quite wrong of them to try to prevent thesefamilies taking these cases through to trial."Each family is suing the electric companies for up to 100,000pounds.Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996California PUC news release on cellular toweremissionsThe December 1 issue of EMF Keeptrack reported that theCalifornia Public Utilities Commission had announced a policy onRF/EMF from cellular towers.  Printed below is the full text ofthat announcement."California Public Utilities Commission News Release 505 Van NessAvenue San Francisco, CA 94102- 3298 Contact:  Dianne Dienstein415-703-2423November 8, 1995CPUC REMAINS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROMCELLULAR TOWERSThe California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) today orderedcellular utilities to identify and address public concerns aboutpotential health problems from electromagnetic field (EMF) andradio-frequency (RF) exposure in siting and building new cellulartowers.  It urged cellular companies to site facilities away fromschools and hospitals, and to restrict access to sites withwarning signs and barriers.The Commission's jurisdiction is limited to cellular towers andrelated facilities - it does not regulate cellular phones.  Thefederal Food and Drug Administration regulates RF emissions fromconsumer/industrial devices and is looking into RF emissions fromhand-held cellular phones.Due to public concern and scientific uncertainty regarding thepotential health effects of EMF exposure, the Commission examinedwhat steps should be taken to mitigate the health effects, ifany, of RF and EMFs from the 1,000 cellular facilities inCalifornia.  It found no scientific link between EMFs and adversehealth effects on humans from cellular facilities.A steering committee composed of one representative each from theCPUC Commission Advisory and Compliance Division, CPUC Divisionof Ratepayer Advocates, state Department of Health Services,Cellular Carriers Association of California, and CitizensConcerned About Telecommunications EMF held an EMF informationalworkshop on July 21, 1993 for interested individuals andorganizations.  The workshop was videotaped for those who couldnot attend.The workshop report, included with the Commission decision today,identified levels of cellular utilities' EMF and RF radiationimpacts, issues for further consideration and interim safetymeasures.The Commission will not adopt a specific numeric standard forRF/EMF exposure associated with cellular facilities because it ispremature to do so given no scientific evidence of a definitelink between cellular facility EMF exposure and adverse healtheffects.However, as more scientific research is completed, commissionaction may become necessary.  The CPUC Commission Advisory andCompliance Division will keep track of cellular EMF/RF researchfindings and information, advise the Commission if action isneeded to address them, and convene periodic workshops to sharethat information with all interested parties."Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996RF Briefs: CaliforniaIn Sherman Oaks, California, cellular service provider L.A.Cellular and residents of the Granada Hills area are arguing overthe placement of a 62-foot antenna at the Patrick Henry MiddleSchool.  Los Angeles City Associate Zoning Administrator HoraceTramel, Jr.  held a hearing concerning the tower and decided towait four weeks before issuing his ruling, giving the residentsand the company time to reach a compromise.  L.A.  Cellular hasoffered to cover the antenna with a bark-like material to make itless visible, but many residents are against any kind of antennaat the school for health reasons.  The Los Angeles Unified SchoolDistrict decided to lease the land to the company in August, inexchange for $1200 per month, paid to the middle school.In El Dorado County, the County Planning Commission vetoed aspecial use permit for a cellular tower on a hill overlooking ashopping center in Cameron Park.  Commissioner Brian Veitexplained, "We cannot make the finding that its use would not bedetrimental to the residents' health, safety and welfare orinjurious to the neighborhood."  Nextel Communications wanted tobuild a three antenna station in a barn it would build on aleased site in the residential area.  Antennas at the facilitywould have been only 19-feet high.  Neighbors are worried aboutthe precedent such a facility would set, and real estate agentstold the commission that the plan for the facility had alreadydiscouraged potential buyers.  The commission suggested thatNextel apply to build a higher tower on a remote site, preferablyin a commercial area.In Fair Oaks, controversy over cellular tower health effectsseemed to have died down.  A public meeting of the PlanningAdvisory Council revealed no opposition to a Pacific Bell MobileServices plan to install a new 60-foot personal communicationsystem (PCS) tower.  PCS towers are smaller and must be placedcloser together than cellular phone towers.  The PCS system wouldallow users with a "smart card" to insert the card into certaindevices, such as a phone, to transmit voice and wireless fax.Operations should commence in the Fair Oaks area by January 1997.Although public opposition was lacking, council members voicedconcerns about EMF and the visual impact of the plannedmonopoles.  They postponed their recommendation on the matteruntil a January 17 meeting.Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996RF Briefs: FloridaIn Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, the city council voted in Octoberto allow communication towers to be built in planned developmentareas, to restrict tower height to 400 feet and to require adistance from homes of three times the tower height.  Tests maybe required once a year.  Residents of Palm Beach Country Estateshad hoped the council would require a distance of ten times thetower height and testing four times a year.  Palm BeachCommunications has applied for permission to build three 500-foottowers near the development.  Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996RF Briefs:  New JerseyIn Pennsauken, New Jersey, cellular phone company ComcastMetrophone withdrew a request for a zoning variance after about60 citizens protested the plan to build a tower on the propertyof the World Harvest Christian Center.  The announcement came atthe beginning of a public meeting September 28.  Comcast said itwould submit an application to build the tower in an area of thetownship that is zoned industrial.  The World Harvest ChristianCenter would have received $1200 a month for allowing the towerto be built on its property.In Clifton, the city council voted October 1 to reverse a zoningboard decision that would have allowed Bell Atlantic to build a150-foot tower near Dianne Court and Allwood Road.  The proposedsite was one of two acceptable to Bell Atlantic.  The company'sfirst choice, a high-rise apartment building called Country ClubTowers, was previously rejected by the zoning board.  Tenants ofthe apartment building were adamantly opposed the antenna becauseof health concerns.Bell Atlantic appealed the zoning board rejection but agreed todrop the appeal in return for a favorable decision on the AllwoodRoad site.  The city council overturned that decision on thegrounds that it was unfair to the Dianne Court/Allwood Roadresidents, who are also concerned about health effects.  Thecouncil also ruled that Bell Atlantic failed to show that itcould not find an alternate site.An attorney representing Bell Atlantic said the company examinedall possible commercial sites and found only two it could use.Although the two sites are commercially zoned, they are within500 feet of homes.  Attorney Greg Czura explained, "This carriermust serve this area by its FCC license.  We have to buildsomething here to provide adequate service."In Ringwood, New Jersey, a public hearing on a joint NYNEX/BellAtlantic application had to be continued from September 28 toOctober 23 because too many people wanted to speak out againstthe project.  The two companies want to build three 60-foottowers near the clubhouse of the Erskine Lakes Property OwnersAssociation.  The towers would resemble flagpoles, complete withflags.  Residents mentioned both health concerns and visualconcerns.  Rejecting the "flagpole" design, one resident said, "Idon't want the hilltop behind my house looking like a used-carlot."  Others said the flagpoles would spoil the view from nearbyhiking trails.  At least one resident offered support for theproject, saying that lost hikers could use cellular phones tocall for help.Members of the Erskine Lakes Property Owners Association wereangry that negotiations for the tower siting were carried outwithout their knowledge by the association's president.  NYNEXand Bell Atlantic are seeking a zoning variance from use, height,and rear setback regulations.Also in Ringwood, a group of neighbors, led by artist JoelPopadics, is lobbying for removal of a 100-foot cellular towerbuilt by AT&T last winter.  The group says there should have beena public hearing before the tower was built at the AmbulanceCorps building.  It replaced an older tower and is wider and morevisible than the previous antenna.  Borough officials agreedthere should have been a hearing and have promised to hold one.LINE RF Briefs:  New York .TEXT In Greenburgh, New York, townofficials took a proactive approach to cellular siting concerns,meeting with residences and telecommunications companyrepresentatives from NYNEX to draft a zoning ordinance.  The newordinance is based loosely on similar laws passed in Seattle,Washington, and Portland, Oregon, and covers the whole range ofantennas, from satellite dishes and television and radiotransmitters to cellular phone towers.The draft ordinance was completed in September and forwarded tothe planning board for review.  NYNEX, AT&T Wireless andcommunity members all provided input.  The ordinancedistinguishes between receiving antennas and transmittingantennas and restricts transmitting antennas to nonresidentialzones.  They must be 500 feet from a residential property lineand also 750 feet from schools, day-care centers and playgrounds.NYNEX was pleased with the outcome, according to a New York Timesarticle.  An attorney representing the company explained, "If acompany can go in someplace as a matter of right, it wouldprobably prefer to do that than try to fight local zoning laws."Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996RF Briefs: WisconsinIn the North Shore region of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, three townshave been fighting cellular antenna plans.  Bayside, WhitefishBay and Fox Point have large numbers of residents concerned aboutthe potential health threat from towers.  According to cellularphone companies, the North Shore has more cellular phones thanany other part of the Milwaukee area.  With the number expectedto double in a year, more antennas are badly needed.  The threecommunities have all refused permits to Ameritech and CellularOne since July 1995.  The cellular companies plan an educationalcampaign and hope to enlist cellular phone users to help push forthe towers.Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 19961995 DOE Contractor's Review: Final installmentIn the last two issues of EMF Keeptrack summarized proceedings ofthe 1995 Annual Review of Research on the Biological Effects ofElectric and Magnetic Fields from the Generation, Delivery & Useof Electricity, sponsored by the US Department of Energy andseveral other organizations.  In this final installment of ourreport on the conference, we highlight the papers presented oncommunications research and policy.  LINE 1995 Contractor'sReview:  Communications Research .TEXT Shari McMahan of theSchool of Social Ecology, Environmental Health Sciences,University of California at Irvine, presented study results onhow the content of EMF risk information influences publicattitudes.  McMahan and her colleague S.  Cornwell designed astudy in which 115 subjects read a low threat message and 136subjects read a high threat message.  Subjects responded toquestions concerning personal attitudes and opinions about EMFs.These questions were posed to participants 2 weeks later.  Onefinding was that subjects in both groups said they would be leastlikely to trust the news media, electric companies and friendsfor balanced information about EMF.  They were most likely totrust the American Medical Association, doctors, theEnvironmental Protection Agency, and the State of CaliforniaDepartment of Health Services.  While researchers did findsignificant differences in attitudes between the high risk andlow risk message groups, they caution the study population wascomposed of college students and may not represent the generalpopulation.  Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 19961995 Contractor's Review:  Policy Studies Martha McNeal of McNeal Consulting, West Palm Beach, Florida,presented a talk on EMF policy options that local governmentscould adopt.  She identified five basic policy options:  1) Noaction, 2) Monitor research/provide information,3)Setbacks/buffers, 4) Numerical limits, and 5)Prudentavoidance/reduction.  Arguing that setbacks, buffers andnumerical limits can create economic burdens for property ownersand communities, McNeal recommended that communities adoptflexible strategies which support prudent avoidance or reductionand monitoring research.  She warned that setbacks, buffers andnumerical limits would erode the value of some existingproperties thereby eroding the community's tax base.  During aquestion-and- answer period, Cindy Sage of Sage Associatesvehemently disagreed with McNeal's recommendations, saying theywere suited more to utilities than to local government.  She alsosaid that McNeal's conclusions about property equity wereinconsistent with the conclusions of the California EMF ConsensusGroup.H.  Keith Florig of Resources for the Future, Washington, DC,discussed risk perception and the reasons policy makers eitherregulate or do not regulate suspected environmental hazards.  Tostudy this, he looked at quantitative and qualitative features ofEMF risk compared to risk from other known or suspected hazards.Looking at the epidemiological studies of children in very highcurrent configuration homes, he found that the risk of cancerestimated from these studies would identify EMF as a worse killerof children than automobile accidents or fire, and would suggestthat EMF should be regulated.  However, the magnitude of risk isnot the most important factor in the public's perception of EMFrisk, according to Florig.  Other more important factors appearto be the distribution across different groups of risk, benefitand control costs and trust in policy making institutions.  Whenchildren are involved, or when people feel they are bearing anunfair risk burden, EMF concerns become more acute.Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Critical review of power frequency-cancer linkA review paper published in the Proceedings of the Society forExperimental Biology and Medicine examines evidence of anassociation between power-frequency electric and magnetic fieldsand cancer.  John Moulder of the Radiation Oncology Department ofthe Medical College of Wisconsin and Kenneth R.  Foster of theBioengineering Department of the University of Pennsylvania firstsummarize what is known about the biophysics of power frequency(50-60 Hz) fields, then examine the epidemiological andlaboratory studies.  They conclude evidence for power-frequencyfields being carcinogenic is extremely weak.The authors contend that the scientific community, in general,agrees there is no danger of cancer from power- frequency fields."There is, then, a broad consensus in the scientific communitythat no causal association has been established betweenresidential and occupational exposure to power-frequency fields,and the risk of cancer."  They argue the controversy inscientific circles is limited to whether a link may beestablished in the future and what kind of studies are mostimportant to do now.The authors give suggestions for future studies and predictionson the potential impact of a positive or negative finding.Outcomes most likely to put the controversy to rest might be theidentification of a confounder in the childhoodleukemia-wirecoding studies, or an unsuspected alternativecarcinogen in the studies of electrical occupations.  Studiesmost in need of replication, they claim, are the positive reportsof tumor promotion in chemically-induced breast cancer (D.S.Beniashvili, Cancer Letters, V.61, p.75-79, 1991, and W.Loscher, Cancer Letters, V.71, p.75-81, 1993) and the reports ofgenotoxicity enhancement (M.  Rosenthal, Mutation Research,V.210, p.329-335, 1989, and D.E.  Hintenlang,Bioelectromagnetics, V.14, p.545-551, 1993).Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Car interference worries needless, say UK expertsToday's cars are thoroughly tested for electromagneticinterference problems, a British expert told the press inOctober, after a media scare over potential mobile phoneinterference with brakes.  Large manufacturers test cars in EMC(electromagnetic compatibility) chambers, bombarding them withradio waves from 10 kHz to 1 GHz to simulate exposure to anythingfrom defense installations to mobile phones.  Ian Simmons,project director of the UK's Transport Research Laboratory (TRL)claims, "I know of no case where any mobile phone has causedinterference of a nature to threaten a car's electronic systems."Design changes have ruled out most interference with cars'electronics, according to the TRL.  A few exceptions can occur,however, such as when a car passes a highly active microwavetower or high-powered transmitters and receivers used by policeand emergency personnel.New European Community rules on electromagnetic compatibility (asof January 1, 1996) apply to vehicles and require manufacturersto use certain test methods and meet certain standards.  Industryofficials say the car makers have been following the new rulesfor some time and that the European directives actually grew outof standards set by car companies.  Aftermarket equipment mightnot have to comply with the new rules until 2002.As for mobile phones, Ian Simmons told reporters that portablephones not designed for car use could induce high fields, butbecause they would not be brought close to the car's electronicequipment, they should not cause a problem.Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996New European EMC regulations take effectElectromagnetic compatibility (EMC) is now the law for productssold or installed in the member nations of the European Union.Beginning January 1, 1996, manufacturers of electrical equipmentmust meet a new set of standards to receive the "CE Mark" showingconformance with all European safety requirements.  The new EMCdirectives say that equipment must not cause undesirableradiation, and it cannot be susceptible to the effects ofunwanted electromagnetic radiation.  The regulations are notaimed at reducing health concerns, but at ensuring that variousdevices will operate smoothly together.  Health concerns arise insome situations, however.  Hospital equipment, wheelchairs,automobile control systems and industrial equipment potentiallycan be affected by electromagnetic interference.  Less lifethreatening, but important, are the effects of interference oncomputers and broadcasting.For US manufacturers, this means that any product meant forexport to Europe must be certified electromagneticallycompatible.  The standards for telecommunications equipment aresaid to be more clear than those for other electrical devices,and some experts advise companies to contract for outside testingby a "competent body" such as Underwriters' Laboratories.According to the European Union rules, "competent bodies" areselected by a national "notified body", currently the USOccupational Safety and Health Administration.Most manufacturers are prepared for the new regulations, whichhave been widely publicized.  Another set of requirements willcome into effect on January 1, 1997, requiring the use of"low-voltage components."Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC & MAGNETIC FIELD KEEPTRACK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Hong Kong government considering alternativeroutes for troubled power lineLegislators planned to discuss five alternative routes for acontroversial 400-kV transmission line in mid- December, but asatisfactory compromise appears remote.  Utility company ChinaLight and Power (CLP) nearly has completed the power line alongthe original route and says it must begin construction on thefinal section over Yick Yuen village in order to supply neededelectricity on schedule.  Residents of the area are accusing theutility and government officials of delaying their considerationof alternative routes in order to finish the line, even thoughthe Legislative Council (LegCo) ordered in April 1995 that a newroute be chosen to avoid coming close to homes.A government spokeswoman told the press that each of the fivealternatives submitted by citizens' groups was flawed.  Two passclose to housing, one poses technical problems because it crossesa road, one passes through a village and over a church, and onegoes through the Ho Chung valley, which is designated as a siteof special scientific interest.  Legislators have said the lineshould be routed through a park area to avoid proximity to homes.Copyright 1996  Center for Energy InformationBack to Headline List WT03-B34-12IA059-000323-B030-167http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey65.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230505 text/html 126963HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:02:51 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:10 GMTContent-length: 126775Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey65.html Sample Issue Copyright ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WHAT UTILITIES PAID FOR FOSSIL FUEL DELIVERIES IN AUGUST -- FROM REPORTS TO FERC (34 words) ELECTRIC UTILITY COMMON STOCKS--1995 VS. 1994 (1014 words) ELECTRIC UTILITY STOCKS FINISH 1995 AND START 1996 WITH STRONG GAINS (641 words) NIMO SEEKS FERC ENFORCEMENT ACTION AGAINST N.Y. PSC ON `QF' PAYMENTS (280 words) YANKEE ROWE SETTLEMENT FEATURES COST SAVINGS BECAUSE OF BARNWELL REOPENING (335 words) HOUSE-SENATE TELECOM COMPROMISE SEEN PROTECTING UTILITY CONSUMERS (892 words) EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAIN CANCER (506 words) TROUBLED OKLAHOMA CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS-ACTION SUIT (420 words) FERC ALJ RULING ON SYNFUELS PROJECT COULD HIT BASIN ELECTRIC CO-OP HARD (313 words) RESTRUCTURING CANADA'S ALBERTA LAUNCHES SWEEPING RESTRUCTURING OF WHOLESALE MARKET (514 words) ELCON ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITION WITH STRANDED-COST RECOVERY FORMULA (1375 words) FEDERAL BUDGET IMPASSE PROMPTS FERC TO POSTPONE DATE FOR COMMENTS ON EIS (128 words) N.Y. PSC LAW JUDGE RECOMMENDS FORMING AN ISO FOR TRANSITION TO RETAIL ACCESS (443 words) POWER MARKETS NYMEX PRESIDENT PREDICTS REGULATORY ACTION SOON, MARCH LAUNCH OF FUTURES (350 words) ELECTRIC VEHICLES UTILITIES SEE GM'S ELECTRIC VEHICLE PLAN INTRODUCING `EXCITING NEW ERA' (567 words) FINANCE MOODY'S SEES HIGH PRICES, STRANDED ASSETS HURTING NORTHEAST ELECTRICS (627 words) UTILITIES SEEK TO EXPAND `TWO-COUNTY RULE' ALLOWING TAX-EXEMPT FINANCING (736 words) DIVERSIFICATION WESTERN RESOURCES ACQUIRES A LARGE ADT STAKE; HOPES FOR JOINT MARKETING (265 words) HYDROPOWER STATE OFFICIALS SEEK NEW SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS IN HYDRO RELICENSING PLAN (563 words) MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS PACIFICORP OPENS KENTUCKY OFFICE TO WRAP UP A DEAL WITH BIG RIVERS (706 words) INDEPENDENT POWER VIRGINIA POWER, DEVELOPER INK PACT KILLING 316-MW COAL-FIRED PROJECT (265 words) TRANSMISSION FEDERAL JUDGE DENIES TEXAS CITY'S PETITION FOR TRANSMISSION ORDER (925 words) AEP DISCOUNTS TRANSMISSION AND SEES REVENUES INCREASE FIVEFOLD: FALCONE (151 words) PLANNING NORTHWEST UTILITIES DROP PLANS TO PURCHASE AS MUCH AS 1,000 MW (310 words) TVA IN DEAL WITH ENRON TO BUY POWER ON AN OPTION BASIS; ISSUES FINAL IRP (442 words) COMPETITION FUELED BY PUBLIC OUTCRY, CITY OF TOLEDO TO RESUME STUDY ON FORMING MUNICIPAL (612 words) EL PASO ELECTRIC RETAINS 125-MW AIR BASE LOAD, ENDING LONG DISPUTE (424 words) CLINTON VETOES DEFENSE BILL, KILLING STUDY OF SAVINGS FROM POWER-SHOPPING (216 words) RATES & REGULATION PSC CAPS TAMPA ELECTRIC ALLOWED EQUITY RETURN AT 12.5% FOR 1996 (374 words) S.C. CONSUMER AGENCY OPPOSING APPROVAL OF SCE&G DEPRECIATION RESERVE TRANSFER (746 words) INTERNATIONAL SOCAL ED AFFILIATE CLOSES $1-BILLION PURCHASE OF 2,088-MW U.K. GENERATOR (357 words) 3,500-MW BRAZILIAN UTILITY SPLIT IN TWO IN PREPARATION FOR AUCTION (618 words) NSP UNIT, TRANSFIELD SIGN 180-MW POWER-SALES PACT IN AUSTRALIA (177 words) CSW FORMS VENTURE WITH MEXICAN INDUSTRIAL FOR 100-MW PROJECT (265 words) MARKETING ENRON SECURES RIGHTS TO BUY 5,400-MW OUTPUT FROM OGLETHORPE POWER SYSTEM (497 words) CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WHAT UTILITIES PAID FOR FOSSIL FUEL DELIVERIES IN AUGUST -- FROM REPORTS TOFERCIllustration(s):Table: WHAT UTILITIES PAID FOR FOSSIL FUEL DELIVERIES IN AUGUST -- FROMREPORTS TO FERC (This table is not available electronically.Please see theJanuary 8, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ELECTRIC UTILITY COMMON STOCKS--1995 VS. 1994              ELECTRIC UTILITY COMMON STOCKS--1995 VS. 1994                        Close   (Div.)    Change    Close    (Div.)   Change                      12/30/94   Yield     93-94  12/29/95   Yield     94-95Dow Jones Industrials  3834.44            +2.140%  5117.12            33.450%Dow Jones Utilities     181.52           -20.837%   225.40           +24.174%Dow Jones Composite    1274.41            -7.720%  1693.21           +32.862%NYSE Utilities          198.41           -13.705%   252.90           +27.463%NYSE Composite          250.94            -3.142%   329.51           +31.310%S&P Utilities           150.12            +8.911%   150.12           -13.014%S&P 500                 459.27            -1.539%   615.93           +34.111%Dow Jones Industry Group Performance  Index--overall               433.07            -2.062%   581.43           +34.258%        --electric utils.       210.24           -17.993%   259.73           +23.540%        --natural gas utils.    137.49           -17.941%  184.25            +34.010%        --telephone utils.      387.61           -9.776%   545.56            +40.750%        --water utils.         454.76           -10.901%   554.90            +22.020%Electric Utility Common StocksDQE##$29.625  (5.941%) -14.130%  $30.750  (4.162%)  +55.696%Portland General       $19.250  (6.234%)  -6.098%  $29.125  (4.120%) +51.299%Pinnacle West          $19.625  (4.586%) -12.290%  $28.750  (3.478%) +46.497%CIPSCO*$27.000  (7.407%) -12.195%  $39.000  (5.213%)  +44.444%Potomac Electric*      $18.375  (9.034%) -31.308%  $26.250  (6.324%) +42.857%Interstate Power       $23.750  (8.758%) -21.162%  $33.125  (6.279%) +39.474%Illinova*$21.844  (4.578%)  -1.271%  $30.000  (3.733%)  +37.339%Unicom*$24.000  (6.667%) -14.667%  $32.750  (4.885%)  +36.458%PS New Mexico          $12.922    (--)   +14.861%  $17.625    (--)   +36.397%NYSE&G$19.000  (7.368%) -38.211%  $25.875  (9.121%)  +36.184%Houston Indus.*#       $35.625  (8.421%) -25.197%  $24.250  (6.186%) +36.140%SCANA$42.125  (6.694%) -15.327%  $28.625  (5.031%)  +35.905%Entergy*$21.875  (8.229%) -39.236%  $29.250  (6.154%)  +33.714%Detroit Edison*        $26.125  (7.885%) -12.917%  $34.500  (5.971%) +32.057%FPL Group*             $35.125  (4.783%) -10.224%  $46.375  (3.795%) +32.028%Cilcorp$32.125  (7.658%) -14.333%  $42.375  (5.805%)  +31.907%Allegheny PS*          $21.750  (7.540%) -17.924%  $28.625  (5.869%) +31.609%PP&L Resources*        $19.000  (8.789%) -29.630%  $25.000  (6.680%) +31.579%S. Indiana G&E         $26.500  (6.226%) -21.771%  $34.750  (4.863%) +31.132%CMS Energy*            $22.875  (3.672%)  -8.955%  $29.875  (3.213%) +30.601%CINergy*$23.500  (6.863%) -14.545%  $30.625  (5.616%)  +30.319%Oklahoma G&E**         $33.125  (8.030%) -10.473%  $43.000  (6.186%) +29.811%Carolina P&L*          $26.625  (6.610%) -11.618%  $34.500  (5.275%) +29.577%General Pub. Util.*    $26.250  (6.857%) -14.980%  $34.000  (5.529%) +29.524%Baltimore G&E*         $22.175  (6.870%) -12.808%  $28.500  (5.474%) +28.814%NIPSCO Indus.*         $29.750  (5.244%)  -9.506%  $38.250  (4.392%) +28.571%UNITIL$16.250  (7.631%) -16.667%  $20.875  (6.132%)  +28.461%Texas Utilities*       $32.000  (9.625%) -26.012%  $41.000  (4.878%) +28.125%Idaho Power            $23.500  (7.915%) -22.634%  $30.000  (6.200%) +27.660%Wash. Water Pow.       $13.750  (9.018%) -26.667%  $17.500  (7.086%) +27.273%WPS Resources          $26.750  (6.804%) -20.446%  $34.000  (5.471%) +27.103%Ipalco Enterprises*    $30.000  (7.067%) -15.493%  $38.125  (5.666%) +27.083%Ohio Edison*           $18.500  (8.108%) -18.681%  $23.500  (6.383%) +27.027%United Illuminating    $29.500  (9.356%) -26.708%  $37.375  (7.545%) +26.695%TECO Energy*           $20.250  (4.988%) -10.497%  $25.625  (4.136%) +26.543%TNP Enterprises        $14.875  (5.378%)  -9.848%  $18.750  (4.693%) +26.050%Delmarva Power         $18.141  (8.489%) -23.214%  $22.750  (6.769%) +25.409%Sierra Pacific Res.    $18.750  (5.973%)  -8.537%  $23.375  (4.791%) +24.667%St. Joseph L&P         $28.500  (6.316%)  -1.724%  $35.500  (5.183%) +24.561%Duke Power*            $38.125  (5.141%) -10.029%  $47.375  (4.306%) +24.262%MidAmer. (vs. IIG&E)   $19.875  (8.704%) -19.289%  $16.750  (7.164%) +23.887%Southwestern PS        $26.500  (8.302%) -13.115%  $32.750  (6.717%) +23.585%San Diego G&E*         $19.250  (7.896%) -22.613%  $23.750  (6.568%) +23.377%New Eng. El. Sys.      $32.125  (7.159%) -17.891%  $39.625  (5.956%) +23.346%Con Edison*            $25.750  (7.767%) -19.844%  $31.750  (6.425%) +23.301%C&SW*$22.625  (7.514%) -25.207%  $27.875  (6.170%)  +23.204%American EP*           $32.875  (7.300%) -11.448%  $40.500  (5.926%) +23.194%Southern Co.*          $20.000  (5.900%)  -9.348%  $24.625  (4.954%) +23.125%Commonwealth ES        $36.375  (8.247%) -21.351%  $44.750  (6.704%) +23.024%PECO Energy*           $24.500  (6.612%) -19.008%  $30.125  (5.776%) +22.959%Boston Edison          $24.000  (7.583%) -19.328%  $29.500  (6.372%) +22.917%MidAmer. (vs. MWR)     $13.750  (8.436%) -23.611%  $16.750  (7.164%) +21.818%DPL Inc.*              $20.500  (5.756%)  -0.606%  $24.750  (5.010%) +20.732%SCEcorp*$14.625  (6.838%) -26.875%  $17.625  (5.674%)  +20.513%PS Colorado*           $29.375  (6.808%)  -8.560%  $35.375  (5.767%) +20.425%Hawaiian Elec. Ind.    $32.375  (7.290%)  -9.756%  $38.750  (6.193%) +19.691%Upper Penin. En.       $15.500  (7.742%) -19.480%  $18.500  (6.757%) +19.355%Wisconsin Energy*      $25.875  (5.449%)  -5.909%  $30.625  (4.800%) +18.357%Union Electric*        $35.375  (6.897%)  -9.873%  $41.750  (5.988%) +18.021%Bangor Hydro-Elec.     $9.750  (13.538%) -46.207%  $11.500  (6.261%) +17.949%Florida Progress*      $30.000  (6.733%) -10.781%  $35.375  (5.710%) +17.917%Fla. Public Utils.     $16.125  (7.194%) -14.000%  $18.875  (6.146%) +17.054%West. Resources*       $28.625  (6.917%) -17.921%  $33.375  (6.052%) +16.594%PacifiCorp*$18.125  (5.959%)  -5.844%  $21.125  (5.112%)  +16.552%Cent. Hudson G&E       $26.500  (7.849%) -12.757%  $30.875  (6.802%) +16.509%Pacific G&E*           $24.375  (8.041%) -30.605%  $28.375  (6.907%) +16.410%Central La. Elec.      $23.1875 (6.296%)  -6.313%  $26.875  (5.581%) +15.903%Black Hills            $21.375  (6.175%)  -6.044%  $24.750  (5.414%) +15.789%Public Service EG*     $26.500  (8.151%) -17.187%  $30.625  (7.053%) +15.566%Puget Sound P&L*       $20.125  (9.143%) -19.095%  $23.250  (7.914%) +15.528%Dominion Res.*         $36.000  (7.167%) -20.661%  $41.250  (6.254%) +14.583%LG&E Energy            $36.875  (5.830%)  -8.951%  $42.250  (5.254%) +14.576%Minnesota P&L          $25.250  (8.000%) -22.901%  $28.375  (7.189%) +12.376%Kansas City P&L*       $23.375  (6.503%)  +1.630%  $26.250  (5.943%) +12.299%Northeast Utilities*   $21.625  (8.139%)  -8.947%  $24.250  (7.258%) +12.139%WPL Holdings           $27.375  (7.014%) -16.730%  $30.625  (6.335%) +11.872%Empire Dist. Elec.     $16.000  (8.000%) -22.892%  $17.875  (7.161%) +11.719%N. States Power*       $44.000  (6.000%)  +2.029%  $49.125  (5.496%) +11.648%KU Energy              $27.000  (6.074%)  -6.896%  $30.000  (5.600%) +11.111%UtiliCorp United       $26.500  (6.491%) -16.535%  $29.375  (5.855%) +10.849%O&R Utilities          $32.500  (7.877%) -20.000%  $35.750  (7.217%) +10.000%Otter Tail Power       $32.500  (5.292%)  -3.704%  $35.750  (4.923%) +10.000%MDU Resources##        $27.125  (5.899%) -13.889%  $19.875  (5.484%)  +9.908%Atlantic Energy        $17.625  (8.738%) -18.965%  $19.250  (8.000%)  +9.220%Nevada Power           $20.375  (7.853%) -15.544%  $22.250  (7.191%)  +9.202%Rochester G&E          $20.875  (8.623%) -20.476%  $22.625  (7.956%)  +8.383%Tucson EP              $3.000     (--)   -17.241%  $3.250     (--)    +8.333%Madison G&E            $32.500  (5.785%)  -3.704%  $35.000  (5.429%)  +7.692%Eastern Util. Asso.    $22.000  (7.000%) -21.429%  $23.625  (6.772%)  +7.386%LILCO$15.375 (11.577%) -36.923%  $16.375 (10.870%)   +6.504%Cent. Maine Pow.       $13.5625 (6.636%)  -9.583%  $14.375  (6.261%)  +5.991%IES Industries         $25.250  (8.317%) -19.200%  $26.500  (7.924%)  +4.950%Northwestern PS        $26.750  (6.355%)  -6.956%  $28.000  (6.288%)  +4.673%Maine PS               $20.750  (8.867%) -19.807%  $21.375  (8.608%)  +3.012%Citizens Utils. `A'    $12.500    (--)    -2.710%  $12.750    (--)    +2.000%UGI$20.375  (6.773%)  -9.444%  $20.750  (6.747%)   +1.840%Citizens Utils. `B'    $12.625    (--)   -26.300%  $12.750    (--)    +0.990%Centerior Energy*      $8.875   (9.014%) -33.019%  $8.875   (9.014%)       0%Green Mt. Power        $27.875  (7.605%) -10.081%  $27.750  (7.640%)  -0.448%Central Vt. PS         $13.500  (5.926%) -35.714%  $13.375  (5.981%)  -0.926%Montana Power          $23.000  (6.956%) -10.680%  $22.625  (7.072%)  -1.630%ESELCO$24.000  (4.167%)  +6.667%  $23.000  (4.522%)   -4.167%Niagara Mohawk*        $14.250  (7.860%) -29.630%  $9.500  (11.789%) -33.333%El Paso Electric       $0.8125     (--)  -69.767%  $0.34375   (--)   -57.692%STOCK SPLITS IN 1994:# two for one## three for two* Indicates stock in Dow Jones Industry Group Performance Index forelectric utilitiesAll stocks traded on New York Stock Exchange except: American Stock Exchange: Florida Public Utilities, Maine Public Service,and UNITIL NASDAQ: ESELCO,  Madison Gas & Electric, Otter Tail Power, andUpper Peninsula Energy El Paso Electric is not listed. The price quoted is from the company.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ELECTRIC UTILITY STOCKS FINISH 1995 AND START 1996 WITH STRONG GAINS   Almost all electric utility stocks gained sharply in price--though notas much as stocks overall--in 1995, erasing the losses of 1994 (EUW, 9 Jan'95, 6).   The gains continued in the first two trading sessions of this year, with32 of the electric stocks on the New York Stock Exchange hitting new52-week highs. Utility bonds also were near the 52-week highs reached atthe end of 1995.   The Dow Jones Industry Group Performance Index for electric utilitiesclosed Dec. 29, 1995 at 259.73, up 23.54% from Dec. 30, 1994, and up 3.36points from Dec. 31, 1993.   On Jan. 3, 1996, the electric IGPI closed at 262.48, up 24.23% from Jan.3, 1995, and its highest close since 267.53, on Nov. 1, 1993. The all-timehigh remains 280.25, on Sept. 13, 1993.   The Dow Jones Utilities, New York Stock Exchange Utilities, and Standard& Poor's Utilities also set new 52-week highs on Jan. 3, 1996. The 228.27close for the DJUA was up 24.72% from Jan. 3, 1995, and was its highestclose since 229.30, on Dec. 31, 1993.   Ninety-six of the 103 publicly-traded electrics ended 1995 with pricegains, the most since 99 in 1991. Only six ended the year down, the fewestsince six in 1986. One was unchanged. In 1994, only four gained in priceand 99 lost.   The Dow Jones Index of 10 utility bonds closed Dec. 29, 1995 at 102.06,up 1,286 basis points or 14.42% from Dec. 30, 1994. The yield on thesebonds fell from 8.59% to 6.99%.   On Jan. 3, 1996, the utility bond average also closed at 102.06, up14.43% from Jan. 3, 1995. Their yield was 6.98%, down from 8.59% on Jan. 3,1995.   The 52-week high for utility bonds was 102.30, reached Dec. 28, 1995.Also that day, the yield reached a 52-week low of 6.97%.   On Jan. 3, 1996, the average yield on U.S. Treasury securities maturingin one to 10 years hit a new 52-week low of 5.31%, down 248 basis points or31.84% from Jan. 3, 1995.   The yield on those maturing in 10 years or more also hit a new 52-weeklow, at 6.17%, down 196 basis points or 24.11% from Jan. 3, 1995.   Following are the electric stocks which hit new 52-week highs on Jan. 3and 4. The number of new highs reached this year--if more than one--is inparentheses, followed by the date and price of the latest new high,followed by that day's closing price, if different:   American Electric Power (two) on Jan. 3 ($41.375/$41.25); Baltimore Gas& Electric on Jan. 2 ($29); Boston Edison (two) on Jan. 3 ($29.75); CIPSCOon Jan. 3 ($39.375); CMS Energy (two) on Jan. 3 ($30.50/$31.25); CMS EnergyClass G on Jan. 3 ($19/$18.50);   Also, Central Vermont Public Service on Jan. 3 ($14.50/$14.375); CINergyon Jan. 3 ($31.25/$31.125); Con Edison on Jan. 2 ($32.50); DQE (two) onJan. 3 ($31.25/$31.125); DTE Energy (two) on Jan. 3 ($35.25/$35.125);Dominion Resources (two) on Jan. 3 ($42.375);   Also, Entergy on Jan. 2 ($29.50/$29.25); Florida Progress on Jan. 3($35.875); General Public Utilities on Jan. 3 ($34.25/$34.125); HoustonIndustries (two) on Jan. 3 ($24.875/$24.625); Illinova on Jan. 3 ($30.25);Ipalco on Jan. 3 ($38.875/$38.75); NIPSCO Industries on Jan. 3($38.75/$38.50);   Also, New England Electric System on Jan. 3 ($40.25); Northern StatesPower on Jan. 3 ($50.125); Ohio Edison (two) on Jan. 3 ($24.375/$24); PECOEnergy on Jan. 3 ($30.75); PacifiCorp on Jan. 3 ($21.875); Pinnacle WestCapital on Jan. 3 ($29.25);   Also, Potomac Electric Power (two) on Jan. 3 ($26.625); Public Serviceof Colorado on Jan. 3 ($36/$35.75); Public Service Enterprise Group on Jan.3 ($31.125); TECO Energy on Jan. 3 ($26/$25.875); Texas Utilities on Jan. 3($42/$41.875);   Also, Union Electric on Jan. 3 ($42.25/$42); and Western Resources (two)on Jan. 3 ($34.625/$34.50).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NIMO SEEKS FERC ENFORCEMENT ACTION AGAINST N.Y. PSC ON `QF' PAYMENTS   Niagara Mohawk Power wants the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission tobring an enforcement action against the New York Public Service Commissionto bar it from implementing a 1991 state law requiring utilities to maketax reimbursement payments to qualifying facilities.   NiMo told FERC the law has required it to pay a total of almost$18-million since 1991.   The state legislature directs the PSC to order utilities to reimburseQFs for natural gas import tax payments that the state requires QFs to payon fuel used to generate power that is sold to the utilities.   According to NiMo, the state law is preempted by the Public UtilityRegulatory Policies Act and FERC's PURPA rules. ``The PSC cannot both obeythe New York statute and heed its obligations under Sec. 210 of PURPA,''NiMo said (Docket No. EL96-26).   The legislature imposed a monthly ``privilege tax'' on certain gasimporters amounting to 4.25% of the price paid for gas imported into thestate for use or consumption there. For cogenerating QFs, the amount of gastaxed is that used in producing power for sale to utilities; the lawexempts gas used to produce power or steam for steam hosts.   Utilities may pass the payments through in fuel-cost adjustments.   NiMo itself paid about $7.2-million in 1994 and $4.8-million in 1995through Sept. 30. The company projected it will pay between $7.2-million in1996 and $13.5-million in the year 2006.   FERC's 1995 rulings in cases involving Connecticut Power & Light andSouthern California Edison ``leave no room for doubt that this New Yorkstatute is preempted'' because it requires utilities to pay avoided costrates to QFs, NiMo said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   YANKEE ROWE SETTLEMENT FEATURES COST SAVINGS BECAUSE OF BARNWELL REOPENING   Yankee Atomic Electric has filed with the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission an offer of settlement among parties in its decommissioning ratecase (Docket No. ER95-835).   The decommissioning collection schedule is premised on an assumeddecommissioning cost of $306.4-million in 1995 dollars and trust fundearnings assumptions specified in the package. The cost is lower thanproposed early last year because of unexpected availability of theBarnwell, S.C., waste disposal site.   The company, which is owned by and supplies 10 New England utilitieswith nuclear power from its 185-MW plant in Rowe, Mass., said adoption ofthe settlement would not set a precedent for any other plant or for anyfuture proceeding on Yankee.   Signing the settlement are the attorneys general of Massachusetts andRhode Island, the Rhode Island Division of Public Utilities & Carriers, andthe Town of Norwood, Mass.   Yankee is now decommissioning the plant. Last March, it submitted awholesale rate case to FERC based on an updated decommissioning cost studythat incorporated the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's approval of thedecommissioning plan, the Dept. of Energy's plans for accepting Yankee'sspent fuel for disposal, and updated assumptions on disposal of the plant'slow-level waste.   Yankee's March 31 filing was based on an estimated decommissioning costof $352.3-million and a determination that annual collections of$58.2-million through June 2000 would be needed to fund that amount. Theestimate assumed that Yankee would not be able to start certain majordismantlement activity until 2003, because a low-level waste disposalfacility was not available.   On July 1, however, South Carolina reopened the Barnwell facility towaste generators outside the Southeast Compact states. Yankee computed thenthat Barnwell's availability would allow the company to start sooner andcut the total cost to $303.2-million, with annual collections of$45.3-million.   The settlement details how the cost will be allocated. It also specifiesthat if Barnwell becomes unavailable, Yankee will notify FERC and willincrease its monthly collection to reflect a $50-million annual charge.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   HOUSE-SENATE TELECOM COMPROMISE SEEN PROTECTING UTILITY CONSUMERS   House and Senate conferees on telecommunications reform legislation haveagreed on language allowing registered utility holding companies to offertelecom services; sources say the compromise language gives electricityconsumers more protection than legislation approved last year by theSenate.   The Senate last summer approved telecom reform legislation that wouldhave carved out an exemption for utility telecom affiliates from SECregulation under the Public Utility Holding Company Act (EUW, 19 June '95,3). The only consumer protections in that bill were provisions allowingstate regulators to audit and examine the telecom operating company's booksand records.   The conferees' compromise retains the provisions giving states auditauthority and access to telecom affiliate books and records, but it alsowould require state approval of transfers of telecom assets out of anoperating company's rate base, according to sources familiar with thelanguage.   The compromise also includes another change that industry sources saidare favorable to utilities and consumers alike: The establishment of a newkind of entity, the exempt telecommunications company (ETC), which would beexempt from PUHCA regulation as long as its sole purpose is to providetelecom services.   ``The idea follows the Energy Policy Act and the creation of the exemptwholesale generator,'' an attorney familiar with the compromise said. ``TheETC has to be a single-purpose subsidiary. If it is single purpose, then itqualifies. Once it qualifies and it is an ETC, the asset transfer provisionkicks in, and the state must approve all asset transfers.''   The compromise also would require that the Securities & ExchangeCommission be notified of any issuance of securities related to ETCs. If onthe basis of that report, the SEC wants more information, the ETC mustprovide it.   The legislation also prohibits the use of utility assets as collateralfor ETC investments, and includes a provision that gives states theauthority to approve contracts among operating companies, utility holdingcompanies and ETCs.   ``This is a significant additional protection for consumers over andabove what the Senate bill contained,'' the attorney said.   The compromise only narrowly addresses the so-called ``Ohio Power''issue, which refers to a federal court ruling that the Federal EnergyRegulatory Commission cannot review transactions between holding companyaffiliates already approved by the SEC.   ``The compromise establishes no SEC preemption under `Ohio Power' forcontracts between affiliates in the area of telecommunications,'' theattorney said. Instead, it stresses that the Federal CommunicationsCommission and the states have jurisdiction.   The language also gives exempt utility holding companies the ability tooffer telecom services ``without limitation,'' according to the attorney.   Sources said the breakthrough came despite opposition by Rep. JohnDingell (D-Mich.), ranking minority member of the House Commerce Committeeand an ardent champion of PUHCA.   One source said Dingell's opposition to giving PUHCA exemptions remainsstrong, but that a determined effort by Sen. Trent Lott (R-Miss.) to giveregistereds the ability to offer telecom carried the day.   ``This compromise has more to do with how much Trent Lott wanted it thanwith anything else,'' this source said.   Despite this compromise, the telecom legislation is not likely to movequickly, sources agreed. Significant issues involving the ownership ofmultiple news media outlets, various broadcast issues and other problemsremain to be resolved before the legislation returns to the House andSenate for approval.   Meanwhile, utility industry officials are continuing their lobbyingefforts to persuade House conferees to reject a Senate proposal backed bythe cable television industry that utility officials say could hike theirshare of the costs of using and maintaining their poles by 50%.   The Senate proposal is the latest wrinkle in the three-year fightbetween cable companies and utilities over how to divide the cost ofattachments to utility poles.   While this issue may appear small compared with the multi-billion-dollarmarket at stake in the telecom industry restructuring debate, utilityofficials are taking it very seriously. They say utilities and theircustomers would see millions of dollars in increased pole maintenance costsif the Senate proposal becomes law.   Cable companies currently pay for their pole attachments at a subsidizedrate set by regulators under legislation approved years ago by Congresswhen cable was a fledgling industry.   But now that cable is everywhere, and that industry is ready to slug itout with telephone companies for telecom customers, utilities say it istime for them to pay a market rate, or at least a fair share, for theirpole attachments.   Under legislation approved by the House, telecom providers would sharethe fully allocated costs of their attachments, including repair andallocation costs. Cable companies that offer only television service wouldcontinue to pay at the current incremental rates, but if they offer telecomservices they would have to pay fully allocated costs.   The Senate-passed telecom reform bill includes a complicated formula forallocating pole attachment costs that would raise cable costs slightly, andraise utilities' costs by about 38%.   Under a proposal offered as a compromise by Senate conferees last month,cable companies actually would pay less than under the Senate-passed bill,while utilities would see their costs increase by 50%, according to anindustry analysis.   If a utility company had 500,000 poles used by cable and telcos it wouldlose $5.75-million per year under the Senate provision, and $8-millionannually under the new Senate proposal.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAINCANCER   A new Electric Power Research Institute analysis of previous studies ofpossible health risks associated with electromagnetic fields concludes thatelectrical workers are about 10% to 20% more likely to develop brain cancerthan other workers.   But because no clear relationship can be found between the amount ofexposure to EMF and the level of risk, researchers cannot conclude thatEMFs cause brain cancer, the analysis said.   EPRI researcher Leeka Kheifets and University of California scientistsAbdelmonem Afifi, Patricia Buffler and Zhong Zhang performed a``meta-analysis'' of 29 studies of EMF and brain cancer conducted from 1983to 1994 in 12 countries. A meta-analysis is an examination of multiplestudies to determine what common conclusions can be drawn.   About a third of the studies were conducted in the U.S., another thirdin Scandinavia, and the remainder in Canada, Australia, Great Britain,Germany and other countries. The earliest study was published in 1983,while the largest number of studies, six, appeared in 1991.   About half of the studies included follow-up before 1984 and werepublished before 1990. Study designs used by the investigators includedproportional mortality, case-control analysis of death certificate data,case control, and cohort studies.   The EPRI study, published in the December issue of the Journal ofOccupational and Environmental Medicine, said most of the studies indicatedonly a small elevation in risk, but noted ``considerable heterogeneityamong the results.''   The U.S. and other studies showed relative risk increases of 40% orhigher compared to those with no occupational exposures to EMFs. TheScandinavian studies, almost all of which were cohort studies based onincident risk, showed the lowest relative risks for brain cancer. Thereasons for the lower relative risk reported in the Scandinavian studies``are not exactly clear,'' the EPRI study said.   To obtain the estimate of an increased risk of 10% to 20% for electricalworkers, the EPRI study adjusted each of the 29 studies' individualfindings according to a formula based on 15 criteria, including quality ofinformation, adequacy of design, possible biases and specificity of data.   The research team said the body of evidence examined in the study allowsthree possible interpretations: no association exists between occupationalexposure to EMF and the risk of cancer; a small effect exists, andinconsistencies among studies reflects biases in the studies; the true EMFexposure effect is large, but affects only a small number of individualswho are somehow ``preconditioned.''   ``We believe that this meta-analysis provides some evidence against thehypothesis of no association between occupational exposure to EMF and therisk of cancer, provides some evidence to support the hypothesis of a smallpervasive effect, and provides no clues that could help to identify acircumstance or condition that would correspond to the third hypothesis,''the researchers concluded.   ``However, because of the lack of adequate exposure information and aclear dose-response pattern, in is not possible to conclude that EMF iscausally associated with the observed excess of brain cancer in workersemployed in electrical occupations.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   TROUBLED OKLAHOMA CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS-ACTION SUIT   Verdigris Valley Electric Cooperative, its economic developmentsubsidiary and four current and former trustees have formally deniedallegations of gross negligence, breach of fiduciary duty and violation ofstate and federal laws or regulations in connection with what has beencalled the largest economic development loss ever sustained by adistribution cooperative.   The allegations were raised in a class-action lawsuit filed in Octoberby Cal McKinney, a member and harsh critic of the Collinsville, Okla.-basedco-op, which in October 1993 announced a $5.68-million write-off from aneconomic development loan to Precision Tubulars, a metalworking firm whichwent bankrupt without ever reaching full production (In the District Courtof Tulsa County, Case No. CJ-95-04552) (EUW, 23 Oct '95, 11).   McKinney's suit was designed to make co-op members financially whole.   In his answer on behalf of the co-op, Tulsa attorney Stephen Riley alsoasserted that losses from the Precision deal were ``due to circumstancesbeyond [defendants'] control.'' He also asserted that an Oklahoma lawrequiring member approval before a co-op can encumber or otherwise disposeof a ``substantial'' portion of its assets does not apply in this case.   The co-op admits loaning Precision $6.79-million, but denies that thisconstituted a substantial portion of its assets. VVEC's current annualreport lists total assets of $57-million.   Riley also contends that McKinney lacks standing to represent otherco-op members, and contends that the suit is barred by the two-year statuteof limitations. He said McKinney knew or should have known of the losses toVVEC members before it was officially announced at the October 1993 annualmeeting because of news accounts of Precision's problems starting in 1991.   Riley said that former general manager Doyle Fulton and five current andformer trustees also named as defendants are not covered by the answerbecause they have not yet been officially served with copies of thelawsuit. An amended answer will be filed once they are served, he said.   Riley's answer lists nine grounds on which he contends the suit shouldbe dismissed, but also indicated that the defendants acknowledge a need forfurther discovery and investigation.   No procedural schedule has been set for the case, but the discoveryprocess is expected to be extremely lengthy and complex. This litigationmarks the first time when all aspects of the Precision deal and VVEC'sinvolvement in it has been subject to court review. A Washington Countycivil case involving much narrower issues generated one of the largestcourt files in that county's history.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FERC ALJ RULING ON SYNFUELS PROJECT COULD HIT BASIN ELECTRIC CO-OP HARD   The Great Plains Synfuels Plant near Beulah, N.D., could be forced toshut down and Basin Electric Power Cooperative could suffer negativefinancial, rate, and capacity consequences as a result if a preliminaryFederal Energy Regulatory Commission ruling issued Dec. 29 is ultimatelyaffirmed.   According to Basin Electric, settlement agreements stemming from thelong and troubled history of the Great Plains plant were struck in April1994 with the Dakota Gasification Company (DGC), a non-regulated subsidiaryof the cooperative, and certain pipeline companies. The agreementsstipulate that synthetic gas from Great Plains is to be purchased by thepipelines at defined prices above the market price over a seven-yearperiod.   However, in FERC proceedings on the prudence of these accords, gasconsumer groups challenged these provisions and on Dec. 29 a FERCadministrative law judge ruled that the stipulated gas pricing and purchaseprovisions were invalid. He recommended setting a new price equal to theGulf Coast index plus 5%.   Dakota Gasification Co.'s current cost of producing synthetic gas is$2.60/dekatherm. According to DGC vice president Kent Janssen, the newprice set by the ALJ ``comes nowhere near covering costs.''   ``For the judge to suggest DGC can survive with that price isludicrous,'' Janssen declared.   A shutdown of Great Plains would cost Basin Electric more than$25-million annually in lost revenue, a utility spokesman said. Inaddition, it could force the utility to raise the electric rates of its 126member co-ops by an estimated 10% and would idle about 100 MW of the900-MW, two-unit Antelope power station. ``We would not look at this as agreat bonanza,'' the spokesman said.   Based on these concerns, DGC said it will vigorously challenge the ALJ'sruling. All parties have 30 days from Dec. 29 to file exceptions with FERC.Janssen said DGC plans to file within that period.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   CANADA'S ALBERTA LAUNCHES SWEEPING RESTRUCTURING OF WHOLESALE MARKET   The province of Alberta, Canada, launched a sweeping restructuring ofthe wholesale power industry on Jan. 1 that is the first to go intooperation in North America, with transmission separated from generation.   So far, only wholesale transactions are involved, although a study willbe conducted soon on whether changes are needed that would usher in retailwheeling as well.   ``The lights are on, the new system is working properly,'' said LarryCharach, senior director of electric policy for the Alberta Dept. ofEnergy, which has overseen the restructuring. Some pool workers have beenworking up to 40 hours straight to get the new system running.   ``We expect in the long term, rates will be lower because we arebringing in competitive forces,'' said Charach. ``Without therestructuring, rates could have risen 20% within a few years.'' Pool rateson Jan. 3 were about (U.S.) $7/MWh for on-peak power and about $4/MWh foroff-peak power.   The new Power Pool of Alberta will be a clearing house for all powersold within the province and for deals utilities strike with otherutilities, independent producers or power marketers from outside theprovince in Canada or the United States.   The pool functions as a spot market for all buying and selling of powerat hourly prices established by suppliers and purchasers bidding into thepool.   Incorporated into the pool were all existing generating units of theprovince's three major utilities--TransAlta Utilities, Alberta Power andEdmonton Power. The generation will be allocated to existing customers,based on unamortized original or historic costs.   The customers include generating utilities and distribution utilitiessuch as the cities of Calgary, Lethbridge and Red Deer. The three citieshave just awarded ZE PowerGroup of Richmond, British Columbia, a contractto manage their power marketing and negotiate contracts with individualsuppliers, said Zak El-Ramly, ZE PowerGroup president. The cities can buyseparately or as a group, with a total of more than 1,100 MW of buyingpower.   Gerry Roberts, Calgary's manager of sales and services, said each cityis entitled to an allotment from the pool. Calgary previously bought all ofits power from TransAlta Utilities, which is based in Calgary.   TransAlta, Edmonton Power, Alberta Power and the city of Calgary haveformed Grid Co. of Alberta Inc. (Gridco), which pools the operation oftheir transmission into a single system. The utilities will retainownership of their wires. Transmission costs will be averaged so that therate will be the same province-wide.   Open access would be provided on a non-discriminatory basis to all. Thisincludes independent power producers, which are expected to be the onesbuilding any new power plants needed in Alberta in the future.   Since 1982, under the Alberta Electric Energy Marketing Act, utilitieswithin the province had averaged generation and transmission costs becausewithout the deal, rates of some utilities would have been dramaticallyhigher.   But driving the need for change were complaints from TransAlta that itwas subsidizing ratepayers of other utilities. Industrial customers alsowere claiming they were paying too much for power.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ELCON ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITION WITH STRANDED-COST RECOVERY FORMULA   The Electricity Consumers Resource Council last week issued a ``Road Mapfor the Transition'' designed to respond to criticisms that its ``Blueprintfor Customer Choice'' lacked specifics--particularly in the area ofstranded investment.   The Edison Electric Institute quickly denounced the so-called road mapas ``full of dead ends and some pretty deep potholes.'' EEI criticized theproposal as a one-size-fits-all imposition of a federal structure on thecountry's electric system that will benefit ELCON's members ``at theexpense of everyone else.''   Nevertheless, with its road map to retail competition ELCON once againhas seized the initiative in the national debate over the future structureof the electric industry. It offers what is seen as the first comprehensiverestructuring proposal--but probably not the last.   When ELCON released its blueprint in September, it purposely glossedover the stranded-cost issue. Shortly thereafter, Rep. Dan Schaefer(R-Colo.) and William Massey of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionchallenged the group to come forward with specific proposals addressingstranded-cost recovery.   ELCON's answer to those challenges is a complicated five-step processfeaturing a formula for dividing up responsibility for unmitigable strandedinvestment. The formula assigns a ``responsibility factor'' to utilities,which would be determined by state regulators according to how efficientlya utility responded to regulatory mandates and whether the company opposedthe mandates in the first place.   A utility would be required to absorb at least 50% of its unmitigablestranded costs, but in practice it probably would have to bear a greatershare. In a nutshell, the formula starts by assigning stranded costsequally between ratepayers and shareholders, with the responsibility factordeciding how much of the ratepayers' 50% share the utility would berequired to absorb in addition to its 50% share.   But the formula only would be applied after state regulators conductwhat ELCON is billing as ``the last great rate case'' to determine whatsunk costs are not mitigable. In the alternative, the utility could opt tosell its generation assets as a means of determining stranded costs.   Stranded-cost recovery mechanisms would be subject to negotiation withindividual customers and classes of customers. Regulators would deciderecovery in the absence of a negotiated settlement. The utility would haveno more than five years to recover its stranded costs.   ELCON executive director John Anderson called the road map'sstranded-cost provisions a ``statesmanlike'' effort to end the impassebetween ELCON and EEI over stranded-cost recovery. Historically, ELCON hasrejected any level of stranded-cost recovery in response to EEI's positionthat utilities are entitled to 100% recovery. With its proposal on thetable, the issue of stranded-cost recovery is now open to negotiation,Anderson suggested.   But EEI president Thomas Kuhn called ELCON's proposal on stranded costsa nonstarter. The formula, designed to ensure little if any stranded-costrecovery, does not represent any change in ELCON's position, he said.   ``I don't see that there's anything new in the ELCON proposal,'' Kuhnsaid in an appearance before the Washington International Energy Group.``We don't see a bargaining chip here at all.''   Kuhn cited ``leading economists,'' FERC and most states as endorsingEEI's position that utilities are entitled to 100% recovery. He predictedthat ELCON's complicated proposal will be rejected by the states.   ELCON's road map proposes a three-year transition to retail competitionfeaturing a ``customer election period'' based on the telephone industryexperience. No later than the mid-point of the three-year transitionperiod, state regulators would feature a ``Day One'' designating thebeginning of the customer election period. As of that date, every customerwould have the right to choose an electric service provider. Customerswould be notified at least six months prior to ``Day One'' of their rightto switch from their utility provider.   At the end of the transition, all generation assets will have beenremoved from rate base. The generation company may continue to sell theasset's power to its affiliated--or previously affiliated--distributioncompany beyond the transition period under terms of a transition contractapproved by the state.   Transition contracts also would provide for ancillary and backupservices to qualifying facilities under the Public Utility RegulatoryPolicies Act. The utility PURPA Reform Group criticized this aspect of theproposal as setting the stage for ``the last great PURPA land rush.'' Thegroup called it inconsistent to deny utilities stranded costs whilecommitting them indefinitely to the purchase of QF power.   But ELCON's Anderson rejected utility complaints about uneconomic QFcontracts as ``a thing of the past.'' No utility is entering into high-costcontracts with PURPA facilities today, he said. The importance of PURPA'sSection 210 is not its mandatory purchase provision, but the section'srequirements that utilities provide backup and ancillary services to QFs.   As a check against market power, ELCON's road map calls for operationalunbundling of vertically integrated utilities using the Dept. of Justice'smethodology. While free market entry is an important check, it is notsufficient in and of itself, the group said. Transmission assets would beturned over to an independent system operator and controls would be placedon interaffiliate pricing of transmission services and interaffiliatedistribution transactions.   EEI's Kuhn dismissed ELCON's ``specious'' concerns about utility marketpower and industry concentration. The electric utility industry is a greatdeal less concentrated than the telephone industry or most ELCON members,Kuhn asserted.   ELCON further proposed that, during the first two years of thetransition, owners of FERC-regulated transmission facilities would berequired to file regional transmission group proposals. Siting of newinterstate transmission systems would become FERC's responsibility. ELCONalso proposed establishment of unregulated Private Delivery Systems, orPDSs, such as a line linking two industrial facilities.   If a new transmission line is built privately and without the exerciseof eminent domain, then the line would be unregulated. Owners of existingtransmission systems could petition FERC for a license to opt out from rateregulation if the owner can show it does not exercise market power and theline was not sited through the power of eminent domain. The unregulatedprivately owned transmission facilities would provide competitive pressureson monopoly transmission providers, ELCON suggested.   Independent System operator franchises would be granted for finiteperiods in order to allow others the opportunity to competitively bid forthe right to serve the franchise, ELCON proposed.   Local distribution services would be unbundled with traditionaldistribution functions split between the ``wires'' business and theelectric services merchant business under the proposal.   ELCON also proposes establishment of joint federal-state boards to makerecommendations for state legislative actions to ensure universal service.   The road map places much of the responsibility for the outcome of thetransition with state regulators, said ELCON's Anderson. The proposal isintended to put to rest concerns of state regulators that ELCON advocates``federalizing the system,'' he said: ``The states are going to have awhole lot to do'' if the road map is implemented.   ELCON's road map is ``pretty bold,'' but on first reading is notspecific enough to rebut complaints that the industry group seeks tofederalize electricity policy, said Charles Gray, assistant general counselfor the National Assn. of Regulatory Utility Commissioners.   EEI attacked the road map as ``shifting significant authority away fromthe states to the federal government.'' EEI's Kuhn called for allowingindividual states to continue experimenting while FERC irons out itsrulemaking on wholesale open access.   ``A lot more questions need to be answered,'' said NARUC's Gray. ``Butit's a discussion draft and you have to give them credit for that.''   NARUC shipped the proposal out to its membership last week, Gray said,citing a high degree of interest in it among state regulators. ``How yousort out the transition is of high interest to NARUC,'' Gray said.   The proposal also is the subject of strong interest on Capitol Hill.ELCON's Anderson is a featured speaker at a conference in Colorado thisweek, on an agenda that features Rep. Dan Schaefer (R-Colo.), chairman ofthe House energy and power subcommittee, who is spearheading legislation topromote retail competition and the end of utility monopoly regulation.   Anderson downplayed the weight ELCON's proposal will carry with Schaeferas he drafts his legislative proposal. ``I'm not naive enough to think weare going to write the bill,'' Anderson said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FEDERAL BUDGET IMPASSE PROMPTS FERC TO POSTPONE DATE FOR COMMENTS ON EIS   The showdown between Congress and the administration over the federalbudget has prompted the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to postponethe Jan. 8 deadline for comments on its draft environmental impactstatement on the air pollution consequences of the open-access transmissionrulemaking.   The postponement is in response to requests from officials at theEnvironmental Protection Agency and other federal agencies shut down by thebudget impasse, preventing those agencies from preparing comments.   FERC said it will publish a future notice establishing a new deadline.It remains to be seen whether the delay in the EIS process will force asimilar delay by FERC in finalizing the open-access rulemaking, proposedMarch 29, 1995. FERC had hoped to issue the final rule this spring.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   N.Y. PSC LAW JUDGE RECOMMENDS FORMING AN ISO FOR TRANSITION TO RETAILACCESS   New York should establish an independent system operator to formalizewholesale competition and ensure a smooth transition to retail access, astate administrative law judge has recommended.   The judge's recommendation--issued as part of the state's CompetitiveOpportunities proceeding--also calls for separating transmission anddistribution from generation and for recovering stranded costs with anaccess charge imposed by a distribution company.   The recommended decision was filed Dec. 22 by the state's Department ofPublic Service administrative law judge Judith Lee and Ronald Liberty,deputy director for the Energy and Water Division. It is subject to reviewby the state's Public Service Commission, which will ultimately accept,modify or reject it. The proceeding itself, which solicited proposals torestructure the state's electric utility market, is aimed at lowering NewYork's high electric rates.   Key parts of the more than 200-page review:   -- Strandable costs ``may be made unrecoverable by the transition fromregulation to a competitive market for electricity.'' These costs, thedecision states, could be recovered by a separate mechanism outside themarket, such as a non-bypassable access charge or wires charge imposed by adistribution company;   -- Transmission and distribution should be separate from generation, Leesuggests, ``in order to limit the exercise of market power,'' and T&Dcompanies will need to serve all would-be buyers in the short term.   Lee sees as ``critical'' the reliability of the bulk power system andsuggests that it should not be sacrificed in any way in order to achievethe potential price reduction that may be associated with a system ofretail access. Therefore, ``effective competition at the wholesale levelshould be established first, with an eye toward adding retail access asrapidly as possible once a market is established and reliability isensured.''   No timetable for the ``as rapidly as possible'' transition to retailaccess has been established, a PSC spokesperson told Electric UtilityWeek.   Lee's recommendation was a ``tremendous disappointment'' to New Yorkindustrials ``and to any advocate of full and open retail competition,''said Barbara Brenner, counsel to Multiple Interveners, the industrial usersgroup. ``It delays, without schedule, retail competition and, in fact,appears to delay even the implementation of wholesale competition for twoyears.''   Utilities, on the other hand, liked the proposal. Their trade group, theEnergy Assn. of New York State, applauded the law judge's recommendation as``a thoughtful approach to what is clearly an incredibly complex series ofissues.''   ``Wholesale competition to the extent that the Energy Association hasbeen talking about is far more significant than what might exist today inNew York--and in most other places,'' said Howard Shapiro, theassociation's president.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NYMEX PRESIDENT PREDICTS REGULATORY ACTION SOON, MARCH LAUNCH OF FUTURES   Patrick Thompson, president of the New York Mercantile Exchange, lastweek predicted the Commodity Futures Trading Commission will act on theexchange's two proposed electricity futures contracts before the end of themonth, which could allow trading to begin by the end of March or early inthe second quarter of this year.   NYMEX filed supplemental information on its proposed futures contractswith the CFTC late last month. The material, responding to commissioninquiries concerning the deliverability of the commodity and potentialregulation of electricity futures by the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission, was filed under a claim of confidentiality and was not madepublicly available.   The confidential filing cleared the way for CFTC staff to beginpreparing a memorandum for consideration by the commission. The foursitting commissioners likely will begin considering whether to approve thecontracts later this month, according to a CFTC source.   Assuming the supplemental filing from NYMEX answers all the questionsraised by the CFTC staff, the memorandum now being drafted could be sent tothe commission within two weeks, the CFTC source said.   ``I'm really confident now that the CFTC has had all of its questionsanswered--both technical and regulatory,'' NYMEX's Thompson said in atelephone interview last week. ``I expect the approval process to concludevery quickly.''   NYMEX is expected to launch both contracts at the same time. The twocontracts are virtually identical, except for the physical delivery pointsat the Palo Verde nuclear station switchyard and the California/Oregonborder intertie. The exchange plans to let the markets decide whether oneor both futures contracts will be sustained in the long term.   With the road seemingly clear for launch of the western contracts, NYMEXis beginning to focus on developing an eastern futures contract.   NYMEX's advisory group is considering at least three systems for apotential delivery point for a futures contract in the East, according tosources. Those systems are the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-MarylandInterconnection, the Tennessee Valley Authority and American ElectricPower. The Southern Company's system is also seen as a possible deliverypoint, sources said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   UTILITIES SEE GM'S ELECTRIC VEHICLE PLAN INTRODUCING `EXCITING NEW ERA'   General Motors' announcement last week that it will market a newelectric passenger car and an electric pickup truck this fall ``shows thatelectric vehicles are ready to play a significant role'' in reducingpollution, the Edison Electric Institute declared. EEI has been pushing forEV development for several years, largely against automakers' resistance.   The announcement ``marks the beginning of an exciting new era intransportation,'' according to EEI. Not only do utilities want EVs fortheir emission-reduction power, which could ease pressure to get morereductions from power plants, but they want them for their addition tooff-peak loads.   GM's plan--to sell the vehicles in Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix, andTucson--was made public at the Los Angeles Auto Show. It came in the wakeof California Air Resources Board action easing its EV sales requirement inthe state. Some sources said the automaker's plan was a quid pro quo forthe CARB decision.   ``We have worked with General Motors cooperatively over many years inclean, energy-efficient transportation technology,'' said EEI vicepresident Tom Morron, ``and we look forward to helping them introduce thesecars in any way we can. Even now, for example, more than 80 electricutilities have pledged to purchase electric fleet vehicles and tonight,many of those fleet managers are preparing to contact local dealers aroundthe country for information on the electric S-series pickup--a real truck,from a real truck maker.''   Besides selling a car, GM also said it will market an electric pickuptruck, a converted Chevrolet S-10, nationwide in 1997 for use in commercialfleets. The company has not set production volumes for either vehicle, aspokesman said, but will ``let the market decide'' how many to build.   An advancement of GM's Impact prototype, the two-seat EV1 will feature aprice tag in the mid-$30,000 range. The EV1's lead acid batteries willprovide a 70- to 90-mile driving range, depending on weather and drivinghabits, the spokesman said.   The car will be marketed through Saturn dealerships in Los Angeles, SanDiego, Phoenix and Tucson.   In a separate announcement, Southern California Edison said it openedits first electric charging station Wednesday at a retail outlet--aWal-Mart store in the City of Industry--and plans to open more inpartnership with Wal-Mart. SoCal Ed paid for the charging ports whileWal-Mart paid to have the electrical circuitry installed and it also willpay the electricity costs.   SoCal Ed hopes to install between 50 and 100 charging stations aroundLos Angeles in the next year to test how they will be used. The utility andthe Los Angeles Dept. of Water and Power already have 75 charging stationsat utility headquarters and branches.   According to GM's announcement, the EV1 is equipped with dual airbags,anti-lock brakes, a CD player and cruise control. ``It is the world's mostaerodynamic production vehicle and it carries 23 new patents in a varietyof new technologies,'' the company said.   Both vehicles will use the Delco Electronics Magne-Charge inductivecharging system, according to GM, which said it has already been tested andreceived well by more than 500 people in GM's PrEView Drive EV test driveprogram.   One reason the company is introducing the vehicles in SouthernCalifornia and Arizona markets, an official said, is that ``they afford thetopographical and climatic conditions found to be most favorable toelectric vehicle operation.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   MOODY'S SEES HIGH PRICES, STRANDED ASSETS HURTING NORTHEAST ELECTRICS   High prices and stranded-cost exposure make electric utilities in theNortheast particularly vulnerable to competition, Moody's Investors Servicesaid in a report released at the end of December.   ``High break-even prices and the stranded-cost exposure of the majorityof utilities in the Northeast competitive arena poorly position theseutilities to respond in a fully competitive environment.   ``Combined with recent initiatives in the region to quicken the pace ofderegulation, Moody's expects downgrades to continue, especially in theface of negative transition cost decisions and/or definitive moves to allowopen access,'' said analysts Julia Doetsch, Paul Fremont, Susan Abbot, andDouglas Watson, in the report ``Northeast Break-Even Analysis.''   Moody's defined the ``Northeast'' as the investor-owned systems withintwo transmission interconnects of Con Edison, plus the MassachusettsMunicipal Wholesale Electric, New York Power Authority, Hydro Quebec, andNew Brunswick Power. It includes all of the New England and New York powerpools, plus Atlantic Electric, Delmarva Power, General Public Utilities,Pennsylvania Power & Light, and Public Service Electric & Gas in thePennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland Interconnection (PJM).   High prices in the area reflect expensive, recently-completed nuclearplants, and purchased-power pacts mandated by regulators, Moody's said,adding that these costs are not likely to be fully recoverable in rates inan ``open, price competitive market'' even though ``all principlesarticulated to date [by state and federal regulators] include languagesupportive of full recovery of prudent, verifiable costs arising from pastregulatory decisions.   ``However comforting for the utilities this is meant to be, the sheermagnitude of potential stranded investments in the region may dampenregulatory enthusiasm--especially where rate increases would be required torecover such transition costs. If the recovery of lost revenues associatedwith authorizing rate discounting is any guide to underlying state bias forcost sharing with regard to retail wheeling, then unbridled optimism forfull cost recovery remains generally unwarranted. Pennsylvania, offering100% recovery for such revenue erosion, may be the exception,'' Moody'scontinued.   ``Many of these utilities--and in turn their equity holders--will beforced to bear some of the financial pain associated with the transition.This in turn diminishes the equity cushion available to debtholders,resulting in negative rating pressure.''   Moody's estimated total stranded-cost exposure in the region at$43-billion, about 25% of the U.S. total and 45% more than the samecompanies' total combined equity.   The average Moody's senior secured debt rating for Northeasternutilities is now ``Baa1,'' below the U.S. average of ``A3,'' though onlythree--Niagara Mohawk Power, PP&L, and Northeast Utilities unit PublicService of New Hampshire--were downgraded in 1995.   Moody's presented ``break even'' prices--defined as ``the price it mustcharge for each unit of capacity to cover fixed charges after applying allprofits or margins from energy sales''--in three ways: for installedgeneration, for installed generation plus purchased power, and for thosetwo plus deferred assets.   With all three included, Long Island Lighting ranks first at $317/kW,with $7,661,000,000 in stranded costs, mostly for the ``regulatory asset''representing future cost recovery of the abandoned Shoreham nuclear plant.Even based only on its own generation, Lilco's break-even price is $105/kW,first in the group.   Ranking first in stranded costs as a percentage of equity is CentralMaine Power, at 456%. Though CMP's break-even price based on its owngeneration is only $29/kW, adding purchased power boosts that to $196/kW,and deferred assets raises it to $231/kW.   In the best shape are NYPA, with a break-even price of $6/kW includingall costs, and Hydro Quebec, at a negative $18/kW. They have no strandedcosts, Moody's noted.   Among the investor-owned companies, the lowest break-even priceincluding all costs is Central Hudson Gas & Electric, at $49/kW. It alsohas the lowest stranded costs as a percentage of equity, at 10%.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   UTILITIES SEEK TO EXPAND `TWO-COUNTY RULE' ALLOWING TAX-EXEMPT FINANCING   In an interesting chapter in the ongoing brawl between investor-ownedand municipal utilities, a group of IOUs that now are able to issuetax-exempt bonds--just as municipals do--are trying to persuade Congress tolet them expand their service territories without having to call in theirbonds immediately, as the law now requires.   The budget reconciliation bill approved by Congress, but vetoed byPresident Clinton, would make changes in the so-called ``two-county'' rule,an obscure wrinkle in the tax code that allows a handful of investor-ownedelectric and gas utilities to issue tax-exempt bonds if they meet certainqualifications.   As the law now stands, utilities that qualify as ``local furnishers'' ofservice in an area consisting either of two contiguous counties or onecounty and one city may issue tax-exempt bonds the way municipals do. Only15 gas and electric IOUs currently qualify.   One of these, Delmarva Power & Light, wants to expand its gasdistribution beyond the two-county limit, but does not want to call in itsbonds immediately, as the law now requires, and seek higher cost capitalelsewhere. So, Sen. William Roth (R-Del.), chairman of the FinanceCommittee, inserted an amendment to the tax code that would give two-countyutilities that want to expand six months to call in their bonds.   But Roth, who wants the federal budget balanced, added another line thatwill prohibit any other IOU from becoming a two-county utility.   Committee staff estimated that provision would save the government$22-million annually.   The Roth language was included in the budget bill that cleared Congressand was vetoed by Clinton. When San Diego Gas & Electric, ConsolidatedEdison, Duquesne Light, and the other utilities that enjoy two-countystatus for a portion of their systems heard about Roth's language, theybegan lobbying for a provision of their own.   While the situation remains fluid, sources on Capitol Hill and officialsfrom investor-owned and municipal utility groups confirmed that SDG&E andCon Ed are pushing for a new amendment that would allow them to expandtheir territories and not have to call the bonds in until the full term ofthe bonds expires.   Municipals are outraged by the idea. ``We oppose this on the groundsthat it is bad public policy,'' one municipal industry lobbyist toldElectric Utility Week. ``Private entities should not benefit from publicfunds. We get these bonds because we are public entities with specialobligations to the public that IOUs don't face.''   The lobbyist said it is ``frustrating'' when IOU officials argue beforecongressional panels with oversight on energy issues that municipals'ability to issue tax-exempt bonds is anticompetitive. Some of the sameofficials, the lobbyist said, want to expand the two-county rule to give ahandful of IOUs ``a better deal than they have now.''   The SDG&E/Con Ed lobbying effort has raised eyebrows among otherindustry competitors. Tony Smith, tax director and assistant comptrollerfor Southern California Edison, said his company thinks the originalamendment to give companies that want to expand an extra six months to callin their bonds ``would not be unreasonable.''   He added, however, that SoCal Ed wants a level playing field for allcompetitors. ``In general terms, while subsidies have made sense in thepast, we don't think they make sense as we go forward into greatercompetition,'' Smith said.   ``One business entity should not be receiving subsidies to the exclusionof others. It makes sense that all business entities be treated the sameand taxed under the same rules. That opinion would apply to municipals aswell as to investor-owned companies.''   SDG&E, which did not return telephone inquiries about its lobbyingeffort, had $786-million in outstanding tax-exempt bonds at the end of1994, according to Morgan Stanley. Con Ed had $1.635-billion in outstandingbonds in the same year.   Ron Clements, the Edison Electric Institute's director of governmentalaffairs specializing in tax and financial issues, said the national IOUassociation has no position on the provision or efforts to amend it.   ``From a conceptual viewpoint, tax-exempt debt from a two-countyperspective has a very limited purpose,'' Clements said. ``Power has to beproduced and distributed within that two-county area. It's a limited fixaimed at a limited number of companies.''   Clements and others interviewed agreed that the efforts of the otherutilities to expand the Delmarva provision are likely to be dropped bySenate staff because they are too controversial.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WESTERN RESOURCES ACQUIRES A LARGE ADT STAKE; HOPES FOR JOINT MARKETING   Western Resources has announced an agreement to acquire 15.4-millionshares, or 11.7%, of ADT Limited stock held by Laidlaw Inc., plus an optionto acquire 15.4-million additional shares.   The transaction, valued at $215-million, is expected to close early thisyear, subject to necessary approvals, and further expands Western'sinvestment in the security field (EUW, 23 Oct '95, 4). ADT is the nation'slargest provider of monitored security services, and the transaction willmake Western one of ADT's largest shareholders.   John Hayes, Jr., Western chairman, president and CEO, said the companyplans to propose to ADT the possibilities of jointly marketing WesternResources' Westar brand energy products and services through ADT's morethan 200 sales offices in North America, the United Kingdom and Europe.Westar offers back-up power systems, appliance repair options and acomprehensive array of environmental and energy management programs.   Hayes described the ADT stock acquisition as part of Western's growthstrategy, under which the company invests in businesses with attractivenatural revenue growth, which complement existing energy business lines andwhich over time could provide a chance for Western to work with others toprovide a branded identity for marketing additional products and services.   In December, Western acquired Mobilfone Security, and in November itacquired the commercial and residential security service business ofCommunications & Signaling Inc., but both those firms have operationslimited to Western's home state of Kansas.   ADT operates in 44 states with more than one million security servicecustomers. It reported operating revenues of $1.5-billion for the 12 monthsending Sept. 30, 1995.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   STATE OFFICIALS SEEK NEW SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS IN HYDRO RELICENSING PLAN   A national organization of state environmental officials said itsupports key elements of a proposal by the National Hydropower Assn. torevamp the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's hydro relicensingprocedures, but said the NHA plan needs ``more explicit accommodations forsettlement provisions.''   The Environmental Council of the States (ECOS), a group of environmentalofficials from 50 of the U.S. states and territories, praised most featuresof the NHA proposal, which was filed with FERC last summer (EUW, 17 July'95, 13). The commission in October launched a rulemaking on the issue(Docket No. RM-16), specifically asking for comment on NHA's proposal (EUW,6 Nov '95, 2) and whether a formal negotiated rulemaking would be a goodapproach.   NHA recently told FERC a negotiated rulemaking would give the bestchance for timely reform of the commission's relicensing procedures.   ECOS said it likes the NHA proposal's emphasis on reducing the overalltime for reviewing FERC license applications, eliminating redundantreports, and involving all stakeholders at the earliest time possible inthe environmental review process.   FERC should, however, include provisions to assist state efforts tosettle disputes among stakeholders, ECOS advised, ``beyond theencouragement given in the NHA proposal.'' The group said many of itsconcerns likely could be resolved by administrative reforms and would notnecessarily require more rulemaking.   ``Specifically, there should be provisions to ensure that formalregulatory positions from involved agencies are not solicited by FERC ondraft [National Environmental Policy Act] documents during ongoingsettlement negotiations,'' ECOS said. ``The outcome of negotiations cangreatly accelerate NEPA reviews. Conversely, the quest for reasonablesettlement terms could also be undermined by the continued pursuit offormal regulatory positions that might constrain the flexibility ofparticipants in modifying their positions to work toward agreements.''   FERC could include ``an escape clause'' that would allow the commissionto defer regulatory steps during ongoing settlement negotiations, ECOSsaid. It agreed with NHA that the commission's ex parte rules on FERCcommunications with participants in the licensing process need to bereformed.   ``Staff interpretations of ex parte constraints can be extreme andresult in a stifling of communications and early resolution of issuesbetween FERC and other agencies and participants,'' ECOS said.   ``Other agencies of government, including our own, are sensitive to exparte concerns and yet are able to find ways to do business withoutincurring these problems. Any reform proposal for hydropower licensing mustdeal with this issue.''   ECOS questioned the NHA proposal provision that strongly encourages FERCto enter into a memorandum of understanding with other agencies tocoordinate input on relicensing proceedings, saying that NHA makes no clearstatement on why such an MOU is necessary.   Alternatively, ECOS suggested that regulations could mandate ``theconsolidation of federal agency input into hydropower relicensing in acoordinated time frame.'' In addition, ECOS said the proposal would benefitfrom ``specific provisions that facilitate comprehensive river basinplanning by providing financial and/or technical support.''   ``Such planning is critical to providing a clear and reasonable contextto any cumulative impact assessment in river basins,'' ECOS continued. ``Itis essential to provide a vision of what agencies and the public want in ariver basin and not just the more traditional regulatory view of what theydon't want. This should be extremely valuable to power producers seeking tosecure their future in a given basin.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   PACIFICORP OPENS KENTUCKY OFFICE TO WRAP UP A DEAL WITH BIG RIVERS   PacifiCorp opened an office in downtown Henderson, Ky., at the start ofthe new year in hopes of wrapping up negotiations to lease and manage BigRivers Electric's coal plants over the next 25 years.   The two companies expect to sign a ``letter of intent'' before the endof January, an action that would trigger a series of state and federalregulatory rulings over the next 12 to 18 months.   If a deal can be reached with PacifiCorp, Big Rivers would remainstructurally intact and avoid a feared default in 1997. The co-op would``maintain a commitment'' to the region, said Big Rivers board presidentSandra Wood. ``There would remain a strong, viable utility presence inwestern Kentucky--a utility that can provide attractive rates to ourcustomers and act as an aggressive recruiter of industry and jobs in theregion.''   While Big Rivers made it official in late December that PacifiCorp wasits choice for a business partner that could help the troubled co-op put torest more than a decade of financial problems, several unsuccessful suitorsapparently are still waiting in the wings.   One well-placed source told Electric Utility Week that U.S. Generating,an independent power producer, and two investor-owned utilities, CINergyand Louisville Gas & Electric, ``think they're still in the game.'' If theBig Rivers/PacifiCorp talks break down, these companies are ready to stepinto the breach.   So, too, is East Kentucky Power Cooperative, the other generation andtransmission cooperative in Kentucky. An East Kentucky spokesman said theWinchester-based co-op, which is four times the size of 85,000-customer BigRivers, intends to keep its proposal on the table until a BigRivers/PacifiCorp deal becomes final.   The selection of PacifiCorp culminated a lengthy search by Big Riversfor a palatable solution to its $1.2-billion debt, much of which is owed tothe Rural Utilities Service. The RUS' predecessor, the RuralElectrification Administration, loaned most of the money needed toconstruct the 440-MW D.B. Wilson coal plant near Matanzas, Ky., in theearly 1980s.   Wilson, the main source of Big Rivers' financial woes, gave the co-op ahuge surplus of power after the co-op gambled and lost on its bet that amultibillion-dollar synthetic fuels industry would sprout in its westernKentucky service territory, thereby generating the need for moreelectricity.   Now, PacifiCorp is asked to be Big Rivers' savior. Under the winningproposal submitted by the Portland, Ore., investor-owned utility, an as-yetunnamed subsidiary of PacifiCorp would operate the three coal plants ownedby Big Rivers--480-MW Green, 455-MW Coleman and Wilson--in addition to the315-MW Station Two plant owned by the city of Henderson but operated by BigRivers under a long-term contract.   The subsidiary also would manage the plants' fuel supply and marketsurplus power to other utilities in the eastern U.S.   Handling coal purchases for Big Rivers would remove a stigma that hassurrounded the co-op since federal investigators uncovered abribery/kickback scheme several years ago. Three individuals have beenconvicted so far on charges of bribing former Big Rivers general managerWilliam Thorpe, who was forced to resign in July 1992. Thorpe, who hasdenied any wrongdoing, is expected to stand trial on a variety of criminalcharges next summer.   Under the PacifiCorp arrangement, PacifiCorp would make long-term leaseand operating payments to Big Rivers, the amounts of which have not beendisclosed. The co-op would use that money to repay its debt.   PacifiCorp would sell electricity to Big Rivers, which then would resellit to its four distribution co-ops: Green River Electric Corp., HendersonUnion Electric Cooperative, Meade County Rural Electric Membership Corp.and Jackson Purchase Rural Electric Membership Corp.   Big Rivers and PacifiCorp officials say the result would be lowerelectric rates for customers, although they would not estimate how much.   Alcan Aluminum and Southwire Co., Big Rivers' two largest customers,have been pressuring the co-op, both verbally and through numerouslawsuits, for lower electric rates for years. In early January, they wereattempting to arrange a meeting with Big Rivers and PacifiCorp to make suretheir concerns are heard.   ``We're looking for a business solution...we didn't do all thislitigation for nothing,'' said Allen Eyre, administrative manager atAlcan's Sebree, Ky., smelter.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   VIRGINIA POWER, DEVELOPER INK PACT KILLING 316-MW COAL-FIRED PROJECT   Virginia Power has reached an agreement with Smith Cogeneration Inc. ofOklahoma City calling for the developer to cancel a 316-MW, coal-firedcogeneration plant at a Goodyear Tire & Rubber factory in Danville, Va.   Terms of the agreement are confidential, said Gary Edwards, VirginiaPower's manager of capacity acquisition. Smith officials declined comment.   Edwards confirmed the utility and the developer recently askedVirginia's State Corporation Commission to drop their long-running disputeover whether Virginia Power should be required to purchase power fromSmith.   When it first proposed the $780-million project in the late 1980s, Smithchose not to participate in Virginia Power's competitive solicitations fornon-utility generation (NUG) capacity. In 1991, the developer convinced theSCC to appoint an arbitrator to help settle Smith's dispute with theutility, which had refused to sign such a large contract outside thesolicitation process.   A year ago, an SCC hearing examiner recommended the commission orderVirginia Power to settle the dispute, and suggested that an equitablesettlement might involve delaying the commercial start-up of the plant to2000--four years later than Smith proposed.   Meanwhile, Virginia Power continues to discuss with the owners ofoperating NUGs on its system the possibility of somehow reducing theutility's power-purchase costs and, in return, providing some financialbenefits to the owners.   Among other things, said Edwards, some NUGs have expressed possibleinterest in working with Virginia Power on ``creatively refinancing'' theirplants, or in turning over their fuel-supply obligations to the utility'sfossil and hydro generation business unit. No final agreements have beenreached to date.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FEDERAL JUDGE DENIES TEXAS CITY'S PETITION FOR TRANSMISSION ORDER   A federal judge in Houston has denied a preliminary injunction sought byCollege Station, Texas, in a transmission dispute with the neighboring cityof Bryan and the Texas Municipal Power Agency, a power pool that includesBryan and several other Texas cities.   The dispute now shifts to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,where College Station has filed for a transmission order under Sec. 211 ofthe Federal Power Act.   College Station resorted to U.S. District Court for the SouthernDistrict of Texas, Houston Division, after attempting to negotiate awheeling agreement with Bryan and the TMPA power pool it needed to enterinto a power-purchase agreement with Dallas-based TU Electric.   College Station's existing power-purchase agreement with Bryan and TMPAexpired Jan. 1. Bryan and College Station are already in litigation overservice territory disputes.   Since Bryan and the power pool had been unsuccessful bidders in responseto the request for proposals that College Station awarded to TU Electric inSeptember, the city charged Bryan and the power pool with wrongfulinterference and sought relief from the court under federal antitrust law.   But U.S. District Court Judge Nancy Atlas denied the ``extraordinaryrelief'' sought by College Station, finding that Bryan and the TMPA weresimply ``hard bargaining'' in their own best interests.   Atlas questioned ``the legal viability of the claimed irreparable harmand whether the public interest is served by a federal court grantinginjunctive relief in what is essentially an aborted contract negotiationbetween public entities engaging in state-authorized commercialactivities.''   Lawyers for College Station conceded they may have lost the battle inAtlas's courtroom, but asserted they won the war as the judge during ahearing last month extracted concessions from Bryan and the power poolensuring that TU Electric's power would arrive with the new year.   The judge persuaded the defendants to sign a remote control area loadagreement with TU Electric, allowing the utility to incorporate CollegeStation into its load remotely through telemetering equipment. Prior to thehearing, the city manager of Bryan, who chairs the power pool, had declinedto sign the agreement, according to attorneys for College Station.   The judge also extracted promises that Bryan and the power pool wouldnot interfere with College Station's receipt of the power while the ratesand terms of a wheeling agreement were in dispute. In a footnote to herorder, Atlas appeared to suggest she would hold Bryan and the power pool incontempt if they did not live up to their word.   Atlas rejected College Station's antitrust claims, finding that thestate action doctrine provided Bryan and the power pool with immunity fromclaims under the Sherman Act.   While College Station complained that Bryan and the TMPA proposedtransmission rates intended to make the power-sales agreement with TUElectric uneconomic, the judge accepted the defendants' arguments thatexisting law provides the grounds for embedded-cost rates and ``pancaking''of rates across the TMPA system.   ``The court cannot find a basis to conclude that defendants have actedbeyond their rights as owners of transmission facilities,'' Atlas ruled.   The judge also rejected the tortious, or wrongful, interferencecomplaint, citing a lack of evidence that the defendants were blockingCollege Station's receipt of the TU Electric power. ``Aggressivenegotiation, without more, does not amount to tortious interference withcontract,'' Atlas said.   ``The court expressly declines to find that any party has acted in badfaith,'' the court ruled. ``Both sides in these negotiations have beenjockeying for position and seeking leverage that will enable them to attaina transmission agreement that best served their constituents' interests.This is understandable under the circumstances and does not warrant courtintervention.''   With the judge's decision, the focus of the transmission dispute nowshifts to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, where College Stationis seeking a wheeling order under Section 211 of the Federal Power Act.   In the filing at FERC, College Station said Bryan and the municipalpower pool ``are exploiting their dominant position in the transmissionservices market to deny College Station access to essential facilities topurchase cheaper power from TU Electric.''   Before the RFP was awarded to TU Electric, the rate for transmissionservices offered by Bryan and the power pool amounted to about $17/kW/year,according to College Station's filing at FERC. After the power-salesagreement was awarded to TU Electric, the rates for transmission serviceoffered by Bryan and the power pool ultimately added up to $45.35/kW/year,the city complained.   The four cities have a tariff on file with the Texas Public UtilityCommission providing for a rate of $10.64/kW/year, College Station toldFERC.   ``Having lost out in the marketplace to a more efficient competitor,Bryan [and the municipal power pool] are intentionally interfering withCollege Station's purchase of the transmission services necessary...at fairand reasonable rates and on reasonable terms and conditions,'' the citycomplained at FERC.   The transmission agreement offered by Bryan and the power pool not onlycalled for rates making the TU Electric agreement more costly than Bryan'sproposal for services, but contained a clause forestalling College Stationfrom seeking relief at FERC or the Texas PUC, the city said in its FERCfiling.   In the course of last month's hearing before Judge Atlas, the defendantsagreed to drop that demand, the order noted.   The Texas PUC may decide to intervene at FERC and could ask the federalregulators to defer the matter to Texas for resolution, according to onesource involved in the dispute. The deadline for interventions at FERC isJan. 22.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   AEP DISCOUNTS TRANSMISSION AND SEES REVENUES INCREASE FIVEFOLD: FALCONE   A more open transmission system and discounted transmission rates haveproduced a fivefold increase in revenues for American Electric Power,according to Charles Falcone, senior vice president for system powermarkets.   Already for 1996, AEP has booked five to six times more point-to-pointservice than AEP provided during 1995, Falcone told Electric Utility Week.He said the discounting policy has boosted AEP's revenues from third-partytransmission fees to $20-million for 1996.   The results have ``turned my eye to a different approach,'' Falconesaid: ``There'll be a lot more third-party transactions across the AEPsystem this year.''   Another strategy AEP will employ this year involves contracts for``conversion service,'' Falcone said. The utility will broker dealsallowing wholesale power purchasers the option to ship coal to AEP andreceive electricity in return. This approach will attract customers whenAEP's prevailing price is not competitive, he said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NORTHWEST UTILITIES DROP PLANS TO PURCHASE AS MUCH AS 1,000 MW   Energy consultants Power Resource Managers of Bellevue, Wash., said thefour utilities it represents have postponed plans to purchase up to 1,000MW because of plummeting power prices and surplus West Coast generation(EUW, 20 Feb '95, 13).   The utilities PRM represented--the public utility districts of Benton,Franklin and Grays Harbor counties in Washington and the Oregon-basedClatskanie People's Utility District--wanted to diversify their suppliesaway from the Bonneville Power Administration.   But this fall, after BPA dropped its proposed rates to utility customers8.2% to 2.49 cents/kWh, PRM asked the bidders to re-examine their numbers.PRM now has placed the bidding on hold.   Spot market power has been available for as low as 3 mills/kWh thisfall. ``I have not seen power prices this low since the 1970s,'' saidGerald Garman, PRM president. He estimates the downward spiral on powerprices will continue for another 18 months. ``If you factor in inflation,this would place power prices at well under 1 mill/kWh in 1970 terms, thecheapest in Northwest history.''   The Aluminum Co. of America (Alcoa) of Wenatchee, Wash., and the PacificNorthwest Generating Cooperative, based in Portland, Ore., had been PRMmembers but dropped out to pursue their own power-purchase options.   PRM had shortlisted three independent plants and three utility systemsales totaling 1,295 MW earlier this year.   Shortlisted utilities were PacifiCorp with a 20-year, 200-MW, baseloadsystem sale and a 20-year, 100-MW intermediate load system sale, and theBonneville Power Administration and Washington Water Power, each proposing10-year, 100-MW system sales.   Shortlisted independents were U.S. Generating Co., with a site for a350-MW plant in either Arlington or Bucoda, Wash.; Summit Energy Group witha 250-MW plant to be located in Goldendale, Wash.; and the WashingtonPublic Power Supply System of Richland, Wash., which proposed a 245-MWgas-fired plant at Satsop, Wash.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   TVA IN DEAL WITH ENRON TO BUY POWER ON AN OPTION BASIS; ISSUES FINAL IRP   The Tennessee Valley Authority has signed a contract with Enron Capitaland Trade Resources to purchase power on an option basis during the period1998-2002.   Neither TVA nor Enron would provide further details about the contract,citing confidentiality requirements.   The options contract is the first TVA has concluded based on bids froman August 1994 request for proposals for up to 4,000 MW of load, and TVAofficials said they expect to sign other options contracts in early 1996.   The contract was announced at the same time TVA issued a final versionof its integrated resource plan that said the federally owned utilityplanned to use options contracts to purchase up to 3,000 MW of peaking andbaseload power between 1998 and 2002.   Under the TVA option system, TVA will pay an up-front option price andthen decide by a predetermined strike date whether to buy the power. Itwill pay the actual cost of the energy on delivery.   TVA had said in early 1995 that it had received 138 option bids covering9,800 MW of peaking and 12,200 MW of baseload power, but it gave littlefurther information.   Also in the final version of its IRP, TVA said it was proceeding withplanning for a 400-MW coal gasification demonstration plant at itsBellefonte nuclear site in northern Alabama. The project would use Dept. ofEnergy clean coal research funding transferred from a stalled project inSpringfield, Ill. and use generation equipment already installed for thenever-completed nuclear plant.   TVA is carrying out an 18-month study of long-term uses for theBellefonte site and based on that would be ready to begin construction ofthe demonstration plant in late 1997, with an on-line target of 2000.   If the initial plant is successful, it would become the core of a largerplant that would produce 484 MW and co-produce methanol.   In response to comments on its IRP from environmental and conservationgroups, the utility also said it intended to beef up its energyconservation efforts to produce 650 MW of new savings by 2002 and 2,200 MWby 2010. This represents an increased savings of 750 MW over previousplans.   TVA also said it would accelerate pilot renewables projects, including awind turbine and landfill-methane fuel cells. It also will begin acommercial program in 1997 to co-fire wood waste from the region at itslarge coal-fired power plants.   TVA will review final comments on the IRP during January, and the TVAboard is expected to approve the final plan in mid-February, ending aplanning process that was ordered by Congress in the 1992 Energy PolicyAct.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FUELED BY PUBLIC OUTCRY, CITY OF TOLEDO TO RESUME STUDY ON FORMINGMUNICIPAL   More than a year after a lack of funding forced its suspension, a studyabout whether to create a municipal electric system in Toledo is set toresume, fueled by a public outcry.   By late this month or early February, SVBK Consulting Group of Denver,Colo., will attempt to pick up where it left off when the Toledo CityCouncil decided not to appropriate additional money to finish the secondphase of the study. The first part, completed in May 1992, concluded that amuni in certain sections of Toledo could effectively compete with ToledoEdison, the city's longtime electricity supplier (EUW, 1 June '92, 6).   Toledo residents, already saddled with Toledo Ed electric rates that areamong the highest in the Midwest, were encouraged further by the utility'spending request for a $35.2-million, or 4.17%, rate hike. They gathered60,000 signatures on petitions supporting the resumption of themunicipalization study and presented them to the city council.   That prompted the council to allocate $250,000 to complete the study,hopefully by next fall.   ``The citizens were particularly unhappy that the council stopped thestudy in the middle, and they went door to door and got signatures,'' KerryBruce, attorney for the Toledo Dept. of Public Utilities, told ElectricUtility Week. ``With that kind of interest, [the city council] simplyacceded to the requests of the citizens and funded the second half of thestudy.''   A Toledo Ed spokeswoman insisted her company ``doesn't have anyproblems'' with resuming the study. But she did express some skepticismabout the fairness of the inquiry.   If the study is fair, it will point out several risks inherent informing a municipal utility, she said. However, ``it's been our pastexperience that the team of consultants Toledo is working with is notfair...if this holds true, this group will say that municipalization isfeasible.''   A ``fair, thorough, objective study will show what we already know--nowis not a good time to get into the electric utility business,'' she added.``There are so many changes going on...deregulation is coming and peopleare looking at retail wheeling. If that is the case, a new fledglingmunicipal system would be competing for customers not only with theexisting investor-owned utility, but independent power producers and otherutilities as well.''   Bruce said he was not surprised that Toledo Ed apparently feelsthreatened by the study. The Centerior Energy subsidiary, he noted, ``hassome of the highest rates in the region.'' Those rates would go even higherif the state Public Utilities Commission approves the proposed rateincrease later this year.   The 1992 study found that a suggested buyout of Toledo Ed's systemwithin the city would be too expensive, costing about $473-million. Butconstruction of a parallel transmission and distribution system in parts ofToledo, similar to the Cleveland Public Power system, could be economicallyfeasible.   Bruce agreed that ``things are too volatile'' in the utility industry tojustify spending ``$100-million to build a competing, full-blown utility''to do battle with Toledo Ed. He wants the consultant to shift the focus ofthe renewed study away from its earlier emphasis.   Instead, Bruce wants SVBK to ``look for ways the city can aggregate itsload and provide a conduit for retail wheeling to customers. I think it'sworth exploring to see if there's anything we can do short of constructinga complete, full-blown system.''   The Toledo Ed spokeswoman acknowledged her company needs to make someimprovements, including being ``more open and a more reliable supplier ofelectricity.'' But if Toledo decides to form a muni, ``we would be a strongcompetitor and fight for every customer.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EL PASO ELECTRIC RETAINS 125-MW AIR BASE LOAD, ENDING LONG DISPUTE   El Paso Electric has signed a new power-sales contract with Holloman AirForce Base in New Mexico, ending a lengthy legal dispute over the base'sright to purchase power from alternative sources.   Under the agreement, announced Dec. 29, the base will buy approximately125 MW of load from EPE at current rates and in return EPE will agree tofreeze rates for 10 years.   Holloman has been a long-term customer of EPE but in 1993, after EPEfiled for bankruptcy, the Air Force announced it would not renew itscontract with EPE when it expired in February 1994. Instead, in June 1993Holloman issued a request for proposals for alternative supplies for thebase.   However, in January 1994 EPE sued the Air Force, claiming that it didnot have the right to buy outside supplies under federal procurement rulesand also that EPE was the only utility authorized under New Mexico law toprovide retail service to the base.   Because of the suit, the Air Force never went through with awarding anew contract and EPE has continued to supply the base on an ad hoc basis.Under the terms of the new agreement, the Air Force RFP has been canceledand the EPE suit has been withdrawn.   Also as part of the deal, at the end of the 10-year period Holloman willbe under no obligation to take service from EPE and can terminate thecontract without payment of damages.   EPE is also trying to resolve a similar problem with the U.S. Army'sWhite Sands Missile Range in New Mexico which had issued a request forproposals for about 75 MW in late 1994 to replace EPE supplies.   In that case, EPE filed a protest with the Army which then decided tosuspend the RFP and review the legal issues. EPE has said that if the Armydecides to go ahead with the RFP it will file a new suit to block thepurchases.   The actions come at a time when Congress is looking at legislation thatcould free military bases to buy their own power, undercutting EPE's legalclaims (see story this issue).   The Holloman deal with EPE parallels a rate freeze plan agreed tobetween EPE and the city of El Paso last August which broke an impasse andopened the way for EPE to end its bankruptcy case.   EPE now hopes to win confirmation of its reorganization plan by the U.S.Bankruptcy Court in Austin on Jan. 9 and emerge from bankruptcy shortlyafterwards.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   CLINTON VETOES DEFENSE BILL, KILLING STUDY OF SAVINGS FROM POWER-SHOPPING   Industrials, marketers, independent power producers and a few utilitiesthat want Congress to let Dept. of Defense facilities shop for electricitylost a major round when President Clinton vetoed the bill containing amandate for DOD to study the shopping issue and report by March 1 (EUW, 25Dec '95, 2).   The House version of the DOD bill had lifted a congressional ban ondefense facilities shopping for power, but in a compromise with the Senate,the final version of the bill (H.R. 1530) called only for the study, whichwas to be done in consultation with the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission.   Advocates said they were pleased with the study requirement because itgave them a chance to use the study to support legislation later this year.Now they will have to try another route. One industry source said he hopesDOD will go ahead and perform a study even without the mandate.   The study was also to examine the stranded-investment liability forutilities if DOD bypassed them for less expensive power, and to identifystatutory and regulatory impediments to such shopping.   Clinton vetoed the measure because of major controversies unrelated tothe power provisions. Congress could revise the measure and try to send itback to the White House.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   PSC CAPS TAMPA ELECTRIC ALLOWED EQUITY RETURN AT 12.5% FOR 1996   The Florida Public Service Commission voted Jan. 3 to cap the 1996 rateof return on equity for Tampa Electric at 12.5%, and to allow the PSC todetermine how any overearnings would be distributed.   The move comes in the wake of TECO earning $45-million more than itsallowed equity return in 1995 and will forestall a rate case that wouldhave been filed in 1996 to pay for a new generating unit.   In an earlier stipulation with staff (Docket No. 950379-EI), TECO's 1995earnings were capped at 12.75%. The $45-million of 1995 overearnings willbe deferred until 1997, after TECO's new $550-million, 260-MW integratedcoal gasification combined cycle plant in Polk County goes on line in late1996. TECO's actual ROE for 1995 was expected to be about 16%.   The deal between the PSC staff and TECO effectively replacednegotiations the utility was conducting with the Office of the PublicCounsel, which represents ratepayers at the Florida Public ServiceCommission, according to OPC attorney Roger Howe.   The PSC's action, which was the result of last-minute negotiationsbetween staff and TECO on 1996 earnings, could mean any excess revenuescould be used for the plant, a refund, to offset regulatory assets, or fordepreciation in 1997 or later. The PSC will likely make a decision ondisposition of 1996 excesses sometime in early 1997, according to TimDevlin of the PSC's Auditing and Finance Division.   Under the arrangement for 1996, TECO will have an ROE range of 11.5% to13.5%. However, all of the earnings over 11.5% will be split, whicheffectively caps earnings at 12.5%. TECO estimated it will earn about13.27% in 1996.   The Polk unit will go into ratebase in late 1996 and based on TECO'searnings projections, which are considered conservative, it will still earnin excess of its allowed ROE. The 1995 excess carried forward was alsoexpected to cover the additional cost of the new unit through 1997, andpossibly beyond.   Howe said that because interest rates were expected to further declineduring the next few years, it was likely the PSC would reduce TECO'sallowed ROE for 1997, which could mean additional excess earnings in thatyear, despite the new unit.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   S.C. CONSUMER AGENCY OPPOSING APPROVAL OF SCE&G DEPRECIATION RESERVETRANSFER   South Carolina's Dept. of Consumer Affairs said the state's PublicService Commission made ``a serious mistake'' in late December when itapproved--as part of a general rate increase for South Carolina Electric &Gas--an SCE&G proposal to shift nearly $257-million in depreciationreserves from the utility's transmission and distribution assets to itsnuclear generation assets.   The state consumer agency said that if the approved transfer holds up toregulatory and legal challenges DCA expects to mount, it would give SCE&Gan unfair competitive advantage over other electricity generators, andwould improperly shift costs from large industrial customers to smallcommercial and residential classes.   In its Dec. 27, 1995, ruling (Docket No. 95-1000-E), the PSC grantedSCE&G a 7.34%, $67.5-million general rate increase to be implemented in twophases. The first phase is a $59.5-million hike as soon as its new 385-MWbaseload plant in Cope, S.C., begins commercial operation later this month,and the second is an $8-million increase next Jan. 1.   The utility had requested a two-step increase totaling $76.7-million,primarily to recoup the $436-million cost of the Cope plant, which isexpected to be the utility's last baseload addition until 2012 (EUW, 24July '94, 19).   The commission also said it will allow SCE&G to earn a 12% rate ofreturn on common equity, which is lower than the 12.25% rate the utilityhad requested but higher than both the 11% it had been permitted to earnand the 11.25% proposed by DCA.   Nancy Vaughn Coombs, DCA's deputy consumer advocate, took issue withvirtually all the PSC's decisions in the ruling, asserting that the rateincrease is more than three times larger than it should be, and that thecommission failed to pass through to ratepayers some $12.3-million insavings SCE&G has achieved through restructuring and downsizing.   She also criticized the PSC's approval of SCE&G's proposed ``stormdamage reserve account,'' under which the utility will collect more than$4-million a year through rates over the next 10 years to create a$50-million fund to be used to offset the cost of repairing damage toSCE&G's uninsured transmission and distribution facilities.   Coombs said an actuarial expert told the PSC during hearings on theproposed rate hike that, on average, SCE&G's T&D system is likely tosustain only $2-million a year in uninsured damage. She added that, in herview, electric customers in the 1990s should not pay for a fund that maynot be used for another 20 or 30 years.   But the DCA official said her agency is most concerned about thedepreciation reserve transfer, which she said would result in a lower``book value'' for SCE&G's two-thirds stake in the 900-MW V.C. Summernuclear plant and a higher book value for the utility's T&D assets.   That would have the effect of shifting SCE&G's costs away from itsgeneration sector, which is likely to face increasing competition aselectric industry deregulation takes hold, to its transmission anddistribution sector, which is likely to remain a monopoly, Coombs said.   As a result, SCE&G will have ``a significantly increased probability''of recouping--through T&D rates--nuclear investment costs that ``otherwisewould have been subjected to an uncertain policy regarding the recovery ofcosts of uneconomic generation capacity.''   Coombs said the DCA will ask the PSC to reconsider its ruling and addedthat if the commission fails to do so, her agency is likely to file a legalchallenge in state court, asserting the depreciation reserve transferviolates South Carolina law by shifting costs from one customer class toanother.   Belton Ziegler, SCE&G's general counsel, dismissed Coombs' claims andasserted that the PSC ruling ``will help us prepare for competition.''Among other things, Ziegler said the depreciation reserve transfer is anecessary preemptive step to ensure that any large retail customers thatleave the utility for other suppliers help pay for assets SCE&G haddeveloped to serve them.   Without the shift, the SCE&G attorney said, residential and smallcommercial customers would likely end up paying for ``100%'' of theutility's stranded investment, ``and we don't think that would be fair.''   Regarding the storm fund, Ziegler said that after Hurricane Hugobattered SCE&G's service territory in September 1989, the utility lookedinto ways it could prepare for the next big storm. ``It became clear thatcommercial insurance would be prohibitively expensive, and that it wouldmake more sense to set up a fund'' like the one the utility proposed andthe PSC just approved.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SOCAL ED AFFILIATE CLOSES $1-BILLION PURCHASE OF 2,088-MW U.K. GENERATOR   Southern California Edison affiliate Mission Energy has reachedfinancial closing on its $1-billion purchase of First Hydro Co., thecompany controlling two pumped-storage hydro facilities in Wales totaling2,088 MW, from the U.K.'s National Grid Co.   Mission beat two other finalists for First Hydro, ScottishHydro-Electric and Virginia Power affiliate Dominion Energy Inc. (EUW, 27Nov '95, 15).   First Hydro will operate as an independent generating company sellingpower into the U.K. power pool on a competitive basis.   Mission, which closed on First Hydro Dec. 22, noted the acquisition isbeing financed with about $400-million of equity and $600-million ofnon-recourse debt underwritten by Barclays de Zoete Wedd Limited (BZW). Asignificant portion of the debt will consist of long-term bonds, Missionsaid. BZW also served as Mission's financial advisor.   The two pumped-storage stations in North Wales are at Dinorwig andFfestiniog. The Dinorwig plant, commissioned in 1983, consists of six unitstotaling 1,728 MW. The Ffestiniog station, in service since 1963, is madeup of four units totaling 360 MW.   The Dinorwig and Ffestiniog facilities function as peaking units andprovide rapid generation response to sudden changes in electricitydemands.   Edward Muller, Mission Energy president and chief executive officer,said ``First Hydro represents a permanent investment in some of the moststrategically important generating plants in the electricity system of theUnited Kingdom.''   Acquisition of First Hydro means Mission is a key U.K. power generator,with total generating capacity of 2,522 MW, including 80% of a 220-MWgas-fired plant in Roosecote, Cumbria, and 33% of a 214-MW gas-fired,cogeneration plant at Derwent.   It also apparently catapults Mission Energy, an affiliate of SouthernCalifornia Edison, back to its earlier position as the world's largestindependent power producer, with 5,551 MW of financed net equity.   In July 1995, the U.K.'s National Power held the top spot with 4,465 MW,followed by Consolidated Electric Power Asia of Hong Kong with 4,391 MW,PowerGen of the U.K. with 3,955 MW, and Mission Energy, 3,463 MW, accordingto The McGraw-Hill Companies' 155 Independent Power Companies--Profiles ofIndustry Players and Projects (EUW, 31 July '95, 15).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   3,500-MW BRAZILIAN UTILITY SPLIT IN TWO IN PREPARATION FOR AUCTION   Brazil's Servicos de Eletricidade SA (Light), the 3,500-MW utilityserving Rio de Janeiro, will be split into two companies to facilitate itssale early this year, under a law approved by Brazil's congress.   A new company, LightRio, will continue to generate and distributeelectricity to Rio de Janeiro and will be offered at auction to privateinvestors. The other company, LightPar, will hold Light's 47.5% stake inSao Paulo Electric Co. (Eletropaulo), one of the utilities serving SaoPaulo.   Light was scheduled to be privatized in an auction by year-end 1995, butwill now likely be auctioned ``in the first few months'' of 1996.   The privatization of Light has been under discussion and planning formany years, but Light's stake in Eletropaulo and the fact that Eletropauloowes Light about $1.24-billion had been a barrier to the sale (EUW, 15 May,16).   The issue came to a head over whether or not previously passedlegislation was sufficient for the division of Light. In the end, it wasdecided the more prudent course would be to pass a separate law to coverthe splitting of Light, said Bernardo Braune, assistant to the director ofprivatization at Banco Nacional do Desencolvimento Economico de Social(BNDS, National Bank for Economic & Social Development).   The resulting law, No. 9163, was ratified on Dec. 15 and allows for thecreation of subsidiaries from Brazil's main electric utility, CentraisEletricas Brazileiras SA (Eletrobras).   According to government estimates, LightRio has a book value of about$3-billion and annual revenues of about $1.4-billion. LightPar has anominal value of $3.6-billion, according to the government. Only about$545-million of Light's total $1.24-billion Eletropaulo debt will betransferred to LightRio.   The sale of LightRio is part of a much larger privatization processunderway in Brazil. The first electric utility sold in this program wasEscelsa, which was won at auction by Brazil's Iven Group in July.   As part of this program, Eletrobras' four main utilities--Eletronorte,Eletrosul, Chesf, and Furnas--will also be privatized. But the size andcross ownership between Eletrobras and its subsidiaries complicatesprivatization.   The next step in the privatization of Eletrobras will be a solicitationfor consultants to advise the government on how best to privatize the45,500-MW utility. The Ministry of Mines & Energy will in the first half of1996 issue a request for proposals for the consulting contract.   The consultants will advise the ministry on the model for privatization,the creation of an independent regulatory agency, interconnecting thetransmission grid, setting tariffs and other issues.   In a separate solicitation process, BNDS will issue an RFP for aconsultant to advise on the actual ``objects of sale,'' said BNDS' Braune.The consultant will help determine, for instance, whether Eletrobrassubsidiaries should be sold entirely or if generating plants should be soldindividually or in packages of more than one generating plant.   The BNDS solicitation will be run concurrently with the ministry'ssolicitation for consultants.   The recommendations of the consultants will be forwarded to a speciallycreated Council of National Privatization, which will decide on the finalstructure of the privatization process. The council will be formed from theMinistry of State Planning--which will serve as the president of thecouncil--the Ministry of the Civil House, the Ministry of Finance, theMinistry of Administration, and the Ministry of Tourism, Industry & Trade.   Meanwhile, Brazil is moving forward with its planned solicitations forprivate sector companies to invest in the completion of stalledhydroelectric projects.   The first projects being put out to bid are in Sao Paulo and includeCanoas, a two-unit, 154-MW hydro plant. The Canaos solicitation will befollowed by solicitation for Porto Primavera, an 1,800-MW hydro plant.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NSP UNIT, TRANSFIELD SIGN 180-MW POWER-SALES PACT IN AUSTRALIA   Northern States Power unit NRG Energy Inc. and Transfield TechnologiesPty Ltd. of Sydney, Australia, have signed a power-purchase agreement withthe Queensland Transmission & Supply Corp. for supplies from the 180-MWCollinsville coal-fired steam turbine station, which will berecommissioned.   The plant was decommissioned in 1989 and will again supply power to thegrid in early 1998. An interim agreement for the sale of the Collinsvilleplant was signed in March as part of the government's Energy PolicyStatement (EUW, 27 March, 16).   The plant is being refurbished in a joint venture between NRG AustraliaPty Ltd., a Brisbane-based subsidiary of NRG Energy that will operate thestation, and Transfield, which will construct and maintain the plant.   Robert McClenachan, NRG's vice president of international businessdevelopment, said the project ``furthers NRG's objective to actively seekand secure independent power projects throughout Australia, New Zealand andSoutheast Asia.'' NRG Australia also has a 37% stake in the 1,680-MWGladstone Power Station, which it operates in Queensland (EUW, 11 April'94, 17).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   CSW FORMS VENTURE WITH MEXICAN INDUSTRIAL FOR 100-MW PROJECT   Central & South West unit CSW International has formed a joint venturewith Monterrey, Mexico-based petrochemical group Alpek to build, own andoperate a 100-MW cogeneration project at Alpek's Altamira petrochemicalcomplex.   The project, which will function primarily as an industrial power plant,will supply electricity and thermal heat to two existing Alpek unitsoperating at Altamira--Petrocel and Indelpro--and a new Temex plant nowunder construction.   All of the cogeneration project's production will be used by theindustrial facilities, although some excess capacity may be available toother industrials in the area.   Petrocel and Temex will serve as the facility's steam hosts, CSWInternational said.   CSW International and Alpek each hold a 50% equity stake in the project.Construction is scheduled to begin in March 1996, with commercial operationset for fourth-quarter 1997.   Alpek is significantly expanding petrochemical production at itsAltamira complex, with most of the expansion in operation by the fourthquarter of 1997.   Efforts to finance the project will be made in 1996, after solidequipment and construction costs are available.   ``CSW has long and cordial working relationships with business andgovernmental entities in Mexico,'' said Terry Dennis, CSW Internationalpresident and CEO, in a statement. CSW officials said similar industrialenergy projects are being sought in Mexico, although no additional projectannouncements are expected soon.   Recently, Central & South West successfully bid $2.52-billion to acquireSeeboard PLC, a U.K. regional electric company, in a friendly takeoverarrangement (EUW, 13 Nov, 1).   Alpek is a major petrochemical manufacturing group in Mexico, withannual revenues of $1.3-billion.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ENRON SECURES RIGHTS TO BUY 5,400-MW OUTPUT FROM OGLETHORPE POWER SYSTEM   In a precedent-setting marketing deal, Enron Power Marketing will haverights from January to April 1996 to buy the total energy output from the5,400-MW Oglethorpe Power system and at the same time will meet the energyrequirements of Oglethorpe's 39 member cooperatives between January andApril.   The deal, which was announced Dec. 22, 1995, and was being finalizedover the New Year's break, is a major coup for Enron, which will double thecurrent energy volumes it markets and could get a leg up on futurelonger-term deals with Oglethorpe and its members.   Oglethorpe already announced in early December that it had decided tocarry out a major restructuring that would split the company up intoseparate generation, transmission and system operating companies and givethe 39 members more freedom to buy and sell power supplies on the wholesalemarket (EUW, 11 Dec '95, 1).   Under the deal with Enron, the 39 members will be able to cover theirenergy needs at a lower price than before and at the same time will be ableto sell excess energy allotments from Oglethorpe through Enron, saving moremoney.   Enron will have access to Oglethorpe's system energy to both supply themembers and sell excess amounts on the regional markets. Enron was selectedby Oglethorpe for the deal from among eight bidders who responded to arequest for proposals in early December. The deal only covers energy anddoes not affect the members' commitments to buy capacity directly fromOglethorpe under existing contracts.   The four-month arrangement with Enron will cover the rest of the winterheating season and provide a convenient way for Oglethorpe members tobenefit from marketing opportunities while they work out the restructuringplan with Oglethorpe.   While other marketers have had similar arrangements with small utilitieselsewhere, the Enron-Oglethorpe deal appears to be the first time that amarketer has provided full energy trading services for such a largeutility.   Once Oglethorpe completes its restructuring in the coming months, agroup of six member co-ops called Cooperative Power Inc. is expected tocontract on their own for a marketer to manage their energy procurement andtrading. CPI already has issued a request for proposals for such servicesand is expected to choose a winning bidder soon.   Other Oglethorpe members appear likely to set up similar trading groups,and Oglethorpe itself has said it plans to offer a regional poolingarrangement for its system energy that will be managed by a separateOglethorpe operating company.   Separately, the Oglethorpe restructuring plan got an initial boost fromRural Utilities Service administrator Wally Beyer, who endorsed the generalconcept in a Dec. 12, 1995, letter to the Oglethorpe board.   Beyer called the restructuring plan a ``forward looking solution'' thatwould keep the group intact and still address the growing diversity amongits members. He instructed his staff to move as quickly as possible toreview the plan and make final decisions on it.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B34-13IA059-000323-B030-266http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey03.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230719 text/html 286134HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:03:39 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:46 GMTContent-length: 285946Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey03.html Sample Issue Copyright ELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNet January 1996 Vol. 210, No. SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES THE LEARNING CURVE BENEFITING FROM IT: A GUIDE FOR PUCS AND UTILITIES (934 words) FINANCE WHY USE FUTURES CONTRACTS? (1604 words) THE CHANGING WORLD OF UTILITY INVESTOR RELATIONS (2041 words) SERENDIPITY OR SAVVY INVESTMENT? A CABLE VENTURE PAYS OFF (1771 words) REGIONAL REPROT STATE EXPERIMENTS WITH RETAIL WHEELING (551 words) SAN FRANCISCO LEADS THE WAY FOR MUNIS (114 words) WEEKLY OUTPUT, 1-MILLION KWH (142 words) FINANCIAL NOTES DIRECT ACCESS THREATENS UTILITY REVENUE News and information about financial matters relevant to the electric power industry provided by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies (1018 words) POWER MARKETING FYI Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (26 words) AGREEMENT Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (36 words) LEGALITIES Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (94 words) REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (54 words) POWER MARKETING:NEWS CEGELEC ESCA Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (123 words) ELECTRICITY ALERT Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (64 words) POWER MARKETING: RATE PROPOSALS ENRON CAPITAL & TRADE RESOURCES Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (78 words) TALLAHASSEE (FLA) ELECTRIC DEPT Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (54 words) TAMPA ELECTRIC CO Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, and Industrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute (38 words) Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in (134 words) Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported in (214 words) PEOPLE ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEM (69 words) AIR MOVEMENT & CONTROL ASSN INC (35 words) AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO (121 words) AMERICAN GAS ASSN (28 words) BECHTEL GROUP INC (57 words) CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE (56 words) CANADIAN STANDARDS ASSN (25 words) CENTRAL HUDSON GAS & ELECTRIC CORP (35 words) CMS ENERGY CORP (41 words) CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO (46 words) COOLING TOWER INSTITUTE (19 words) COOPERS & LYBRAND LLP (43 words) CSW ENERGY INC (43 words) DOW ENVIRONMENTAL INC (29 words) DUKE ENGINEERING & SERVICES (46 words) EDS APPOINTS WILLIAM J. GRABSKE (34 words) ELSAG BAILEY PROCESS AUTOMATION (62 words) FLUOR DANIEL INC (34 words) IBM UTILITY AND ENERGY SERVICES INDUSTRY (56 words) INSTITUTE OF NUCLEAR POWER OPERATIONS (41 words) LURGI CORP (22 words) MIDLAND COGENERATION VENTURE LP (40 words) MISSION ENERGY CO (24 words) NEW YORK POWER AUTHORITY (36 words) NOOTER/ERIKSEN INC (60 words) PECO ENERGY CO (46 words) PLANMETRICS INC (32 words) SCECORP (70 words) SIEMENS CORP, POWER GENERATION GROUP (65 words) THE SOUTHERN COMPANY (54 words) CONFERENCE REPORT GLOBALIZATION OF ELECTRICITY MARKETS (7344 words) SHOW PREVIEW: DA/DSM '96 DISTRIBUTECH CONFERENCE (1471 words) COMPANY PROFILES (704 words) SHOW PREVIEW: DA/DSM '96: EQUIPMENT ON DISPLAY METER READING (63 words) CONTRACT SERVICES (47 words) MOBILE TECHNOLOGY (109 words) GIS SERVICES (82 words) TELECOMMUNICATIONS (73 words) WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS (36 words) HANDHELD COMPUTER (46 words) MOBILE COMPUTER (49 words) SCADA PC-SOFTWARE (50 words) POWER METER (55 words) UNDERGROUND AUTOMATION (68 words) DISTRIBUTION AUTOMATION (64 words) COVER STORY WHO CONTROLS THE 'LAST INCH'? (3588 words) COMPANY NEWS ALLIANCE (57 words) BRIEFS (55 words) ALLISON ENERGY CO (36 words) LEGALITIES (51 words) MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS (29 words) PROFILE IN BRIEF (125 words) WEB SURF SITES (54 words) B&W RINGS IN THE NEW YEAR WITH BIG CONTRACTS (303 words) COMPANY NEWS: CONTRACTS SARGENT & LUNDY (68 words) WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP (31 words) FRAMATOME TECHNOLOGIES INC (71 words) COMPANY NEWS: MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS FOSTER WHEELER ENERGY CORP (30 words) COMPANY NEWS: NEW PROJECTS GRAPHIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP (37 words) CSW ENERGY INC AND PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO (45 words) WESTMORELAND ENERGY INC (42 words) THE CORPORATION INSIDE UTILITY MERGERS: TRENDS WITHIN THE TREND (3113 words) WHY UTILITY BOARD MEMBERSHIP IS CHANGING (806 words) THE 1995 JAMES H. MCGRAW AWARDS THE 1995 JAMES H. MCGRAW AWARDS `Industry is always ready for leadership' James H. McGraw, founder, The McGraw-Hill Companies (1003 words) THE HISTORY (204 words) ANALYSIS HYDRO PACTS REVAMP OPERATIONS AND MARKET STRATEGIES (1933 words) THE NAME GAME: A LEXICON FOR DISTRIBUTION (1880 words) CAN RETAILING WORK? (1814 words) NOPR PRICING DEFINED (250 words) WASHINGTON REPORT CONGRESS TO DOE: TAKE THE WASTE Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters (417 words) PARK SERVICE HUNTS FOR POWER SAVINGS Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters (180 words) GAS INDUSTRY SEES OPPORTUNITY IN ELECTRIC'S REVAMP Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters (291 words) CARE TO COMMENT ON HYDRO RELICENSING? Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported in McGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters (122 words) CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. BENEFITING FROM IT: A GUIDE FOR PUCS AND UTILITIESTechnology, and the competitive markets made possible by technology, haveradically reshaped the public utility industry and its regulation. One setof technologies with the potential to help utilities remain financiallyviable in competitive markets--as well as help utilities and regulatorsbetter serve the public--is information technologies (IT).   Typically, utilities focus on reducing costs as a primary means ofcompeting with rivals. Unfortunately, the ability to become the low-costprovider is affected by many irreversible investment decisions made duringless-competitive times. As a result, most utilities will need to make newinvestments that better position the company to provide competitiveservices that are valued by customers. Investment in information systemsand IT is one strategy that allows utilities to better identify and trackpotential customers and their needs and to provide many new servicesspecifically tailored to customer needs.   In order to make optimal use of information, utilities and regulatorycommissions will need to make the transition to being information-basedorganizations (IBOs). IBOs recognize that, although they produce a tangibleproduct--utility service--the most important product of the organization isinformation. Furthermore, IBOs are ``flatter'' than traditionalorganizations. Rather than a corporate management structure that is bloatedat the top, such enterprises:   -- Rely on the expertise of those who create new information andknowledge.   -- Employ task-focused teams as the basic unit of work.   -- Transform data into useful information.   Together these tactics allow informed decisions to replace opinions.Through the skillful use of information, IBOs identify the needs of thosethey serve, adapt their work and organization to the optimal service oftheir customers, and generate a fair return for their shareholders.The transition   Making the transition to an IBO is a challenge. It requires buildingpowerful and flexible information systems that can bring internal andexternal sources of information together into a system with graphics,analytic, modeling, and communications capabilities. It requires a carefulevaluation of information requirements, effective system-developmentstrategies, and thorough cost/benefit analyses.   Cost/benefit analyses of information systems need to take intoconsideration the strategic benefits of information systems because thosesystems may be used to attract new customers, to support customer-specificprograms and services, and to develop a better understanding of acompetitor's capabilities. Indeed, labor savings typically account for only30 to 40% of projected system benefits. The recommended steps ofinformation-system cost/benefit analysis are (1) determine baseline costs;(2) develop a strategic implementation plan; (3) determine benefits; (4)compare costs and benefits; and (5) perform sensitivity analysis and riskassessment.Where?   Because geography is such an important part of an electric, natural-gas,telecommunications, or water utility's service-delivery system, geographicinformation systems (GIS)--which encompass transmission and distributionfacilities--are used by many utilities and are being planned by manyothers. One estimate is that utilities may invest as much as $48-billion inGIS technology and data in the next decade.   Public utility commissions (PUCs) are also investing in GIS. As aresult, GIS is a key IT tool, with the capability to assist utilities andregulatory commissions in their transitions to IBOs. GIS has replaced papermaps and records at some utilities and PUCs and is now being used toprovide those entities with strategic advantages.   Among the important trends driving the need and specific planning forthe use of information systems are downsizing, the rise of outsourcing,safety and regulatory compliance issues, environmental impacts, newcompetition and competitive alternatives, deregulation, andre-engineering.   Re-engineering focuses on the outcome of work processes as opposed tototal quality management, which focuses on the processes themselves.Information systems can support the efforts necessary to fundamentallyredesign business processes and support strategic business decisions.Justification to the PUC   Under traditional, rate-base/rate-of-return regulation, there are threeoptions for the regulatory treatment of information-system investments:expensing costs immediately, amortizing them over a longer period, orincluding them in the rate base. Other issues include determination of theprudency of information system investments, establishing the appropriatedepreciable life, and the allocation of costs and benefits betweenregulated and unregulated business segments.   Under incentive regulation and price-cap forms of regulation, theregulatory treatment of utility information-system investments will only beinitially important as regulators set baseline rates or price caps. It willbe difficult for regulators to separate the benefits of information systemsinto those that serve the interests of captive ratepayers and those thatposition the utility to compete in new environments.   Therefore, the most significant challenges for utilities and regulatorswill not be to find new ways to use information to benefitconsumers--opportunities to use information to benefit customers arevirtually endless. The challenges will be funding, designing, and buildingeffective systems, performing adequate cost/benefit analyses, andconvincing others that there will be long-term payoffs for manyinformation-system investments.   For a copy of the complete report, contact The National RegulatoryResearch Institute, Ohio State University, 1080 Carmack Rd, Columbus, Ohio43210-1002.   Editor's note: The following is an excerpt from The Use of InformationSystems to Transform Utilities and Regulatory Commissions: The Applicationof Geographic Information Systems by David W. Wirick, The NationalRegulatory Research Institute (NRRI), Columbus, Ohio; Glenn E. Montgomery,and David C. Wagman, Convergent Group, Englewood, Colo; and James Spiers,Consultant/Attorney, Boulder, Colo. It was prepared by NRRI with fundingfrom the National Assn of Regulatory Commissioners. Convergent Groupdonated its time to the study.Photograph(s):Photograph: One estimate places utility investment in GIS technology in the$48-billion-range in the next decade. As a result, GIS is a key informationtechnology in the drive to make utilities and regulatory commissionsinformation-based organizationsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WHY USE FUTURES CONTRACTS?By:Preston D. Head   Futures contracts and risk management are quickly becoming as much apart of the electric power business as gas turbines and alternatingcurrent. Accordingly, to understand where the industry is headed, it isimportant to understand how these financial tools work.   Although the explanations presented here will primarily deal withfutures contracts (see box), risk management as it applies toexchange-traded options and over-the-counter (OTC) transactions will alsobe covered.   Each of these financial tools--futures contracts, exchange tradedoptions, and OTC transactions, collectively referred to as derivatives, hasspecific characteristics and applications, and together they can providetremendous flexibility. Essentially, they give participants in themarketplace the capacity to affect the outcome of risk exposures they mayhave.Setting sail   In a competitive, free-market environment, a firm must either accept therisks to which it is exposed or make a conscious effort to deal with them.Those that optimize their risks in the marketplace win. Therefore, theprimary message is design and build your ``risk-management'' ship well.Find, train, and continuously tune the best crew you can--as well as youcan. This is not a one-time crossing or a protected cove. The electricityindustry is embarking on a competition in the open seas. The weather andconditions will be forever changing and sometimes unexpectedly. Therefore,managing risks will be a constant necessity, and companies must learn toembrace futures and other derivatives because their use within the electricpower industry will increase unless deregulation is reversed.   Why use futures? Because futures can play many valuable roles--such asaddressing price volatility, facilitating price discovery, enhancingmarketing flexibility, and providing transactional safety and anonymity.Profiting from volatility   As natural gas made the transition to market-based pricing throughderegulation, that market became more efficient internally, but pricevolatility increased. The ability to mitigate--or even better--to profitfrom price volatility, is an important aspect of futures.   Natural-gas prices have been among the most volatile of globalcommodities. Consequently, the natural-gas futures contract has been one ofthe fastest growing futures markets in the world. By the third year oftrading, in 1992, over 2-million natural-gas futures contracts were traded.Over 6-million contracts were traded in 1995, representing a nationaltransaction value exceeding $100-billion. In fact, the New York MercantileExchange (Nymex) seat prices have more than doubled during this same timeperiod to over $400,000 today. This seems to provide testimony recognizingthe value of these markets.   So, who is watching over these dynamic transactions? Ultimately, futurescontracts are governed by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).Futures exchanges represent a well-capitalized clearing system, enforcingstrict compliance and operational standards to ensure fair and orderlymarkets. These exchanges are backed by some of the most significantfinancial institutions in the world. Thus, when firms use futures as ameans to buy or sell a commodity--such as electricity--they can feelcomfortable with their counterparty.   Also, the public forum of futures exchanges provides for efficient pricedissemination. The liquidity and transparency it provides establish futuresexchanges as ideal pricing benchmarks for portfolio managers, industryregulators (performance-based ratemaking), and as a reference for othercommercial contracts.Delivery schedule   A small percentage of traded futures contracts result in actualdelivery. However, there are various futures contract delivery mechanismsthat provide commercial flexibility among participants. In the case ofNymex futures contracts, a firm may stand for delivery by ``standarddelivery procedure,'' ``alternative delivery procedure'' (ADP), or``exchange for physical procedure'' (EFP). The most widely used amongcommercial participants is the EFP.   Essentially, two entities with opposite futures positions may enter intoan EFP. Mutual offset of their opposite positions involves an agreement fordelivery of an actual commodity that does not necessarily conform tocontract specifications in all terms. Firms use EFPs to offset theirfutures contracts, thereby gaining the ability to select their own mutuallyagreed upon delivery location.   Participants may preselect their counterparty, price the transaction atany level, and eliminate futures execution risk. For example, two firmsdesiring to trade a given quantity of electric power under given terms--butwithout pre-agreement on price--may index the transaction to the futurescontract. Each firm manifests its separate belief on price by the timing ofits entry into its respective, but eventually offsetting, futures position.The required cash or physical commodity moves as needed, with each firmindependently determining its own net price.   In the oil and gas industries, many firms conduct a substantial portionof their commercial trading activity by using EFPs, often each month, withthe same counterparties. Simply put, futures contracts change the method ofpricing among parties, greatly increasing flexibility.Hedging, to start   Risk management is often used interchangeably with the term ``hedging.''And although risk management covers other areas, hedging is a start.Hedging (a position in the futures market that is equal and opposite to aposition at risk in the cash market) allows commercial participants toshift unwanted risks to other market participants with inverse riskprofiles. If you do not hedge, you accept total price risk.   Hedging is rarely, if ever, a pure science. One of the most importantconcepts in hedging may be understanding ``basis.'' Basis (cashprice-futures price) is the relationship between the price of the cashposition being hedged and the futures contract price. If a futures is beingused to hedge an exposure other than one with terms identical to thefutures contract, the basis will fluctuate.   In addition, there is basis risk, which is an undesired change in thebasis. Professional hedgers consciously weigh outright risk vs basis risk.And, delivery causes the basis to disappear as cash and futures pricesconverge at the expiration of the futures contract. Therefore, hedging isused by commercial participants to protect:   -- Prices and costs (fuels, power, inventory, base load.   -- Margins.   In the broader context, risk management may:   -- Provide a competitive advantage.   -- Afford more confident budgeting and planning.   -- Allow monetization of poorly performing assets.   -- Temper earnings volatility.   -- Focus corporate strategy.   -- Enhance a firm's ability to borrow.What to ask   Preparing for the new competitive environment means analyzing a firm'sexposures to risks. What are the risks, how do they fluctuate, whichrisk-management tools are appropriate? What is the corporate objective andwhat is the level of sensitivity to risk? Coordinate with knowledgeableaccountants, auditors, attorneys, and brokers. Develop meticulousprocedures and controls incorporating highest levels of management andoversight groups. Make sure that futures, derivatives, and cash markettransactions are viewed in the aggregate when assessing results. Otherindustries have embraced futures markets for decades. The electric powerindustry has an ideal opportunity to benefit from those industries sailingthe seas before it.What is a futures contract?   A futures contract is a firm commitment to deliver or to receive aspecified quantity and grade of a commodity at a specific location within adesignated month. Typically, there are simultaneous offerings for tradingof successive delivery months, prices are not predetermined, and there areobligations governing financial performance--with penalties levied fornon-performance.   For example, the proposed New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex),California Oregon Border and Palo Verde Switchyard futures contracts callfor 736 MW of firm energy to be delivered during on-peak hours (16 hoursfrom 07:00 to 22:00), at a rate of 2 MW, over 23 delivery days (Mondaythrough Friday with makeup on Saturdays and Sundays if necessary), with aminimum price fluctuation of $0.01/MW ($7.36/contract).   Successful futures contracts reflect terms and conditions consistentwith cash market practices. The Nymex contracts reflect carefulcollaboration with the electric power industry.   The possibility to actually make or receive delivery, in the case of theproposed contracts, serves to precipitate convergence between futures andphysical prices as a futures contract approaches expiration.   To establish the viability of a futures contract, futures exchanges lookto the commercial importance of a commodity, uniformity of product, anefficient cash or physical market, an efficient way to deliver the product(bulk transmission market), a large number of buyers and sellers, and amarket that needs price transparency and risk management--in other words, aprice-driven market.Real-time information for the electric power market   Electricity Alert combines the editorial expertise of Power Markets Weeknewsletter and Platt's commodity information service--both part of TheMcGraw-Hill Companies--to create the definitive market information service.Electricity Alert delivers: news and market coverage of the US electricpower industry; real-time electricity spot-market transactions reported asdeals are completed--as well as bid/ask information gathered by ElectricityAlert's price reporting team; regular reports on market-movingdevelopments, such as nuclear plant outage schedule; influential priceindexes and ranges from Power Markets Week; up-to-the-minute commentary andanalysis identifying and explaining market movements; a comprehensiveweather service designed specifically for electricity traders; and weeklyproduction figures for nine regions provided by the Edison ElectricInstitute.   Electricity Alert features a flexible display and delivery optionsdeveloped in partnerships with leading network and software providers tooffer custom solutions for integrating information into a company'soperation.   For more information, or for a demonstration, call Platt's sales office,212-512-4047; 1-800-459-6521, or fax 212-512-2596.Illustration(s):Screen: Platt's TerminalPhotograph(s):Photograph: Companies must learn to embrace futures contracts and otherderivatives because their use within the electric power industry willincrease--unless deregulation is reversedAbout the Author(s):Preston Head is a principal in the firm of Preston Head Ltd, New York, NY,an energy futures and derivatives brokerage firm registered as anIntroducing Broker and Commodity Trading Advisor with the National FuturesAssn.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. THE CHANGING WORLD OF UTILITY INVESTOR RELATIONSBy:Jeffrey D. Bogart   A New York utility considers how to explain its proposed unbundlingprogram to investors. A diversified utility holding company fieldsquestions from traditional investors trying to understand its oil and gasexploration and production business; a West Coast utility appoints itsfirst full-time investor relations manager to communicate actively withmajor investors and explain its growth strategy.   Deregulation is posing new and intensified investor relations (IR)challenges for utility companies--which are putting IR executives on thefront lines of the competitive battlefield. How well utility companiessucceed in their fight for funds and for reduced financing costs may welldepend upon their ability to upgrade their IR programs. That won't besimple. With retail wheeling increasingly certain, mergers anddiversification on the rise, and unbundling more than a possibility,investors are seeking new information for use in evaluating utility companystocks. Meanwhile, some utility companies without active IR programs aretaking steps to increase investor appreciation for their businessstrategies--and the quality of their management. Still others are seekingto attract non-traditional utility investors, interested in more thandividend yield.   As Laura Mountcastle, vice president of investor relations at CMS EnergyCorp, notes, ``Utility-company investor relations is more demanding thanever.''   ``And certainly different,'' adds W. Scott Dudley Jr, IR manager at FPLGroup Inc.   Security analysts, for example, are digging for data that did notinterest them five or 10 years ago. Witness Edward J. Tirello Jr, whocovers utility companies for NatWest Securities, New York, NY. ``I'mseeking information from companies about market share and competitiveposition--but then, everyone is.''   Underscoring the industry's reformation, Tirello observes the novelty ofthe information that attracts him: ``What mattered before doesn't matternow,'' he says. ``Before, you were very concerned about regulation, whetherthe utility got its rate case, and what its kilowatt-hour-sales growthpotential was.'' Now, ``What I am looking for is almost what you would lookfor in a manufacturing company,'' he explains. ``That wasn't the case 10years ago; you didn't care about those factors. A utility was a regulatedmonopoly, and those factors didn't matter.''Mining for information   So what are analysts looking for these days? They are much more focusedon industrial customers than they have been in the past, because that isthe group that has the market power right now, asserts Allan J. Stewart, IRmanager at Duke Power Co. ``Analysts are seeking to determine howsusceptible we are to customers selecting some other type of energysupplier.''   At Oppenheimer & Co, New York, NY, utility analyst Craig Lucas agrees:``We need more information in terms of industrial load,'' he says. ``Weneed more in terms of customer mix and the prices being charged eachconsumer group.''Cost reduction is another concern for analysts. There is a tremendousemphasis on busbar costs, or all-in generating costs, instead of the moretraditional questions about rates of return, says Jeffrey Kotkin, NortheastUtilities' IR manager. ``The lower your costs, the easier it is to sellyour power''--thus, the easier it may be to attract investors.The shock of open access   ``In the stock market, low-cost producers carry a premium to theindustry as a whole,'' observes Tirello. Higher margins, after all, doaffect the bottom line. They also influence an analyst's interpretation ofa company's ability to stand the shock of open access. ``Assume, forexample, that in the year 2003, there is direct access and no morestranded-investment recovery,'' says Oppenheimer's Lucas. ``Then, theutilities that are able to get their cost profiles in shape in the sevenyears from now until then will be the strongest utilities. Right now,electric utilities trade at from eight to 15 times earnings, a function ofa competitive position. Are you going to pay the same amount for a companywhose costs are higher than another company's, assuming the earnings arethe same?''   IR officers also are encountering more questions and providing moreinformation about their companies' unregulated operations. For instance,Duke Power's Stewart comments that as the regulated electric power businessmatures, analysts are asking whether unregulated, diversified operationswill enable utilities to maintain the earnings growth that will translateinto continued dividend growth.   The challenge for the IR executive is to disseminate the new informationin a way that helps analysts and others understand and value theunregulated businesses. That means that in some cases, the traditionalelectric-utility analysts will need additional education about unregulatedenergy businesses. For example, many people following CMS Energy Corp donot have a good feel for the oil and gas business, says Mountcastle.M&A quiz   Utility IR officers are also fielding questions about their companies'plans to acquire or be acquired, stimulated by the industry's stream ofmergers. ``When the industry's consolidation finishes, there will be 20 to50 companies left, down from 125 to 150 today,'' suggests Tirello, perhapsthe first among analysts to predict that mergers would occur (``I was theearliest,'' he claims. ``I was a visionary; everyone else called mecrazy.'')   Merger information requests can be tricky for IR officers to answer--ornot answer. ``There was a time when I could joke about utility mergers,''says Stewart, implying no market activity. ``Now I don't say anything. Idon't know about our plans. There are boardroom discussions going on, and Ijust don't know what they are. So instead of risking saying that nothing'shappening when it could be, I don't respond to those questions any longer.There is going to be industry consolidation, and I think we are going to beinvolved in it in some form or fashion. I just don't know when or withwhom.''Close to the vest   Merger and acquisition information is not the only subject that iscausing utility IR officers pause. Despite analysts' increased need forinformation, today's competitive environment is making some companies lessforthcoming about cost information as well. FPL Group Inc, for example, hasstopped filing its Uniform Statistical Report with the Edison ElectricInstitute, Washington, DC, because of concern about revealing cost data tocompetitors. ``We have always been good information gatherers anddisseminators,'' says FPL's Dudley, ``and in a regulated environment, youreally didn't care who had your information. Today, we are being challengedto balance the need of the financial community to understand our businessenvironment with our need to protect our competitive position.''   Deregulation has also increased the importance of corporate positioningand corporate credibility in utility IR programs. ``The nature of theissues and the way you evaluate a company is different,'' says Dudley,``and our message has changed as well.''   He adds that companies must find things that are unique about their ownsituation, and cautions that the electric power sector is no longer ahomogeneous industry. ``We think we are one of the more uniquely situatedcompanies,'' says Dudley. ``FPL has a very low exposure, for example, toindustrial customers. We have taken a very aggressive position with regardto our dividend and our depreciation policy. Taking a marketing-orientedapproach with analysts, Dudley asks Wall Street ``not to treat allutilities the same; don't analyze us the way you always did, because thosethings may no longer work.'''Not just a regular utility   As for corporate credibility, it can be key to helping companies bridgethe gap perceived by many investors to exist between the announcement of acorporate positioning strategy and its accomplishment. Investor skepticismat corporate pronouncements is evident in a remark by Goldman Sachs' (NewYork, NY) Utility Analyst Ernest Liu: ``There's not one company that comesinto a meeting with investors without saying, `We're not just anotherregular utility.' The question is just how much you want to believe it.''   Credibility also comes into play during mergers and in financingindependent power projects. ``Everyone tells you what they do isnon-dilutive,'' says Tirello. ``That's their basic [line]. Sometimes it'strue, sometimes it's not. I take it with a grain of salt.''   Knowing management well can help analysts gauge the probability that acompany will arrive at its planned destination. As companies unfold theirstrategies for doing business in a deregulated environment, says Earl R.Dunn, IR manager at Puget Sound Power & Light Co, analysts willincreasingly be asking themselves, ``I know these guys; can they pull thisoff?''   For that reason, companies are increasingly inviting analysts andinvestors for on-site visits to give them a chance to size up operatingmanagement. Dunn says that in the past, when the business was based on``cost-plus,'' there was no need for the analyst to go out and ``kick thetires;'' but today, the analysts are kicking the tires and more than everwant to understand and know the management.   These visits differ from the time-honored plant tour. CMS Energy, forexample, conducts almost a full day of presentations with the heads of thecompany's different business units, says Mountcastle.   This enables analysts and investors to see, hear, and actually meetinformally--CMS hosts a dinner the prior night--the people running thebusiness.Pounding the pavement   Besides affecting the substance of investor communications, deregulationis also stimulating some utilities to expand their interaction withinvestors. A New England utility, for example, engages an outside IR firmto help it target and meet with institutions. Five years ago, Puget Powerdid not have anyone handling IR for it, says Dunn. ``We believed thatbecause utility stocks traded somewhat like bonds, we did not have to getout there and do anything.'' Is Puget Power doing anything different?``Yes,'' says Dunn, ``I'm the first in-house investor relations managerthat Puget Power has ever had.''   The approach is to be more proactive and less reactive, says FPL'sDudley. In 1994, FPL increased efforts to explain the company's changeddividend and financial policies. Dudley expects that in 1996, FPL will bemore active than in 1994, when, he estimates, the company's seniormanagement spent 14 days on the road in company-sponsored meetings in 14cities with some 80 different investment firms. In 1996, he expectsmanagement's time on the road to increase to as many as 20 days.   Some diversified companies are seeking to ``target'' and attractinvestors interested in more than dividend yield. ``We have been working toexpand the investor base beyond traditional utility investors,'' says CMSEnergy's Mountcastle.   Both investor and analyst interaction is being made easier by using newtechnology. Electronic media offer new avenues of communications. FPL, forexample, plans to launch a site on the Internet within the next few months,says Dudley. The company, he adds, is also investigating the use offax-on-demand and CD-ROM.Winning ways: A checklist for improving investor relations in a competitivemarketplace   -- Targeting: Expand the existing base of actual and potentialinvestors, identifying new categories of potential investors.   -- Strategy: Build awareness of and appreciation for the company'sapproach to survival and growth.   -- Positioning: Differentiate the company from its industry peersnationally, regionally, and next door.   -- Context setting: Identify new benchmarks or criteria against whichto evaluate the company's growth potential and success in achieving itsgoals.   -- Credibility: Manage corporate credibility by avoiding overoptimism;showcase operating management.   -- Intelligence: Through systematic perception studies, provide seniormanagement with insight into how buy-side and sell-side analysts andinvestors view the company's potential.   -- Alternative media: Evaluate and be prepared to adopt new electronicforms of communications, such as fax-on-demand, the Internet, and CD-ROM,as their popularity among investors increases.   -- Background: Explain the basics of new, unregulated businesses toinvestors unfamiliar with them, providing investors with an analyticalframework, data, and insight into the investment potential of these newareas.   -- Engagement: Seek out investors rather than wait for them to expressinterest.Photograph(s):Photograph: Financial analysts are much more focused on industrialcustomers than they have been in the past, because that is the group thathas the market power right nowPhotograph: ``Companies are less forthcoming about M&A and costinformation''Jeffrey BogartAbout the Author(s):Jeffrey D. Bogart is president of Bogart & Co, a New York City-basedinvestor relations and public affairs consultancy.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. SERENDIPITY OR SAVVY INVESTMENT? A CABLE VENTURE PAYS OFF   In 1986, buying a cable company seemed like a good idea to HoustonIndustries (HI). And as it turned out, it was--but for unexpected reasons.Almost a decade ago, HI, the parent company of Houston Lighting & Power Co(HL&P), the US's ninth largest investor-owned utility with $11.4-billion inassets, entered the cable television business. The venture, which recentlyended with the sale of HI's KBLCOM, was important--not because it gave HIcable expertise--but because the sale added $700-million to HI's books,thus providing the company with overseas purchasing power.The genesis   Like other utilities, HI was coming out of the heavy construction periodof the 1970s and early 1980s, and was looking for diversified businessopportunities. Company executives were specifically interested in abusiness that had some of the essential qualities of a utility-typecompany: A large volume market with a captive audience.   At the same time that HI was exploring diversification options, ajoint-venture deal between the New York City-based Warner Communicationsand American Express Corp dissolved, sparking rumors that Warner's Dallasand Houston cable properties would be sold. The speculation was enough tosend HI executives to Time Inc, New York, NY--owner of cable programminggiant Home Box Office--to consult with Time's cable experts about enteringthe market.   The meetings with Time eventually turned into a 50/50 joint venturebetween HI and Time, called Paragon Inc. Although Paragon never acquiredWarner's Texas properties, in 1986 it did purchase 22 cable televisionsystems from Westinghouse's Group W, Pittsburgh, Pa. For the bargain priceof just over $500-million, Paragon took on almost 560,000 customers at ahistorically low price of $900 per subscriber.   Through Paragon, HI entered the cable business in such diverse localesas upper Manhattan, NY; Tampa Bay, Fla; El Paso and Dallas/Fort Worth, Tex;and Los Angeles County, Calif--and became involved in a business thatseemed tailored for anyone able to string new lines into thousands ofinterested homes.Growing a subscriber base   By 1989, HI, independent of Paragon, sold off its once profitable oiland gas business that it had operated since the early 1970s to pay$1.3-billion for Canada's Rogers Communications. That deal gave HI accessto an additional 550,000 subscribers (at the significantly increased marketvalue of $2360 per head), who were tied to cable franchises in San Antonioand Laredo, Tex; Minneapolis, Minn; Portland, Ore; and Orange County,Calif.   HI then formed a new cable subsidiary, KBLCOM, which combined its 50%share of Paragon into the recently acquired Rogers properties. KBLCOM'ssubscriber list was growing each year, and in 1994, it made its lastacquisition--this time paying just under $2000 per head for 47,000 newsubscribers in the Minneapolis area. In roughly an 8-yr period, HI hadformed a business that served a total of 967,000 cable customers on anoverall investment that reached $1.65-billion. Yet, what was HI's realstrategic goal?An evolving vision   At the end of the 1980s and into the early 1990s, the prevailing wisdomwas to get into the consumer's home, via cable, and hopefully extractmarketing information from customers that could be used in unforeseen waysin the future. HI's management believed that within cable technology wassome kind of marketing enhancement capability that could be applied toHL&P's existing 1.5-million electricity customers--the vast majority ofwhom are residents in the Texas Gulf Coast area.   By the end of 1994, HI was a utility holding company that reported$399-million in income on revenues from continuing operations of$3.7-billion. Arriving at this juncture, however, seems more like anevolution rather than a direct path for HI.   Since its inception in 1882, HI has been a company that was defined bythe history of its market. For example, HL&P, in 1901, became one of thefirst utilities to burn oil instead of coal because of the huge oil findsat Spindletop, Tex, only a few miles east of its generating plant. By the1930s, natural gas from western Texas became plentiful--and today almost65% of its 13,660 MW of installed capacity is gas-fired.   However, challenging times were ahead. Since World War II, the so-calledbig 19 oil refineries and petrochemical companies, (Exxon Corp, DowChemical Co, DuPont Co, etc), increasingly began producing their own power.The far more recent threat of retail wheeling is something HI has beendealing with for a considerable period of time. Also, the debacle of theSouth Texas nuclear project in the 1980s didn't help its image with manycustomers.   Already imbued with a view toward deregulation, HI went into the cablebusiness, thinking that it would lead the company into thetelecommunications age, and change the firm's status as only an energysupplier. ``We saw the cable business as potentially profitable, with goodoperating cash flow,'' says William A. Cropper, HI's vice president andtreasurer. ``We had good book earnings, but we were also pumping a lot ofmoney back into the business.''   Along the way, adds Cropper, ``we were visiting with other cable firmsand telephone companies as well. And nobody seemed to be certain as to whatthe technology advances meant.'' That was the main concern: Nobody couldsay where, exactly, the future of cable or telecommunications was headed.``Many said they knew, but few were right,'' says Cropper.A time to sell   In the early 1990s, Time Inc and Warner Communications merged, formingTime Warner (TW). Because Denver (Colo)-based baby bell US West took a$2.5-billion position in that merger, the pact became more significant.But, even that deal paled against the proposed mega-deal between baby bellBell Atlantic, Newark, NJ, and the number one US cable company,Tele-Communications Inc (TCI), Englewood, Colo, in the summer of 1994.   Once again, the market sparked HI into action. The announcement of theBell Atlantic/TCI deal--which eventually collapsed--convinced HI that itwas time to assess its portfolio and cable holdings. Although HI's cableoperations were stable, it was still going to be several years before itcould be considered a major profit center, large enough within the industryto be able to control its own destiny. Moreover, the business was requiringmore programming arrangements and product marketing than HI's executivesfelt comfortable with.   By August 1995, HI sold KBLCOM, including its 50% share in Paragon, toTW. The deal drew little public attention. Nonetheless, TW paid HI almost$2500 per subscriber as part of its $2.4-billion package.   In the deal, TW assumed $650-million of KBLCOM external debt and otherliabilities, and purchased HI/KBLCOM intercompany debt for approximately$620-million cash. The sale gave HI 1-million shares of TW common stock,and 11-million shares of TW convertible preferred, with a total value ofapproximately $1.1-billion. ``We booked a gain on the deal of $700-millionafter tax, and we are also left with $1-billion in TW stock,'' saysCropper. ``This made our balance sheet healthy--real fast.'' Indeed, HI hasseen equity vs debt rise from 39 to 48% since the end of 1994.   With its cable sale has come a deepened commitment to the strategy ithas turned to replace diversification: overseas expansion of its coreutility business. HI's most recent international venture took place lastSeptember in South America.Global now, then   In 1988, after HI had already entered the cable business, a newopportunity surfaced. With very little international fanfare or support,then embattled Argentine President RaPound l Alfonsn launched his so-calledHouston Plan. With it, formerly nationalistic Argentina was turning acorner and reaching out to the oil and gas company executives inHouston--still the world's energy capital. Within 18 months, Alfonsn'ssuccessor, Carlos Menem, accelerated the process, cementing the new Houstonoutreach program via a major privatization effort. In 1993, an HI-ledconsortium assumed La Plata and Santiago del Estero electricitydistribution rights through the privatization process.   HI's next global venture brought the company to the UK. There, lastSeptember, HI's unregulated subsidiary, HI Energy, teamed with Central &South West Corp (CSW), to make a run at acquiring Norweb plc, the electricdistribution company that serves 2-million customers in the northwesternpart of England, near Manchester. In what turned out to be a nerve-wrackingbidding war, HI and CSW saw their $2.7-billion bid topped in the end by theUK-based North West Water Group, which won the distribution firm with aprice of $2.89-billion.   According to Steve Schaeffer, senior vice president of finance at HIEnergy, the company's specific aim in Britain was to expand itsinternational distribution operations. While the company does not rule outexpansion of generation, executives believe that HI Energy is one of ahandful of international companies that can bring ``state-of-the-art''billing and record-keeping systems to the table. ``We know thatdistribution is often a political exercise, but we believe that is the areawe have the ability to add value,'' says Schaeffer.   Indeed, HI Energy's experiences in Argentina, with its 350,000 customersin Buenos Aires and Santiago del Estero provinces, has given it confidencethat it can work out kinks in distribution systems just aboutanywhere--particularly in Latin America.   Very much on the mind of HI executives today, is the perceived openingof the Brazilian industry. ``Brazil is clearly in the same league as Indiaand China, in terms of potential,'' says Schaeffer. ``However, itsadvantages may lay more in distribution than in generation. If thegovernment is going to continue building hydro facilities, I'm not sure Iwant to build gas-fired units there.''In India, where HI Energy is building the largest coke-calcining plant inAsia, HI supports behind-the-fence projects, given the comparatively highrates of return from Indian industrial customers. Schaeffer also believesthat India's local capital market is developing at such a fast rate thatbefore long, foreign companies will mainly be sought after for theirtechnical skills, and not for how deep their pockets are.   For the moment, HI's pockets are plenty deep, thanks to its brief flingin the cable business. The company is going to have to plow those profitsinto something soon--or shareholders could be headed for a big windfall.Photograph(s):Photograph: Houston Industries Energy has 350,000 electric-utilitycustomers in Argentina--and expertise to run a distribution systemanywhere, say company executivesPhotograph: ``We booked a gain on the [cable] deal of $700-million aftertax, and . . . $1-billion in Time Warner stock'' William Cropper, HoustonIndustriesPhotograph: ``Brazil is clearly in the same league as India and China, interms of potential'' Steve Schaeffer, Houston Industries EnergyAbout the Author(s):Jeffrey Ryser is a business writer based in Houston, Tex.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. STATE EXPERIMENTS WITH RETAIL WHEELINGLast October, the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (PUC) announceda 3-yr retail wheeling pilot program that hasn't left the spotlight sinceits introduction. Source of both controversy and consideration, the programis continuing efforts to open the electric power market to competition.Yet, project implementation faces high hurdles, such as recovery ofstranded costs and resolution of federal and state jurisdictional issues.   With most industry groups taking direct access as a matter ofinevitability, New Hampshire is seen as the test case. At issue for theelectric power industry in part is stranded cost recovery and itsimplications for balance sheets and credit ratings. Standard & Poor's(S&P), a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, is carefully watching theterms the state PUC is devising for stranded-cost recovery. For theutilities involved in the pilot, however, the news is good, notes S&P:``[Its relatively small size] should allow the financial impact to bemanageable for the utilities involved.''   The program is scheduled to begin May 1 and include 3% of the state'selectric peak load--about 60 MW. Although Michigan has announced a retailwheeling program, it only covers incremental load growth and not existingload. The New Hampshire program will involve the state's six majorutilities, including Public Service Co of New Hampshire (PSNH) which willaccount for 44 MW of the pilot load.   The project is expected to include all customer classes allocatedproportionately with random customer selection of interested parties.Customers will be expected to bear the risks involved with the transactionsin making their own arrangements for a power provider and backup supplier.However, these initial guidelines may be revised. Final guidelines wereexpected on Dec 22, after press time.   The PUC's preliminary guidelines divide the cost of stranded investmentsequally between customers and shareholders. Therefore, according to S&P,state utilities will not be able to fully recover stranded-investmentcosts. The mechanism itself may be financially damaging to utilities iffinalized as New Hampshire's permanent mechanism in dealing with strandedinvestment. This inability to fully recover costs that were allowed underprevious regulatory practices will almost certainly impact negatively on autility's credit-worthiness.   Although the PUC notes that the stranded-cost mechanism is temporary andsubject to full review after the pilot program's first year, it conflictswith the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's (FERC) position thatutilities get an opportunity to recover identifiable and verifiablestranded costs. But the PUC contends that it has exclusive jurisdiction onintrastate transactions despite FERC's jurisdiction on wheeling. Result:The jurisdictional conflict between state and FERC will most likelyescalate as the pilot progresses.   In fact, the pilot has yet to begin and PSNH has already asserted itsclaim that state regulatory commissions do not have the authority to orderretail wheeling--an echo of Detroit Edison Co's claim in its issue with theMichigan PUC over its experimental retail wheeling program.   To add fuel to the fire, a New Hampshire attorney is proposing a newpublic utility to serve industrial customers with low-cost power availableon the wholesale market. The PUC could approve the utility-- FreedomElectric Power Co--under a state law allowing competition in the publicinterest. Freedom has already arranged to purchase 20 MW of capacity fromNorth Atlantic Energy Service Co's nuclear powerplant, Seabrook.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. SAN FRANCISCO LEADS THE WAY FOR MUNISIn a move closely watched by industry observers, the city of San Francisco,Calif, is studying the formation of its own electric utility. Through itsconsultant, Strategic Energy Ltd, Pittsburgh, Pa, the city is evaluatingwhether or not it makes economic sense for its citizenry to break fromPacific Gas & Electric Co and establish its own electric utility. Undercurrent federal regulations, municipal utilities can shop around forlow-priced power.   However, at this point, San Francisco is just examining its options.According to the consulting firm, the question posed by the city is whethercompetition for the city's business would result in lower electricityprices for consumers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WEEKLY OUTPUT, 1-MILLION KWH        Weekly output, 1-million kWh           November 11:  59,890November 4: 57,682      October 28: 57,049October 21: 57, 046     October 14: 57,917Cumulative year to dateTotal US: 2,807,683 kWh (-10 superscript 6)Change over 1994, % 3.0                         LATEST WEEK           52 WKS TO DATE                                    % chg                         kWh        over       kWh              %               (-10 superscript 6)  1994  (-10 superscript 6)  chgNew England              2217       7.0     116,163            0.6Middle Atlantic          7852       7.3     418,652            0.5Central Industrial     12,718       9.0     661,933            3.9West Central             4452       8.5     236,664            4.3Southeast              14,594       9.7     778,542            3.8South Central            7299       2.9     429,085            2.8Rocky Mountain           2878       3.1     160,540            0.1Pacific Northwest        3502       0.4     167,919            2.1Pacific Southwest        4378       0.5     243,820            2.7Latest seasonally         148              Previous week       144 adjusted indexYear ago                  137Source: Edison Electric InstituteIllustration(s):Illustration: Graph:l Weekly output, 1-million kWhCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. DIRECT ACCESS THREATENS UTILITY REVENUENews and information about financial matters relevant to the electric powerindustry provided by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-HillCompanies   Revenue--rather than stranded assets--is the key to credit quality whenthe US electric power industry retail markets open to direct access,explains Standard & Poor's (S&P), a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies.A recent S&P study has determined that if direct access were to happentoday, industry revenues would decline between a moderate $10-billionannually (6%) and a more troublesome $26-billion (16%). The range is basedon two scenarios that make assumptions about the extent to which customerswill opt for direct access and the degree to which lost revenue will berecovered.   Companies whose credit rating could be in jeopardy are those with thepotential for the most revenue deterioration. Each utility's potential lostrevenue indicates the degree of cost reduction it must effect to stave offfinancial erosion under a direct-access scenario.The financial risks occur when a utility's embedded costs cannot berecovered in a declining price environment. At most risk are a utility'sown generation expenses and purchased-power contracts, since it appears--atleast for now--that the transmission and distribution end of the businesswill remain regulated and insulated from competitive threats. Mostutilities are well aware of the exposures and are working toward a morecompetitive cost structure.Who is vulnerable?   The severe case contemplates a situation in which direct access occursimmediately for all customer classes and assumes no surcharge mechanism torecover lost revenue.   The more expected scenario assumes direct access for commercial andindustrial users only. While all customer classes are likely to havecompetitive choices, as a practical matter, only the larger users areexpected to exercise that choice--at least initially. Residential customersare initially less likely to switch from their local utility supplier.   This scenario also assumes that 50% of commercial and industrial lostrevenue will be recovered in rates. In reality, S&P believes thatregulators will permit recovery of a higher percentage of lost revenue;however, the exact portion will vary greatly among states. And, in thefinal analysis, the market will decide how much it can bear.   Under the moderate (6%) revenue-loss scene, utilities with the most tolose are those with high generation costs and possibly a heavy industrialload. Most utilities will be hard-pressed to cut costs sufficiently tooffset a potential double-digit reduction in revenue. On the other hand,various risk-mitigation strategies are available to all utilities, and manyhave already begun to implement cost-cutting measures in an effort topreserve financial integrity.   Utilities with the least vulnerability to direct retail access are thosewith low generating costs and a modest industrial customer base. Inaddition, utilities that will also do well will have competitively pricedexcess-generating capacity and the ability to market that power nationwide.Nevertheless, as the competitive landscape changes, even those companieswill need to adjust periodically to maintain their competitive advantages.Market forces drive risk   Market forces will continue to drive retail prices down, as long asthere is excess generating capacity. Moreover, customer self-generation andfuel switching are tempting alternatives that will contribute to pricingpressure.   A large and efficient spot market for electricity is poised to emerge.This too will contribute to pricing pressures. While regional pricingdifferences now reflect supply and demand, prices will become morehomogeneous nationwide over time as cross-country power swaps expandcustomer access to additional power sources. These displacement andexchange deals, as well as technological advances, should highlight theinefficiencies of the transmission grid and encourage improvements tolessen any existing constraints and bottlenecks.   Flexibility may dictate customer buying patterns--forcing some to relyheavily on the spot market and short-term contracts. This would increasecompetition for customers and possibly entice generators to run on smallerreserve margins, freeing up even more generating capacity and drivingprices down further.   Utilities with firm contracts with customers are less likely to losethose customers but not completely immune from the risks of price andrevenue decline. To illustrate: Raytheon Corp asked for--and got--pricereductions from Massachusetts utilities so it would remain in-state.   Nevertheless, with all of the proposals floating around, mandated directaccess is likely to emerge from federal or state regulators or legislators.Utilities will continue to discount rates until the market rate drops tothe variable cost to generate power. If market rates are below variablecosts, a utility will no longer generate power from its most inefficientplants, at least in theory.   So why not do a plant-by-plant analysis to reveal uneconomic powerstations? S&P feels that most utilities run their systems as a portfolio.Operating statistics for individual plants, such as capacity factor, changeconstantly with fluctuating load patterns, fuel choices, plantavailability, and other management decisions. However, in the long term,some plants will be closed and others built to take their places forpeaking and base-load capacity.Mitigating riskMost US utilities are already re-engineering their way to lower generationcosts. In the future, many may also decide to write off high-costassets--particularly if generation-related revenue is no longer regulated.The resulting equity reduction is not a concern from a credit-qualitystance because it is a non-cash event. However, the eventual drop inrevenue as prices decline is a concern. But there are additional ways tomitigate stranded costs other than reduction.   One method is to seek recovery through rates. While the bulk of strandedcosts may be charged to ratepayers, the actual dollar amount is likely tobe tempered by political and market forces. Other strategies, such asaccelerated depreciation of plants or reallocation of costs to reduceindustrial subsidies, will continue to proliferate. The potential for lostrevenue is lower if generation assets can be further depreciated beforedirect access becomes effective or if industrial rates can be reducedwithout affecting cost recovery.   Other options include aggressive marketing efforts to boost sales andchanges in purchased-power strategies. Some utilities may absorb part ofthe above-market power-purchase costs to stay competitive-- despite aregulated pass-through to customers.   For more information on the revenues-at-risk study by the corporateutility group, contact John Bilardello at 212-208-1525 or Michael Cole at212-208-8704.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. FYIUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   As of Nov 11, 1995, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) hasapproved 136 power marketers; 25 more are pending.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. AGREEMENTUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   New Energy Ventures signs an agreement with the California RetailersAssn to negotiate power and natural-gas supply contracts and provide avariety of other energy services to individual association members.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. LEGALITIESUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   Dept of Energy (DOE) selects three power suppliers for the Nevada TestSite and North Las Vegas facilities, but has delayed awarding the contractsbecause of litigation over service territory rights. Estimated value of thecontracts is $55-million for the test site and $19-million for North LasVegas over the 10-yr contract duration. DOE proposes 2-yr contracts withfour 2-yr options.Valley Electric Assn filed the lawsuit, now pendingbefore the Nevada Supreme Court, seeking clarification of the boundaries ofits service territory on part of the test site.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. REQUEST FOR PROPOSALSUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   University of Missouri's Columbia campus issues an RFP for electricityand natural-gas supplies. The school intends to purchase up to 48,300MWh/yr with purchases of up to 10 MW in certain hours. Supply will beginApr 1. The campus also seeks up to 2-million ft3/yr of natural gas.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CEGELEC ESCAUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   Cegelec ESCA launches The Electronic Energy Exchange, a 24-hr,real-time, bilateral service designed specifically for trading electricity.The exchange combines the convenience of electronic public bulletin boardswith the security of private telephone negotiations in an on-line serviceusing advanced computer technology. Subscribers can post offers to buy orsell products for any duration--from minutes to months. There are notransaction fees.   Transactions can be handled in several ways. A subscriber needingresources quickly can accept a seller's posted terms or strike a betterdeal by negotiating concurrently with multiple sellers through privatescreens. All transactions among the exchange users are secure; all dealconfirmations are private. Information for market analysis is alsoavailable to each subscriber.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. ELECTRICITY ALERTUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   Electricity Alert, a real-time information service for the electricpower industry, is now available from Platt's and Power Markets Week,divisions of The McGraw-Hill Companies. It combines the editorial expertiseof Power Markets Week and Platt's commodity information services to createa definitive market information service with real-time news, commentary,and prices (see p 52 for more information).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. ENRON CAPITAL & TRADE RESOURCESUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   Enron Capital & Trade Resources makes an offer to the Long Island PowerAuthority (LIPA) to help restructure Long Island Lighting Co, evenguaranteeing rate relief under some structures if LIPA opens Long Island toretail competition. The proposal was one of 13 made public by LIPA in itsefforts to develop a restructuring plan for the Long Island utility, whichcharges the highest electric rates in the country, averaging 15.3cents/kWh.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. TALLAHASSEE (FLA) ELECTRIC DEPTUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   Tallahassee (Fla) Electric Dept receives three proposals from outsidesources and two from itself for a total of 964 MW in response to an RFPseeking 250 MW for a minimum of 11 years. All the proposals are for newgeneration. A decision is expected in the spring.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. TAMPA ELECTRIC COUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data Institute   Tampa Electric Co seeks PSC approval of a new optionalCommercial/Industrial Service Rider, which would allow the utility tonegotiate special rates with large power consumers without the need for PSCapproval.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data InstituteTable I: Power marketer applications, fourth quarter, 1995*Company                         FERC Docket No. StatusDartmouth Power Associates LP   ER96-149-000    PendingEastex Power Marketing Inc      ER96-118-000    PendingEnergy-Online Inc               ER96-138-000    PendingEnergy Transfer Group LLC       ER96-280-000    PendingEnerserve LC                    ER96-182-000    PendingEnova Energy Marketing Inc      ER96-41-000     PendingGreenwich Energy Partners LP    ER96-116-000    PendingMulti-Energies USA              ER96-203-000    PendingNordic Electric LLC             ER96-127-000    PendingNorstar Energy LP               ER96-10-000     PendingSouthern Energy Marketing Co    ER95-976-000    ApprovedUSGen                           ER95-1625-000   PendingUS Power & Light Inc            ER96-105-000    PendingYankee Energy Marketing Co      ER96-146-000    Pending*From Sep 30 through Nov 11   Source:UDI/McGraw-HillCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. Updates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inUpdates of current rate issues and bulk power transactions as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week, andIndustrial Energy Bulletin newsletters and by Utility Data InstituteTable II: Power marketer transactions, third quarter, 1995*Power marketer                      MWh sold         MWh purchasedAES Power Inc                           55,200           55,200Aquila Power Corp                       71,446             9600Associated Power Services Inc          203,556          203,076Catex Vitol Electric Inc               371,695          135,151CNG Power Services                     435,098          421,518Citizens Lehman Power LP               247,915          247,915Coastal Electric Services Co           111,250          111,250R. J. Dahnke & Associates              438,840           49,560Destec Power Services                     7300             7300Electric Clearinghouse Inc           1,180,374        1,194,938Engelhard Power Marketing Inc           83,676           87,980Enron Power Marketing Inc            2,427,703        2,193,264Hartford Power Sales LLC                14,331           14,379Heartland Energy Services Inc          155,480          158,219Illinova Power Marketing Inc            20,800           20,800InterCoast Power Marketing Co             1400             1400Koch Power Services Inc                   9420             9420LG&E Power Marketing Inc               650,701          672,073Louis Dreyfus Electric Power Inc     1,457,156        1,434,002Morgan Stanley Capital Group              1600             1600NorAm Energy Services Inc              333,828          303,542North American Energy Conservation Inc    6950             6950Power Exchange Corp                         50               50Rainbow Energy Marketing Corp           54,738           55,246Stand Energy Corp                       18,816           18,816Tennessee Power Co                        4800             4800TransCanada Northridge Power Corp       43,200           30,000Total                                8,421,723        7,462,449*Source:UDI/McGraw-HillCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEM   Allegheny Power System consolidates its bulk power supply functions atthe Greensburg (Pa) office, establishing three major business units:generation, headed by Donald R. Feenstra, executive director, operating;transmission, led by David C. Benson, director, system operations; andplanning and compliance, headed by Karl V. Pfirrmann, director,transmission planning. All three men are elected vice president as a resultof their new positions.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. AIR MOVEMENT & CONTROL ASSN INC   Air Movement & Control Assn Inc elects David W. Wolbrink president. Heis vice president of research and development for Broan Manufacturing Co.Photograph(s):Photograph: D.W. WolbrinkCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO   American Electric Power Co names a management team to pursue globalenergy investment and development projects involving power systemsengineering, design, consulting, and project-management services. Donald M.Clements will lead the reorganized business unit as president of AEP EnergyServices, AEP Resources, AEP Resources International Ltd, and AEPInvestments. C. David Mustine, who was general manager of AEP EnergyServices, is elected vice president of the four entities. John H.Provanzana, formerly manager of support services in AEP's T&D ServicesDept, is named to the newly created position of general manager oftransmission and distribution for AEP Energy Services. Stephen A. Molick, aprincipal engineer in AEP's Technology Applications Div, becomes directorof industrial projects.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. AMERICAN GAS ASSN   American Gas Assn elects Susan Glasmann, vice president of marketing andsales with Mountain Fuel Supply Co, chair of the marketing section.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. BECHTEL GROUP INC   Bechtel Group Inc elects Frederick W. Gluck vice chairman and AdrianZaccaria president and chief operating officer. Riley P. Bechtel continuesas CEO, in addition to his new duties as chairman. Gluck was an executivevice president and member of the executive committee. Zaccaria waspresident of Bechtel's Global Energy Industries.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE   Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce appoints Michael K. Burke director inits CIBC Wood Gundy Project Finance Unit, under which it offers credit andcapital market services globally, primarily to the power industry. Burk waswith Barclays de Zoete Wedd as director of project finance in theStructured Finance Div.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CANADIAN STANDARDS ASSN   Canadian Standards Assn elects Nick Maalouf vice president,certification and testing; he was vice president, operations-North Americaand Europe.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CENTRAL HUDSON GAS & ELECTRIC CORP   Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp names Gladys Cooper assistant vicepresident-governmental relations. She was corporate secretary prior to aleave of absence used to obtain a juris doctorate.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CMS ENERGY CORP   CMS Energy Corp elects President Victor J. Fryling to the additionalpost of chief operating officer. Michael G. Morris is named executive vicepresident. He will remain president and CEO of subsidiary Consumers PowerCo.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO   Consolidated Natural Gas Co announces that David M. Westfall will assumethe responsibilities of chief financial officer in addition to his role assenior vice president. He succeeds Lester D. Johnson, vice chairman andchief financial officer, who is retiring.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. COOLING TOWER INSTITUTE   Cooling Tower Institute elects Ken Kozelski of DuPont Co president andboard chairman.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. COOPERS & LYBRAND LLP   Coopers & Lybrand LLP expands its Utilities/Energy Consulting Div,adding Robert A. Irvin to lead the group, which now includes PalmerBellevue, an energy consulting group acquired in 1993. He was a principalat McKinsey & Co.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CSW ENERGY INC   CSW Energy Inc names Floyd W. Nickerson to the newly created position ofvice president of corporate resources for both the firm and affiliate CSWInternational Inc. Nickerson was vice president of corporate services forTransok Inc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. DOW ENVIRONMENTAL INC   Dow Environmental Inc announces that Paul Goldstein will succeed BarryN. Naft as president. Goldstein was vice president of marketing andbusiness development.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. DUKE ENGINEERING & SERVICES   Duke Engineering & Services names Charles B. Aycock vice president ofrenewable energy with responsibility for hydroelectric and thermal powerprojects, plant operations, industrial power applications, and emergingtechnologies--such as solar, wind, and photovoltaics.Photograph(s):Photograph: C.B. AycockCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. EDS APPOINTS WILLIAM J. GRABSKE   EDS appoints William J. Grabske president of its Utilities Div. He waswith JWP International as vice president with responsibility for thatfirm's international energy and environmental business.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. ELSAG BAILEY PROCESS AUTOMATION   Elsag Bailey Process Automation announces four key assignments in theEngineering and R&D Group, naming Richard Allenson director, systemsdevelopment engineering; Thomas Fink senior director, consoles and toolsdevelopment engineering; Edward Mallinak senior system architect; and AnnePoorman director, applications product development engineering. Companyunit Bailey-Fischer & Porter names Blake Doney product manager for magneticflowmeters.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. FLUOR DANIEL INC   Fluor Daniel Inc appoints Bill Wasilewski general manager of the firm'sPhiladelphia (Pa) office. He was business development manager for thecompany's Chemicals, Plastics, and Fibers operating company.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. IBM UTILITY AND ENERGY SERVICES INDUSTRY   IBM Utility and Energy Services Industry names Kevin M. Moonan generalmanager of the business unit for North America with responsibility fordefining industry strategy and direction, developing customer solutions,spearheading sales and marketing in North America, and for coordinatingworldwide activities of the Utility and Energy Services Industryorganization.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. INSTITUTE OF NUCLEAR POWER OPERATIONS   Institute of Nuclear Power Operations elects W. George Hairston III toits board of directors. Hairston is president and CEO of Southern NuclearOperating Co and executive vice president, nuclear operations of GeorgiaPower Co.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. LURGI CORP   Lurgi Corp appoints Alan N. Silberberg president and chief operatingofficer. He was senior vice president.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. MIDLAND COGENERATION VENTURE LP   Midland Cogeneration Venture LP elects James M. Kevra president and CEOand Gary B. Pasek general counsel and secretary. Kevra was president of PanNational Gas Sales Inc; Pasek was with Illinois Power Co.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. MISSION ENERGY CO   Mission Energy Co appoints Lawrence C. Grundmann Jr director ofdevelopment, USA/Canada. He was with Ahlstrom Development Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. NEW YORK POWER AUTHORITY   New York Power Authority Chief Nuclear Officer William J. Cahill Jr iselected a life fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.Photograph(s):Photograph: W.J. Cahill, Jr.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. NOOTER/ERIKSEN INC   Nooter/Eriksen Inc names three to new positions: Donald H. Lange fromgeneral sales manager to vice president-sales and marketing, Timothy S.Peterson from project manager to manager of projects, and Thomas S. McBroomfrom project engineer to project engineering manager.Photograph(s):Photograph: D.H. LangePhotograph: T.S. McBroomPhotograph: T.S. PetersonCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. PECO ENERGY CO   PECO Energy Co elects Drew B. Fetters vice president of nuclear stationsupport, succeeding William H. Smith III, who has a new post with thecompany. Fetters' most recent assignment was project director for theutility's financial information systems project.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. PLANMETRICS INC   Planmetrics Inc elects James Pardikes vice president. He has been withthe firm for several years as a consultant in strategy, finance, marketing,and operational effectiveness.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. SCECORP   SCEcorp and its utility subsidiary, Southern California Edison Co, electAlan J. Fohrer and Bryant C. Danner executive vice presidents. They willcontinue to serve as chief financial officer and general counsel,respectively. Harold B. Ray is elected executive vice president of Edisonfrom senior vice president. He remains in charge of the Systems group,which includes nuclear, power generation, transmission, and substationorganizations.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. SIEMENS CORP, POWER GENERATION GROUP   Siemens Corp, Power Generation Group, appoints Dr David G. McAleesexecutive director of its Nuclear Fuel Cycle Div, succeeding Helmut Pekarekwho has accepted a new management position for the firm. McAlees retainshis current position as senior vice president and general manager ofSiemens Power Corp's Nuclear Div, headquartered in Bellevue, Wash.Photograph(s):Photograph: D.G. McAleesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. THE SOUTHERN COMPANY   The Southern Company names Dave Altman vice president for corporatecommunications, succeeding J. R. Harris, who assumes new responsibilitiesas vice president of external affairs and assistant corporate secretary ataffiliate Southern Electric International Inc. Altman is currently vicepresident of corporate communications at subsidiary Georgia Power Co.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. GLOBALIZATION OF ELECTRICITY MARKETSAt a recent executive summit, CEOs, presidents, managers, and strategistsshared McGraw-Hill's insights into the current and future state of theindustry. Analysts from four divisions of The McGraw-Hill Companiesexplained the what, when, and why of regional economic growth, electricitydemand, capacity expansions, changing structural and regulatory climates,and trends in fuel prices and technologies. If you didn't attendGlobalization of Electricity Markets, here's what you missedBy:John Javetski   As an early-season snowfall blanketed New York City in late November,electric power executives converged on the headquarters of The McGraw-HillCompanies to participate in the first annual Globalization of ElectricityMarkets conference. Sponsored by IBM's Utility and Energy ServicesIndustry, White Plains, NY, the two-day executive summit showcased thecollective marketing and technical expertise of personnel from severaldivisions of The McGraw-Hill Companies, the world's largest supplier ofinformation to the global electricity marketplace.   Energy specialists and technical/business analysts from Standard &Poor's, DRI/McGraw-Hill (a unit of Standard & Poor's), the magazinesElectrical World and Electric Power International, and Utility DataInstitute (UDI)/McGraw-Hill joined guest speakers in providing a forum forthe audience of executives to discuss and debate the latest trends anddevelopments that are reshaping the global electric power industry, as wellas traditional relationships between risks and opportunities in thebusiness.   The conference also marked the release of DRI/McGraw-Hill's worldwideand regional forecasts of electricity demand, electricity prices, capacityneeds, regulatory and structural evolution, and fuel prices and mixes. Thisreport summarizes the conference sessions; unabridged versions of DRI'sforecasts for the 1995-2020 period can be found in its ambitious,six-volume, multi-client study, titled ``The Future of the Electric PowerIndustry Around the World'' (see box).World economic outlook   Roger Brinner, chief economist of DRI/McGraw-Hill, Lexington, Mass,kicked off the conference by presenting DRI's rather upbeat worldwideeconomic outlook, which was at the core of DRI's analyses of regionalelectricity markets. Brinner began by predicting that GDP growth for the USwould be fairly moderate in the long term, averaging only about 2%/yrbetween 1995 and 2020.   The fundamental reason that economic growth will remain half a pointlower than the 2.5% it has averaged of late, he explained, is that growthin both the US population and labor force recently shrank to about 1%, andwill remain there over the forecast period.   But thanks to the North American Free Trade Agreement, in 1995, Brinnersays the US lost about $20-billion worth of export sales to Mexico,and--because of the devaluation of the peso--the US is now absorbing moreimports from Mexico that may have represented another $10- to $20-billionof lost US production last year.   Brinner then revealed why he remains optimistic about the economicfuture of the US. Normally, in the late stages of an economic recovery,capital spending on machine tools, computers, and plant and equipmentdeclines sharply. But that hasn't happened yet, based on recent figures fornew orders for most non-defense capital goods. Brinner concluded that thereare four unusual, positive elements in the current US economic cycle:n New technology is economically obsoleting many types of equipment, fromprocess-control systems to business computers, and corporations can nowjustify accelerating their capital-goods spending because of savings inproduction and operations costs that they can reap.   -- For foreign firms that sell into the US market, the dollar has becomeso relatively cheap that many are locating their production facilities inthe US to an unprecedented extent, and those investments show up as UScapital spending.   -- Inflation seems to have topped out in the US, because the FederalReserve Bank's 1994 interest-rate hikes were successful in keepingunemployment from falling below 5.5 to 6%, and capacity utilization fromexceeding 85% --the balance points for today's US economy.   -- Recent productivity growth has been so good that the manufacturingsector has been able to keep its rate of price increases below that ofhourly compensation gains, while boosting its capital spending andprofitability. As a result, DRI predicts that the Federal Reserve will cutinterest rates by at least one-half percent over the next six months.Reining in inflation   Brinner was somewhat less optimistic about overall long-term economicprospects for the rest of the world, especially Europe. However, he wasencouraged by worldwide efforts to rein in inflation. In the G-7 nations,inflation should remain comfortably down at around 3% through the end ofthe decade, and even the nations of economically overheated Asia seem tohave capped inflation at about 8%.   Brinner characterized Europe's expected moderate but extended upswing asdisappointing, for the following reasons. Compared to the US, Europeannations are experiencing an even more pronounced decline in theirpopulations and labor forces, and they're trying to cut their budgets tomeet the Maastricht Treaty requirements. Rampant pessimism among Europeanbusiness leaders, which is tempering the short-term investment climatethere, is justified by Europe's untenable labor costs, which are twicethose of the US but with only 75 to 80% of its productivity.   Brinner was more optimistic about Mexico and Latin America. He predictedthat the peso crisis, which cut the influx of international equity todeveloping Latin American nations by an order of magnitude two years ago,would not result in another lost decade like the 1980s. Why? This time, theLatin American nations responded to the crisis by cutting their deficits,accelerating privatization efforts, locking in economic reforms, andreaffirming their integration with global trade.   For Europe, Japan, and the US, DRI projects that inflation-adjustedgrowth will be only 2 to 2.5% from 1995 to 2020. For the Middle East andAfrica, the former Soviet Union, and Eastern Europe, growth will be3.5-4.5%. For Latin America, GDP growth will be approximately 5%, and forAsia, about 5.5%.   Brinner said the greatest opportunities, purely on a GDP basis, are inthe developing world. But in terms of demand for power, the opportunitiesin high-GDP-growth regions are even richer because of the even fastergrowth of the middle class there.   Growth in the developing world will continue to exceed the rates of the1970s and 1980s because of entrepreneurial government initiatives. Thefastest growing countries had higher rates of investment relative to GDP,much higher rates of secondary-school enrollment, and greater openness totrade. So, Brinner concludes that if you welcome equity investment and yourworkforce is educated enough to make use of transferred technology, you cangrow rapidly.   But there are risks to investing in emerging markets, Brinner reminded.DRI recently launched a global risk service that delineates many dimensionsof those risks, recognizing that the risks facing direct foreign investorsare different than those facing, say, a portfolio investor. One conclusion:today, Asia and Latin America offer the best risk/reward tradeoff of allregions.Fuels forecast   Electric-utility executives care only about the relative--not theabsolute--prices of the fossil fuels that they burn, noted James Osten, aprincipal with the Lexington (Mass) office of DRI/McGraw-Hill.   So, in its fuels-price outlook, DRI also considers the availability,demand, and end-user costs for oils, natural gas, liquified natural gas(LNG), and coal on a relative basis. Osten explained that, as a bulkcommodity, the price of crude oil is determined strictly by supply anddemand. He mentioned that, facing sluggish demand forecasts and competitionfrom non-OPEC sources, OPEC itself may be anticipating that oversupply mayreduce the price of crude oil in the short term.   But residual oil remains a key fuel whose price is commonly used as anindex in natural-gas contracts, Osten reminded. At present, the price ofpipeline gas--including fixed demand charges, a commodity part thatescalates with fuel-oil prices, and often-significant transportationcosts--appears to be capped by the price of fuel oil on one side, and bythe price of coal on the other.   Osten then addressed the evolution of demand for the various fossilfuels by region. He predicted that, across the board, the growth of demandfor oil will lag that for other fuels, even in the developing world. Andalthough demand for natural gas will grow fastest--in part because of itspenetration of power-generation sectors--eventually coal will become thenew fuel of choice for new base-load capacity as coal producers reducetheir prices in response to the challenge by gas.   Today, however, natural gas is still the fuel of choice for new capacityin the US, Osten said, thanks to the low heat rates and low capital costsof the gas turbines it typically fires. However, the growth of demand forgas in power generation will vary by region, with most of the developingworld craving more gas, and mature markets less.   To complete the presentation on fuels, Osten passed the microphone toAndrew Slaughter, principal, DRI/McGraw-Hill International EnergyConsulting, Paris, France. Slaughter began by summarizing his three keypredictions for coal:   -- Power generation will remain the most important market for coal inthe developed world, and it will become more important in the developingworld.   -- Coal will retain its dominant share of the worldwide market forpower-generation fuels, despite competition from gas in certain sectorsover certain periods of time within the forecast period.   -- Because all signs point to a relatively stable and adequate supply,and a moderation in its price over the long term, coal's cost advantageover oil and gas will improve over the forecast period.   When coal producers lose business with a mature-market utility sector,he said, they don't recover it anywhere else in the region--which motivatesthem to find ways to reduce their prices.   In the developing world, coal markets are a little more diverse. InAsia--the world's largest coal consumer--power generation accounts for 40%of demand for coal, and in Latin America, 29%. However, Slaughter calledcoal's penetration of the Latin American power-generation market poised forgrowth.   Slaughter explained that although current pressures--increasing regionaldemand, emissions-abatement policies that mandate greater use of low-sulfurcoal, etc--seem to presage an upward movement in coal prices, DRI'sanalyses conclude that, in all regions, the moderating influences on coalprices, including a healthy supply situation, will continue to outweigh theupward pressures.   In the US, many long-term, high-price utility contracts for steam coalare being replaced by shorter-term contracts at lower prices. In Europe,privatization and the phasing out of subsidies to the coal-mining industryare pushing coal prices down, nearer international levels. In Asia, withits mix of subsidized and market prices, the trend isn't as clear, but theadequacy of supply there is a moderating factor.   Slaughter concluded his presentation with a prediction: In powergeneration, moderating prices will improve coal's competitive position vsoil and gas, and their rising prices will accelerate the effect. He pointedout how the thermal-powerplant fuel mixes in the four major markets willchange over the next 25 years. Where coal is already dominant, it willremain so. Coal's share will be hurt most by gas through the early years ofthe next century, but after that, coal will rebound slightly.Technology trends   Jason Makansi, editor-in-chief of the magazines POWER and Electric PowerInternational, based in New York City, next identified discussed five majortechnology trends. The most important, he said, is the transition fromsteam turbines to gas turbines, many of which could be burning gasifiedsolid fuels within 10 to 15 years. The worldwide trend away from regulatedmarkets and toward a free-market orientation will only accelerate thetransition.   That's why, at least in the short term, Makansi believes that naturalgas will not only cut into the market share now held by oil, but into theshare held by coal as well. In explaining how he came to the sameconclusion as DRI's economic analysts, Makansi cited the superior technicaland economic efficiencies of today's gas turbines, shorter-term financinghorizons, and environmental pressures.   The second sweeping trend is the use of information-technology (IT)systems to gain a competitive edge. Makansi explained that, by usingcomputers and telecommunications systems to run their powerplants andtransmission and distribution (T&D) systems, nations, utilities, and IPPsalike can:   -- Capture much of the design margin inherent in existing, olderequipment.   -- Allow power systems to run more reliably, and with smaller reservemargins.   -- Reduce the costs of building and operating generating plants and T&Dsystems.   Makansi predicted that the process of building a new powerplant wouldsoon routinely entail not just the installation of generation hardware--butalso the integration of software and systems that allow operators up anddown the chain of command to monitor and control that hardware moreefficiently andesponsively. He suggested that there might be greaterpotential for adding value and making profits in IT-based equipment than insupplying or installing traditional gear.   The third and fourth global trends mentioned by Makansi involve shiftsin priorities. Wherever competition makes electricity a commodity productproduced from a fuel, it becomes imperative for power producers to maximizetheir control of that energy source at all points of the productionprocess. In competitive environments, utilities and independent powerproducers (IPPs) might do better to concentrate on making their plants morefuel-flexible, or using their IT systems to canvass the market for a betterdeal on a fuel, rather than on acquiring the latest combustionsystem--unless that system offers an immediate bottom-line payoff.   The fifth technological trend involves reliability. When a developingnation invites IPPs to build most or all of its expansion capacity, it alsofosters a climate that encourages short-term, profit-driven thinking--andmay discourage development of the very different mindset needed to planpowerplants and T&D systems that will run reliably for 30 or 40 years. Abalance between private power and state-owned or monopolistic utilities maybe the best approach.   In conclusion, Makansi noted that the electric power business has alwaysbeen driven by crises and catastrophes. Three Mile Island and Chernobyl,the great Northeast Blackout, the oil shortages of the 1970s, droughts inSouth America, and the local health crisis precipitated by an SO2 emissionsincident at the huge coal-fired Mae Moh, Thailand, all drove the industryin directions that could not be foreseen. Market participants will push theenvelopes for performance, risk, profit, staffing, and reserve margins, butwith less certainty about the outcome--thanks to the parallel influence ofthe invisible hand of the free market.World capacity and structural overview   Christopher Bergesen, vice president and editorial director of UtilityData Institute (UDI)/McGraw-Hill, Washington, DC, and Marie Leone,editorial director of Electrical World magazine, provided brief overviewsof those subjects.   Bergesen led off with a UDI projection that conventional steam turbine/generator systems will comprise 44% of worldwide new capacity additionsfrom 1994 to 2003, which put Makansi's first gas-turbine technology trendin perspective. Bergesen said that all the diesels, gas turbines,industrial cogeneration systems, and mini-hydro plants being planned andinstalled today collectively don't amount to all that much in terms ofinstalled base.   UDI's 10-yr rolling projection of new-capacity additions reflected thefact that many private-power projects around the world have been stalled.Bergesen said that after he crunched his numbers a year ago, he anticipatedthat 100 GW of new capacity would be installed worldwide in 1995. Now,however, it looks like only 75 or 80 GW of new plants were commissioned.   In overviewing the structural and regulatory issues that are guiding thetransformation of the North American electricity market, Leone said thatthe shifting ground beneath the feet of US electric-utility executives hasbecome a breeding ground for innovative business arrangements.Investor-owned utilities are merging, branding their products, and spinningoff dedicated generation, distribution, and transmission companies.   But the most interesting activity in the US electric power arena isn'tbetween utilities, Leone claimed; it's among utilities and companies fromdifferent industries. Electric utilities are partnering with computercompanies, commodity brokers, cable companies, telecommunications firms,and even their industrial customers. New species--power marketers, loadaggregators, and merchant plants--are evolving to meet the new,service-oriented, and information-driven needs of the competitive market.   Leone concluded that participants in the new electric power industryshould prepare for the future by arming themselves with historicalperspective in one hand, and forward thinking in the other.North America: Regulatory outlook   Richard Hilt, president of Bright Line Energy Inc, Palo Alto, Calif,seized on Leone's overview of change in the US electric power industry as aspringboard for delving into specifics. Hilt broke up the restructuringproblem into three critical elements: regulatory reform, the unbundling ofutilities, and new pricing mechanisms.   He prefaced his discussion by predicting that the industry's transitionfrom regulation to competition will be neither smooth nor rapid. Asevidence, he pointed out that states are not waiting for the Federal EnergyRegulatory Commission (FERC) to follow the notice of proposed rulemaking(NOPR) it published last spring with final deregulatory rules this spring,before they try to advance on their own toward competition. But althoughCalifornia, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin have taken the lead in increasingconsumers' access to lower priced electricity, the implementation of openaccess among customers and suppliers at the state level is still yearsaway.   At the federal level, Hilt said, a section of the FERC NOPR addressesthe second of his three elements--unbundling. FERC appears to want, at aminimum, utilities to unbundle themselves into functional entities thatcannot deal directly with each other, similar to the situation that used toexist between the commercial and trust portions of banks. But utilitiesdon't currently track their costs that way, he said, so expect additionaldelays as they learn how to do that.   Presently, Hilt explained, electricity rates are set based onutility-cost allocations to various customer classes, and utilities musttry to recover their costs--largely generation costs--using those ratestructures. With functional unbundling, however, the new pricing mechanismmight base prices on utilities' average production costs, on net productioncosts, or even on their average variable costs.   But if competition and open access are successful in lowering consumers'electricity bills, Hilt asked, how might utilities reduce their costs andstill make a profit? They could cut their production costs by operatingtheir powerplants more efficiently, but the economics of that option don'tlook too promising to Hilt. Another way that utilities can cut costs is bywriting down their generation assets, Hilt continued. But writing downassets, he claimed, only changes a utility's fixed production costs;variable costs--except in the Northeast, where fuel costs are high--prettymuch stay the same. As a result, Hilt again predicted, distributioncompanies will be the focus of utilities' attention when they look toreduce their costs in response to the lowering of tariff rates.North America: Demand and capacity forecasts   Susan Haltmaier, a principal based in DRI/ McGraw-Hill's Lexington(Mass) office, continued Hilt's discussion of US regulatory andrestructuring issues, extended it to Canada, and drew some interestingconclusions about the implications of DRI's North Americanelectricity-demand and new-capacity forecasts. First, she introduced theanalytical concept of alternative scenarios--under which restructuringproceeds at different speeds--that DRI applied to all world regions duringthe creation of its six-volume study.   For the US, the three scenarios make different assumptions about whenretail wheeling will be implemented, and about how much of their strandedcosts utilities will be allowed to recover, Haltmaier explained. She saidthat the reference scenario assumes that retail wheeling will arrivegradually, and that utilities will be forced to unbundle their generation,transmission, and distribution assets. The reference scenario also assumesthat utilities will be allowed to partially recover their stranded costs,which complex calculations reveal would be about $88-billion.   Under the liberalization scenario, the move to open access and retailwheeling would occur more quickly, and more utility customers would be atrisk of changing suppliers, so stranded costs would be higher, at$160-billion. However, under this scenario, utilities would be allowed torecover none of that total. At the other end of the spectrum, theretrenchment scenario assumes that retail wheeling will not become areality by 2020; as a result, fewer customers will leave, stranded costswill amount to only $58-billion, and utilities will be allowed to recoverall of that total--through surcharges to the industrial sector and slightlyhigher prices for residential and commercial customers.   Haltmaier also predicted that, regardless of the speed with which ittakes place, deregulation will even out electricity prices across allregions of the US. She said that the biggest beneficiaries of the lowerprices will be commercial users and homeowners, who currently pay for 80 to90% of utilities' capital charges.   Turning next to electricity demand, Haltmaier reminded the audience thatUS demand is growing at only 1.4%/yr, and net new-capacity needs are aminiscule 0.8%/yr. However, electricity is taking markets away from oil inend-use fuel markets, and it is even cutting into natural gas' dominantshare of the residential and industrial sectors.   Regardless of its pace, deregulation will also affect what type of newcapacity will be added to the US installed base between now and 2020.According to the DRI study, deregulation favors gas-fired over coal-firedcapacity. Although coal prices and interest rates will fall, coal stillwon't be able to compete with gas on a least-cost basis until 2015, whenthe 40-yr licenses on many US nuclear plants expire. All three scenariosassume that those plants won't be repowered; they will just be retired andreplaced by new coal-fired capacity.   In Canada, where utilities are owned and regulated by the provinces,under the reference scenario, unbundling would be gradual, but hydropowerdevelopment would slow in the face of stagnant demand growth, Haltmaiersaid. Under the liberalization scenario, unbundling would occur sooner, andhalf of the provincial utilities would be privatized, but there still wouldnot be much hydro development because the private sector would be dominant.Under the retrenchment scenario, Canadian utilities would cooperate morewith each other to build some large hydro and coal-fired projects, and thenwheel those new kilowatt-hours through Quebec--whose potential lack ofcooperation makes this scenario least likely.Western Europe: Regulatory outlook   Moving on to Western Europe, Silvia Pariente-David, director ofDRI/McGraw-Hill's Global Energy Group, Paris, France, said that there hasbeen a region-wide trend toward liberalization of national electricitysectors, including increasing participation by IPPs. The trend has resultedboth from initiatives at the European Union (EU) level to introducecompetition into the sector, and from individual nations' efforts toincrease competition and/or sell off their electric utilities formuch-needed cash.   Addressing the EU initiatives first, Pariente-David said that fullimplementation of the Internal Energy Market (IEM) could radically changethe structure of the industry in Western Europe. But so far, she added,progress toward the goal of a single market has been painfully slow, and iscurrently stalled. In 1992, the EU issued a directive which proposed, amongother things, the phasing in of regulated third-party access (TPA)--theEuropean equivalent of US retail wheeling--to transmission networks. At therequest of the industry, the directive was amended in 1993 to replaceregulated TPA by negotiated TPA.   Then, in 1994, before TPA could begin to be implemented, Francesuggested that it be replaced by the single-buyer system (SBS), in which asingle entity would buy and sell electricity and prioritize the dispatchingof generation. Since then, the commission has been studying whether and howSBS could be modified to make it compatible with SBS. If the two conceptscan be made compatible, the EU would allow member states to choose one orthe other.   At the national level, several governments are taking their owninitiatives to liberalize their electric power sectors and introducecompetition, with or without privatization, according to Pariente-David.Several camps have developed, she said: The UK and the Nordic countries arepushing for reform, and the UK and Norway have already taken steps tounbundle and/or privatize their utilities and introduce competition; Franceand Luxembourg oppose liberalization; and the other countries must still becollectively classified as ambiguous.   In conclusion, Pariente-David displayed a slide that ranks the EUnations under the reference scenario strictly by the amount of new capacityavailable to IPPs, and delineates that capacity by type--standardgeneration, renewable waste and cogeneration (RCW) and combined heat andpower (CHP) autoproduction. Worth noting, she said: Italy looks positivefor RWC, but less so for CHP/autoproduction because much industrialgenerating capacity already exists; Spain is positive in all threecategories; and Portugal is attractive for both standard generation andRWC, largely because the government hopes to use new IPP gas-fired capacityto reduce the country's dependence on fickle hydropower.Western Europe: Demand and capacity forecasts   Continuing Pariente-David's discussion of Western Europe, Andrew Ellis,an economist with DRI/McGraw-Hill's Global Energy Group, Paris, France,presented some of DRI's predictions of how much and why the region'selectricity prices, electricity demand, installed capacity, and fuel mixwill change between now and 2020. Ellis began by stating that, in 1994, theaverage electricity price in Western Europe was about 5 cents/kWh.   Under the reference scenario, Ellis continued, average generating costswould rise slightly, to between 5 and 6 cents/kWh, over the forecastperiod. But under the liberalization scenario, with full TPA/SBS,industrial electricity prices would rise dramatically in certain countriesand fall dramatically in others as patterns of electricity exchange change.For example, factories in Portugal (-40%), Switzerland (-32%), and Italy(-28%) would receive much-lower electric bills, but Norwegian and Swedishfactories would pay 12% more for their power. To summarize, Ellis said thatunder the liberalization scenario, average industrial prices in WesternEurope would fall an average 12.5% by 2020; under the retrenchmentscenario, however, they would rise an average 14.3% by the same year.   Ellis then explained how the level of openness of the EU electricitymarket might affect the costs and character of new capacity. Using a barchart from the DRI study, he showed that, under the reference scenario,coal would become competitive with gas toward the end of the forecastperiod; under the liberalization scenario, however, that would not be thecase. Because coal will be unable to go toe-to-toe with gas for quite awhile, DRI predicts that most of the new capacity to be installed inWestern Europe through 2020 will be gas-fired.Eastern Europe   Matthew Sagers, director of energy services for PlanEcon Inc,Washington, DC, next turned the audience's attention to Eastern Europe andthe former Soviet republics.   Like the rest of the world, the nations of Eastern Europe have begun todecentralize, unbundle, and privatize their state-owned utilities with thegoal of introducing free-market competition. The two most important driversof power-sector reform in the region are the shift of economies from asupply to a demand orientation, and the changing structure of electricitydemand. In the past, when heavy industry accounted for 50 to 75% ofconsumption, utilities could run base-load nuclear and coal-fired plantswith very high load factors and pay very little attention to peakrequirements. But as residential and commercial consumption rise, Sagerspredicted, more gas-fired capacity will be needed and installed.   Because of excess capacity and low projected levels of demand, grosscapacity additions in the region will be small, and most of that willreplace aging plants that will be retired by 2015. Most of the additionsand retirements will be in Russia, Poland, and the Ukraine, Sagers said. Asis the case elsewhere, natural gas will be the generation fuel of choice inthe region, mainly at the expense of coal.   Although many of the region's governments have discussed privatizingtheir electric utilities, progress has been very slow, Sagers reported. Thecountries furthest along are the Czech Republic and Hungary; both haveunbundled their state-owned power companies and sold minority stakes inthem.Asia   Shifting gears, from struggling Eastern Europe to fast-growing Asia,Andrew Slaughter returned to the podium to address that region's regulatoryand structural issues.   In the industrializing Asian nations, Slaughter explained, state-ownedelectric utilities and their governments have reached the limits of theirfinancial capacity to satisfy explosive demand growth, and power-supplysystems are cracking under the pressure. To cope with relentless demand,countries are joining the rest of the world in considering private poweralternatives.   For analytical purposes, Slaughter said, it makes sense to consider thecountries of Asia as two groups. One group comprises: the older tigers(Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong); the tiger cubs (Thailand,Indonesia, and Malaysia); Pakistan; the Philippines; and, of course, Indiaand China--whose sheer size and potential dwarf the others. DRI projectsthat new-capacity needs in those nations will collectively grow at anannual rate of 5.8% between now and 2020. The other group's members areJapan, Australia, New Zealand, and Turkey; their needs will grow at amore-mature 1.5% rate, according to DRI. For Asia as a whole, DRI pegsannual new-capacity growth at 4.5% over the forecast period, Slaughtersaid.   Where will that new capacity come from? Strapped for cash, Asiangovernments are being forced by foreign sources of capital such as theWorld Bank to restructure their electricity sectors, make their supplysystems more efficient, and/or introduce competition by creating afavorable climate for IPPs. However, only the Philippines has yet attractedmuch inward investment.   But despite setbacks in China and India, Slaughter predicted that, inthe long term, relentless demand growth and capital shortages will forcethe governments of the industrializing Asian countries to make their regionattractive to inward investment. However, although many of those countriesare saying that they expect the private sector to build most of theirneeded capacity expansions, Slaughter doesn't think that that's a feasibleobjective. He expected that as governments reform their electricitysectors, they and their state-owned utilities will retain the ability tobuild their own powerplants. As a result, DRI projects that IPPs will notdominate new-capacity additions in Asia.   Although the total IPP contribution of 250 GW is significant, it isconsiderably less than what the Asian nations will need, and what theirgovernments are saying they want, said Slaughter.Asian fuel mix   Christophe Barret, senior associate with DRI/McGraw-Hill, Hong Kong,followed Slaughter's presentation with DRI's projections forpower-generation fuel mixes in Asia over the forecast period. China, hesaid, will be responsible for most of the new oil-fired capacity installedthrough 2010, because it is desperate for power now, and lacks thepipelines needed to support widespread use of gas.   Barret also predicted that Asia will see much more local development ofgas-fired facilities than individual countries--Philippines and Indonesia,in particular--are now predicting, and that India, Japan, and Thailand willlead the pack in overall installed capacity. China, he said, will dominatein the use of coal for power generation. Barret assumes that China willinstall most of its new coal-fired capacity in its coal-rich northernprovinces, and then transport the electricity generated to regions of highconsumption--such as Beijing and the eastern provinces.Latin America   Moving on to another fast-developing market, Michael Roach, an associatewith DRI/McGraw-Hill, Lexington, Mass, completed the regional forecastswith a look at Latin America. Roach listed four developments that aredriving the industrializing countries of South America and Central Americato make the regulatory and institutional changes needed to make theirelectric power sectors more market-oriented:n Nations that rely heavily on hydroelectric power continue to experiencedroughts that cause capacity shortages.   -- Ill-conceived and poorly developed power projects have squanderedinvestment capital.   -- Financial constraints and investment bottlenecks have arisen ascountries implement conservative fiscal and monetary policies designed tocontrol inflation.   -- The economic integration of the region is forcing the Latin Americancountries to compete for foreign capital, motivating them to create morefavorable and predictable investment and business climates.   Roach expressed confidence that Latin America will continue down thefree-market path. Argentina's and Chile's privatization programs have bornefruit, proving that liberalization and competition can lower electricityprices and elevate economic efficiency. Economic liberalization, he added,would also creates capital markets for IPPs and financial instruments tofacilitate power trade. With stable capital markets, there would be morelocal financing, which he called the key to the success of private power inthe region.   Turning to country specifics, Roach said that Mexico has alreadyderegulated its natural-gas industry, so it is now possible to plan apowerplant assuming the availability of competitively priced gas from alocal source or the US. But all privately generated electricity must stillbe sold to CFE, the state-owned electric utility, and CFE has beenreluctant to purchase anything except peak power. Proceeds from Bolivia'scapitalization program for its national electric utility are earmarked forpension funds that could be used to finance further private investment. InEcuador, widespread and severe brownouts and blackouts will likely resultin accelerating the government's reform efforts. Even giant Brazil seemscommitted to reform.   Which countries offer the biggest and best opportunities? DRI's capacityforecast for the eight largest countries of Latin America shows an overallneed for 242 GW of new capacity between now and 2020, with Brazil's 122 GWaccounting for half of the total. However, as in Asia, the levels of IPPparticipation in national expansions will be lower than currently expected,ranging from 8% in Ecuador to 43% in Argentina.Investment insight   William Chew, managing director for project finance at Standard &Poor's, followed the release of DRI's annual regional forecasts with thefirst of two S &P discussions on investment in the electric power business.For the last five years, Chew explained, many of the world's infrastructureprojects have been non-recourse financed--that is, their debt is financedby their revenues. With power projects, credit-rating agencies look hard atthe potential risks to those revenues.   The importance of credit ratings rose in 1995, Chew noted but so didbusiness risk. But despite the Mexican peso crisis and India's troubledDabhol project Chew remained optimistic that non-recourse andlimited-recourse financing would continue to fuel infrastructure projectsaround the world. What's more, he predicted, the increased use of creditratings will help broaden the circle of investors in those projects toinclude not just specialist investors, but new sources--such as pensionplans and insurance portfolios.   Chew described five long-term factors that are making project financemore revenue-driven, and attractive to a larger pool of investors:   -- The developing world's thirst for new infrastructure and generatingcapacity is inexorable.   -- Banks are currently in the midst of a cycle of substantial liquidity.They are looking to make not only higher-yielding investments, butinvestments in vehicles--such as project finance--that also offeropportunities for higher fees.   -- Managers of annuity-driven portfolios are seeking to optimize theirholdings with risk-adjusted, long-term, high-yield investments--such asproject loans, and several new institutions have entered the field.   -- The focus of financial institutions has shifted away from traditionaldirect lending and toward non-recourse debt financing and serving as acatalyst for project financing from other sources.   -- New project-finance structures are evolving. Big developers are nowusing balance sheets to secure a holding-company-level debt issue with thecombined equity flows of all their projects.   Wrapping up his talk, Chew said that project-finance specialists havelearned--occasionally the hard way--that electric power projects must havea sound economic foundation, and that financial engineering has limits. Asan example, Chew cited the tendency for developers and lenders to allocatecurrency risks to foreign power purchasers. But, he said, that practiceexposes investors to the risk that when a currency weakens, so will thechances of keeping electricity prices low and the purchaser's ability topay.   Curtis Moulton, managing director of corporate finance for Standard &Poor's, followed Chew's discussion on IPP project finance with adissertation on debt ratings of US investor-owned utilities. Compared withcompanies in other industries, Moulton began, electric utilities arerelatively highly rated. But utilities' credit excellence is beingimperiled, he said, by the rising business risks that retail competitionwill bring.   Competition, Moulton predicted, will result in lower electricity pricesand lower earnings. How much and how quickly will prices fall? Moulton saidthat that will be determined by whether the view of FERC or individualstates on stranded-cost recovery prevails. In its NOPR, FERC proposes thatutilities be allowed to recover the costs they incur when wholesalecustomers leave a utility system. Although FERC's philosophy sounds good intheory, in practice, it is not clear whether departing customers will pay100% of utilities' stranded costs.   At the level of the states, one trend is clear: a shift from cost-basedto market-based regulation. Moulton said that one increasingly popular toolin the latter category is performance-based regulation; using thatapproach, a utility's earnings remain regulated, but they are linked to itsability to achieve certain performance objectives in such areas as customerservice and fuel purchasing. He expected that distribution operations wouldeventually come under performance-based regulation.   Moulton predicted that the popularity of market-based regulation wouldeventually overwhelm local sympathies for letting utilities recover all oftheir stranded costs. State regulators, he explained, are under a lot ofpressure to cut electricity rates soon--rather than 10 years from now, whenutilities' stranded costs would be recovered under FERC's timetable. As aresult, Moulton expects that state regulators will allow utilities torecover most of their stranded costs through a surcharge on distribution;the remainder will be absorbed by utility shareholders. To the extent thatutilities can't offset their losses by cutting their operating costs, theirprofits will suffer--potentially substantially.   Moulton predicted that widespread direct access or its marketplaceequivalent will be in place well before the end of the decade. But theintervening uncertainty won't be comforting to investors, he added.Therefore, Moulton says that the credit outlook for US electric utilitiesas a group is poor. However, there are reasons for optimism: Interest ratesare low and falling; utilities are continuing to reduce their cost ofcapital with refinancings; and managements are reducing their operatingcosts and capital expenditures. As a consequence, industry cash flow isstrong, providing opportunities for debt reduction.Electricity futures: Just around the corner   Daniel McElduff, an energy analyst in the Research Dept of the New YorkMercantile Exchange (Nymex), provided conference participants with a sneakpreview of a key aspect of the electric power industry of the future. Heexplained how Nymex's futures and options contracts for electricity willsoon help utilities, merchant plants, and power marketers manage their riskby allowing them to assess and lock in the price of the electricity thatthey buy and sell.   With the development of any competitive marketplace, McElduff explained,participants need new tools to assess the price of the underlyingcommodity. One such tool is McGraw-Hill's Power Markets Week newsletter,which provides price assessments for points throughout the US, and anotherwill be Nymex's electricity futures and options contracts. The futurescontract facilitates standard transactions that are negotiable only as tothe price and the month in which electricity is to be delivered.   What advantages are there in being able to assess the price ofelectricity? With a forward price assessment, McElduff explained, you cancompare the expected future price to historical data and make more-informedpurchase or sales decisions. That's increasingly important, he added, giventhe recent volatility of electricity prices. You could also use forwardprice assessment to aid project planning and development.IBM and the challenge of change   ``Success goes to those able to accept and develop new ways of doingbusiness, and to those who can anticipate--and even accelerate change,''noted featured speaker Kevin Moonan, general manager, IBM's Utility andEnergy Services Industry, at McGraw-Hill's Globalization of ElectricityMarkets executive summit. As sponsors of the two-day summit, IBM'scommitment to the global electric power market was highlighted in twotalks--one by Moonan, the other by IBM's general manager, Europe, UlfGundemark--that captured the essence of a market in flux.   Moonan described the electric power market as one where rivals arebecoming allies, companies are developing new markets and services, andultimately, new revenue streams are being derived from unexpected places.As energy becomes a commodity, added Moonan, service will be the keydifferentiator.   One key to opening the market's potential: Information technology (IT),asserts Moonan. Just as Hong Kong Hospital issues wallet-size optical cardsthat contain full medical records of their patients, and Levi Straussoffers custom-made clothing you can order via the Internet, and FederalExpress puts the power to track packages in its customer's hands, so willIT revolutionize the way electric power companies do business, said Moonan.He then noted four strategic thinking points relevant to his discussion:n IT is of critical importance in light of all the changes within theindustry.   -- It is a defining technology--and how it is used can determinepotential winners and losers.   -- All companies will compete on the basis of information as well as onproducts and services.   -- The fiercest competitors could be the ones that are not in theindustry today because they don't carry the baggage and the mindset of theold way of doing things.   Gundemark, in his presentation, likened today's economic transition tothe 19th century shift from farms to factories--the steam engine madepossible mass production then, just as computer-based IT now enableslarge-scale acquisition and processing of information and fastercommunications.   Gundemark talked about the continued opening of borders to people,capital, and communications that is driving utilities to compete ininternational markets, and the disintegration of local differences. Forutilities in the developed world, says Gundemark, IT systems will likely bethe only tools which separate the winners from the losers.Multi-client worldwide study available from DRI/McGraw-Hill   The Future of the Electric Power Industry Around the World is acountry-by-country analysis of demand, generation profiles, and industrystructure compiled by DRI/McGraw-Hill's Global Energy Group, based inParis, France. The comprehensive, multi-client study covers North America,Western Europe, the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, andAsia/Pacific in four ambitious volumes that provide in-depth analysis,economic outlooks, scenario models, market and business implications,policy debates, and industry forecasts for the global electricity sector.   DRI/McGraw-Hill is a division of Standard & Poor's, The McGraw-HillCompanies.   For more information on the study, please contact, Dr SilviaPariente-David, Director, Global Energy, DRI/McGraw-Hill, 8/10 Rue Villedo,75001 Paris, France. Telephone (33 1) 44 77 83 30 or fax (33 1) 42 60 2504.Illustration(s):Illustration: The Future of the Electric Power Industry around the World(cover)Photograph(s):Photograph: ``Low interest rates are going to be a kind of `treat' ingeneration financing for quite a while'' Roger Brinner, Chief Economist,DRI/McGraw-HillPhotograph: ``The computers and telecommunications systems that we in theelectric power industry are calling IT are the single most fertiletechnology for gaining a competitive advantage today'' Jason Makansi,Electric Power InternationalPhotograph: Shown left to right, Michael Hehir, president, InformationServices Group, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Harold McGraw Jr, chairmanemeritus, The McGraw-Hill Companies, and Kevin Moonan, general manager,North America, IBM Utility and Energy Services Industry, gather at theexecutive summit to discuss the day's eventsPhotograph: ``Developers should look at the process of project creditrating and its role in financing as a good value-added opportunity. Sostart early'' Bill Chew, Standard & Poor'sPhotograph: DRI's Osten and Pariente-David field questions from the summitdelegates on their study's risk analysis of Western European countriesPhotograph: ``Conservative fiscal policies designed to control inflation inLatin American countries are now creating investment bottlenecks'' DRI/McGraw-Hill's Michael RoachPhotograph: Is the European Union moving toward a one-market electricitysector--Robert Schwieger, group director, Energy Publications & Databases,The McGraw-HIll Companies, and Ulf Gundemark, general manager, Europe, IBMUtility and Energy Services Industry, discuss the issue at the summitbreakPhotograph: Richard Hilt, president, Bright Line Energy and Liz Hannon,president, UDI/McGraw-Hill have a friendly debate about the``Mega-NOPR''--the proposed set of regulations that will change the way theUS electric power industry does businessCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. DISTRIBUTECH CONFERENCEBy:Philip I. Dunklin and Warren B. Causey   Electric, telephone, cable, and wireless services will vie for controlof the customer in the competitive future, and kilowatt-hours will becomenothing but a commodity, says Philip O'Connor, managing director of PalmerBellevue, a division of Coopers & Lybrand, Chicago, Ill. He also believeselectric utilities are in the best position to win those battles because``electric wire is the hardest to replicate'' of the existing conduits intothe home.`Electricom' is next   ``The next really big thing we will see is the emergence of a kind of`electricom' or `telectric' business in which electric utilities willbecome major players in the next round of development of the informationsuperhighway,'' O'Connor says. ``The reason is that a lot of electricutilities are going to be partnering with personal communications system[PCS] firms. PCS represents an opportunity to overlay or leapfrog theexisting copper system and to be much more versatile.''   Telecommunications will give electric utilities an opportunity to``leverage brand equity where they have it, and build it where theydon't,'' O'Connor adds.   O'Connor will bring that optimistic assessment of electric utilities'future to the 1996 DA/DSM DistribuTech Conference in Tampa Bay, Fla, Jan15-18, as one of two keynote speakers at the conference. The other keynoteaddress will be by William Tucker, a member of the Wyoming Public ServiceCommission and also an advocate for the ``appropriate use of informationtechnology in energy distribution.''   While O'Connor's sanguine view of the electric-utility industry move todominate the customer telecommunications linkage of the future is notshared by all experts, such a viewpoint will be pervasive at the 1996conference. In fact, the advent of the information superhighway has changedthe very nature of the distributed automation/ demand side management(DA/DSM) meeting, says Stuart Harrison, founder and director of theconference.   ``The movement toward this being the leading industry informationtechnology/ business conference as opposed to focusing on one element,distributed automation, or load management, is the greatest change thisyear,'' Harrison comments. ``The term DA/DSM never really covered what wedo, so this year we've demonstrated that by extending the program to coverall aspects of utility information technology and its applications fordistribution companies.''Entry of industry giants   Another indication of the shift in attention, both of this conferenceand of the industry as a whole, is in vendor support, Harrison says.Several years ago, when the conference started, support came from smallerspecialty vendors who produced DA or DSM products. The 1996 conference isbeing sponsored by IBM Corp, AT&T, Digital Equipment Corp, and other bigplayers, Harrison notes.   One reason O'Connor is a big promoter of electric utilities getting moreinvolved in the telecommunications boom is that telecom may represent a wayto offset ``stranded assets,'' which he says is the current major concernof the industry. He believes utilities eventually will have to settle forconsiderably less than full recovery of assets stranded by competition, butthat telecommunications can help ease the pain.   ``When you compare the potential total revenues in informationcommunications [infocom] systems with the kind of money needed to cope withthe stranded generation cost issue, even a modest share of infocom couldhave a significant effect if a utility can leverage brand equity,''O'Connor asserts. A Coopers & Lybrand/Palmer Bellevue chart shows that by2003, telecom is expected to generate an estimated $480-billion in revenue.In 1993, it generated nearly $250-billion. That compares with an estimated$130-billion in total stranded costs potential faced by electric utilities,he says.The link   O'Connor says he sees tremendous potential in the ``utility infocomalliances emerging'' between electric utilities and:   -- Local telephone exchange companies (regional Bell operatingcompanies).   -- Incumbent long distance providers (AT&T, MCI, Sprint).   -- Cable television firms (TCI, Time-Warner, Cox Communications).   -- PCS providers.   -- Software vendors (Microsoft, Novell).   -- Computer companies (IBM).   In addition, O'Connor points to several technological developmentsdriving electric utility/telecom alliances; many of which will be ondisplay or under discussion in Tampa Bay. These include:n Utility radio spectrum auctions.   -- Electric wires carrying signals (power-line carrier or PLC).   -- The digital revolution: smart metering/energy controls.   -- Real-time pricing.   -- T&D reliability and control.   -- Implementation of cost identification information systems.   -- On-site distributed generation and energy storage.   All of these elements bode well for electric utilities becominginformation providers in the future, O'Connor says. Utilities already havethe in-place infrastructure of towers, poles, conduit, buildings, wire, andfiber optics. More important, utilities have rights-of-way in high-densityurban markets and a competitive rural facilities network.Brand and fiber   O'Connor is particularly impressed that electric utilities already havemore than 100,000 miles of fiberoptic cables, and that such utilities asBaltimore Gas & Electric Co, Houston Lighting & Power Co, Los Angeles Deptof Water & Power, Scana Corp, and Tampa Electric Co are leasing excessfiber capacity. In addition, electric utilities have basic skills that cancontribute to infocom alliances, he says, including, expertise in systemengineering, maintenance, outage repair, site installation, unionnegotiation, and regulatory permits.   Electric utilities generally have good reputations for quality andreliability, as well as ``ubiquitous customer penetration.'' These twoelements constitute considerable ``brand equity,'' O'Connor stresses.   Infocom capabilities will determine winners and losers in a competitiveenvironment, notes O'Connor. But he also preaches there is a ``danger ofdoing nothing.'' If utilities do not become involved in telecom, they mayfind themselves becoming a commodity provider only. Information serviceproviders will own the value-added equipment, he says. He also warnsutilities not to wait about becoming involved in telecommunications.Waiting runs the risk of decreased penetration of the market as well as theproblem that recovering lost customers is difficult. It is easier to keep acustomer than to find a new one, he notes.Experts speak out   In addition to the telecom emphasis of this year's DA/DSM Conference,Harrison says the nature of the presentations has changed as well. In thepast, virtually all presentations were based on voluntary submissions.While there still will be 70 papers presented, there will be 14 sessions inwhich speakers or panelists were invited because of their expertise incertain areas. ``We think that's an unusual amount in a conference programthat historically has focused on adjudicated submissions,'' he says. ``Thisyear we've been proactive and gone out and sought the movers and shakers.We put all those folks into what we call expert laboratories.''   Some of those expert laboratories will include:   -- Innovative pricing in a restructured utility environment.   -- The business case underlying the need for change in utilityoperations.   -- Organizing for success in the competitive market.   -- Owning the customer relationship through information technology.   -- The leading edge of energy innovation: Implementing advanced energyservices.   This year's conference will feature 400 exhibitors and is expected toattract about 3000 participants, Harrison says.Genesis Services: Where AMR possibilities begin   In a first-of-its-kind move, Itron Inc, Spokane, Wash--a supplier ofenergy information and communications solutions--has formed a newdivision--Genesis Services--to provide the electric, gas, and waterutilities industry with automatic meter reading (AMR) services that includeoutsourcing, networked communications applications, business partnering,and financing. More important, through Genesis Services, Itron offersutilities the financial flexibility to take advantage of capital-intensiveAMR projects, which are considered by some industry experts to be one ofthe critical links to customers and consumption patterns.   Working much like a capital venture firm, Genesis can help utilitiesbuild an AMR program that provides a custom fit for their bottom line. ``Wecan bring financial advisors to the table,'' says Dominic Geraghty,president Genesis Services.   Itron executives identified a need for AMR project partnering ascompetitive pressures forced utilities to rethink strategic goals and planfor the information revolution. As a result, Genesis Services designed agraduated partnership program to address the issues its customers face.``If we develop an AMR outsourcing program for a utility, we enter thearrangement as a partner, not a vendor, and that includes performanceguarantees,'' notes Geraghty.   Genesis also installs and implements AMR networks--from installingradios in the meters to moving that information into the utility billingsystem--as well as provides software expertise for such market-drivenapplications as real-time pricing, time-of-use, and customer informationsystems.Photograph(s):Photograph: Expertise in systems engineering, maintenance, outage repair,and site installation are some of the inherent skills that theelectric-utility work forces brings to an infocom alliancePhotograph: Utilities already have an important competitive edge: anin-place infrastructure-- such as poles, towers, wire, fiber, andrights-of-wayAbout the Author(s):Philip Dunklin is president and Warren Causey is associate publisher ofChartwell Inc, an Atlanta (Ga)-based publishing company serving the utilityindustry.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. COMPANY PROFILESFIELDTECHBooth # 835   Company prides itself on being an evolutionary leader in automated meterreading (AMR), including offering an entire service package that includesreal-time order and data management, AMR installation, meter reading, orderdispatch, and customer utility-billing services anywhere in the US orCanada. Company personnel have first-hand experience dealing with thefinancial, operational, and customer impacts of meter reading. Partneringwill allow utility to break through technological barriers, according tofirm that claims that a decision to automate or outsource using companywill produce immediate results in streamlined operations and productivityboosts, reduced costs, improved cash flow, and improved customer service.IBM CORP, UTILITY AND ENERGY SERVICES INDUSTRYBooth # 538   Company is a leading technology and solutions provider in the utilitiesindustry. More than a hardware vendor, company expertise includes itsability to supply total solutions. The Utility and Energy Services group isorganized based on a ``go to market'' strategy which ensures responsive andcohesive delivery of firm's capability to its customers. It is focused onthe changing needs of utility clients, as well as their specific businessprocesses and applications. Wherever a client is located, it has aworldwide IBM team at its disposal, with utility industry skills andexpertise--including business and information-technology planningconsultants, systems integrators, and product application and networkingspecialists--helping to develop strategic approaches to real businessissues and implementing effective, quality solutions on time and withinbudget.MOTOROLA LAND MOBILE PRODUCTS SECTORBooth # 618   Business sector is a leading provider of analog and digital two-wayvoice and data radio communications systems. In response to changing needswithin the utility industry, company introduces EnerConnect, acommunications network designed specifically for utility companies.EnerConnect integrates transmission and distribution automation, mobiledata, and voice communications onto a single network, providing astreamlined flow of information and significantly reducing response times.NORAND CORPBooth # 920   Company takes pride in its role as a leader in mobile computing for thepast 25 years. Over 150,000 of company's mobile systems are performing inthe real world today. Providing more than a ``box,'' firm supplies completesystems--hardware, software, networks, and communications--all backed up byextensive customer support, technical expertise, training, and experiencedfield sales, system, and reseller organization. Company's R&D efforts aresubstantial, focusing on making the latest technologies practical forcustomers' environments and applications.POWER MEASUREMENT LTDBooth # 201   Complete line of advanced, digital instrumentation and economicalPC-based Scada systems for power monitoring and control in industrial,commercial, and utility applications. Features include real-time datadisplay, power-quality and fault/swell/sag analyses, automated demandcontrol, historical trend graphing, and much more. Company's complete lineof full-featured, advanced, digital instrumentation includes: power meters,demand controllers, and smart transducer interfaces. Also featured will beeconomical PC-based Scada systems for industrial, commercial, and utilitysubstations, including those which provide real-time data display; powerquality and fault or swell/swag analysis; historical trend graphing;detection, annunciation, display, and logging of alarm conditions; andautomatic retrieval and disk archival of data logs from remote devices.S&C ELECTRIC COBooth # 430   Company manufactures complete switching systems for automated overheadand underground distribution. A real-time PC-based demonstration highlightsScada-Mate switching systems for automated overhead distribution and remotesupervisory pad-mounted gear for automated underground distribution. Bothare available as complete packages, including communications and controls,or as custom engineered packages designed to incorporate the RTU andcommunications device of the user's choice.UGC CONSULTINGBooth # 329   Mapping, spatial analysis, and facilities management: automation is thekey to these functions in today's information-driven world. The challengeis to develop a prudent and successful system implementation plan, fromboth a functional and economic perspective. Company says it provides experttechnical and management services for hundreds of projects worldwide,including project feasibility analyses and funding strategies, strategicplanning, data conversion management, and project management. From singledepartment solutions to cooperative projects among numerous government,utility, and private enterprises, UGC offers its services as an activeparticipant in a project, able to analyze each project's specific needs andwork with clients in a problem-solving partnership to determine exactsystem requirements and the most effective way to meet them.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. METER READING   From automation to outsourcing firm will partner with a customer tostreamline operations, providing project management and oversight fromdesign and installation to staffing and customer billing. Company will setup, assist, or manage individual components of an overall program. Companyworks to provide immediate results through reduced costs, improved customersatisfaction, and increased productivity and profitability.--FieldTech.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CONTRACT SERVICESCompany offers customized utility services, including real-time order anddata management, automatic meter reading system installation, contractmeter reading, and order dispatch and customer billing anywhere in NorthAmerica. Company offers over 100 years of combined utility and meterreading experience.--FieldTech.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. MOBILE TECHNOLOGYFirm offers clients multiple ways to improve operations through mobilitybased on planning methodologies that work with executive teams inidentifying key areas of their business best suited for enhanced capabilitywith mobile technology. A basic dispatch system that can be integrated withother systems to provide a wireless dispatch capability is available.Company also has design artifacts to help clients accelerate the processfor selecting and implementing a wireless communications infrastructurethat is open and exploits the price/performance curve. With broadcapabilities, firm's approach is directed toward helping clients solvetheir most critical problems in mobility.--IBM Corp, Utility and EnergyServices Industry.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. GIS SERVICES   For the particular needs of the utility industry, company's GISConsulting and Services Group offers its traditional Geographic FacilitiesInformation System (GFIS), or the object path solution set, featuring anobject-based GIS technology platform with supporting applications andintegrated automated data-capture tools. Using the object-orientatedprogramming tools provided under the object path methodology, customers canexpect to have a functioning utility GIS prototype much more rapidly thanpreviously thought possible.--IBM Corp, Utility and Energy ServicesIndustry.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. TELECOMMUNICATIONS   Business sector is a leading provider of analog and digital two-wayvoice and data radio communications systems. In response to changing needswithin the utility industry, company introduces EnerConnect, acommunications network designed specifically for utility companies.EnerConnect integrates transmission and distribution automation, mobiledata, and voice communications onto a single network, providing astreamlined flow of information and significantly reducing responsetimes.--Motorola Land Mobile Products Sector.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS   EnerConnect provides a complete wireless communications and informationsystem specifically for utilities, enabling rapid customer response andcost reduction through efficient operation of electrical distributionnetworks.--Motorola Land Mobile Products Sector.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. HANDHELD COMPUTER   Company's 22-oz Pen*Key 6100 computer offers a handheld computer formobile workers who need to run MS-Windows. Rugged unit combines the best ofthe notebook world--a DOS/MS-Windows operating environment--with the bestof the PDA world--reduced size and weight. --Norand Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. MOBILE COMPUTER   Company's Pen*Key 6600 computer features an Intel Corp 486DX2, 50-MHzprocessor which allows advanced graphics and use of DOS and MS-Windowsoperating systems. Yet unit weighs under 4 lb. Sophisticated graphicscapabilities make unit highly useful by utilities, field personnel, andothers.--Norand Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. SCADA PC-SOFTWARE   Economical Scada systems for industrial, commercial, and utility powersubstations and systems feature real-time display, power quality andfault/swell/sag analysis, historical trend graphing, alarm annunciation,extensive data logging capabilities, and more. Unit is compatible withfirm's complete line of advanced digital instrumentation.--PowerMeasurement Ltd.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. POWER METER   Model 3720 ACM digital meter now offers expanded 36-cycle faultrecording, high-speed historical logging, 1 ms device-to-device eventsynchronization, time-of-use registers, predictive demand control, andK-factor calculations, in addition to hundreds of high-accuracy power,energy, and harmonics measurements. Extensive setpoint control and I/Ofunctions are also featured.--Power Measurement Ltd.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. UNDERGROUND AUTOMATION   Remote supervisory PMH and PME padmounted gear permits automatedswitching of 14.4- and 25-kV underground circuits in response to a signalfrom a remote location. The completely self-contained switching andprotection units include: switch operators; battery pack with charger;voltage sensors for single-phase voltage sending and control power;power-operated switches with 3-phase current sensing; and on-boardcommunications and control equipment.--S&C Electric Co.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. DISTRIBUTION AUTOMATION   Scada-Mate switching system consists of two major components: aninteger-style, load-interrupting switch and a communications and controlunit that provides an interface between the switch and a master-stationcomputer. The switching system provides a self-sufficient, automated,overhead distribution switching installation which includes a modem fordirect connection to a master-station computer via a land-linecommunications channel.--S&C Electric Co.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WHO CONTROLS THE 'LAST INCH'?By:Paul Kemezis   When the nation's public utility commissioners met in New Orleans, La,recently, the entire electricity debate came down to an inch of wire. At atime when the whole idea of utility regulation is being questioned, thehundreds of professional regulators in attendance at the annual meetingknew instinctively that every inch would count.   In this case, the inch under debate was the last bit of the electricdistribution system before it enters Mr John Q. Public's house. Theinfamous inch is attracting special attention because it could become thelast bastion of state regulation in the $200-billion/yr electric powerindustry.First shot   In its March 1995 notice of proposed rulemaking (the so-called MegaNOPR), the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) asserted that oncepower generation, transmission, and distribution services were unbundled ina restructured electric industry, federal logic held that control ofinterstate commerce could give FERC control over the entire US electrictransmission and distribution system.   State regulators, represented by the National Assn of Regulatory UtilityCommissioners (Naruc), Washington, DC, immediate bristled, seeing aninvasion of their traditional jurisdiction over local electric distributionsystems. More than that, many state commissions believed that complete FERCcontrol of the wires could force state regulators out of the electricsector altogether--because without some piece of the distribution networkto regulate, state regulators would have no leverage over the industry--nopeg to hang rules on.   In New Orleans, at the mid-November Naruc annual convention, all fiveFERC commissioners came to meet the gathered state regulators face-to-face,to discuss the controversial issue in a historic first-of-a-kind meeting.Although one participant compared the session to the Bosnian peace talks,the atmosphere was cordial. FERC Chairman Elizabeth Moler made clear itfrom the start that the object of the meeting was to cooperate and find``practical and workable'' solutions to issues posed by changes in theindustry--which neither side had full control over.Legally defensible   Moler assured attendees that the states, not FERC, would make keydecisions on electric power industry restructuring and deregulation, andthat the jurisdictional issue would not be ignored. Any final plan forsplitting jurisdiction had to be ``legally defensible,'' she warned, orelse it would invite utility lawsuits that would lead to long,non-productive court battles.   But that introduction still left wide open the key question of whoactually will have authority over the electric system if restructuring goesforward and distribution service is unbundled. The FERC commissioners saidthey had no intention of staging a ``power grab'' and taking over theentire system--even though under some legal interpretations they probablycould. Not all attendees agreed. ``It's impossible to see how the states donot have authority,'' said Texas Public Utility Commissioner Robert Gee.``FERC jurisdiction is clearly limited to wholesale transmission andmatters not subject to regulation by the states.''   The federal commissioners said that they expected to retain a major rolein regulating any wires that carry power considered in ``interstatecommerce.'' Unfortunately, in the new deregulated industry, where retailcustomers may buy directly from generation companies across the country,virtually all power can be considered to be ``in interstate commerce,'' andtherefore FERC could have a claim on virtually all wires.   FERC General Counsel Susan Tomasky said that the commission had put outthe language in the Mega NOPR to try and provide some sort of a definitionfor what the federal law required. But FERC now realizes that it has towork with the states to ``get the issue right.''The last inch   Speaking for Naruc, Vermont Public Service Board Chairman Richard Cowartasserted that the states should remain in control of any part of thedistribution system that functions to serve retail users--no matter wherethe power came from. Under such a plan, a clear line would be drawn aroundeach utility's retail service area and the states would regulate insidethat boundary, whether the power was coming bundled from the local companyor unbundled from the outside via a retail wheeling arrangement.   The key, said Cowart, would be that the wires would carry out a ``localdistribution'' function, meeting the test in the Federal Power Act forstate jurisdiction. The FERC commissioners, however, worried that such anapproach would lead to a ``Balkanization'' of the national power market,especially if different states took radically different approaches torestructuring electric markets.   FERC Commissioner Donald Santa noted that the commission was trying tobe non-intrusive. He said FERC wants to give states elbow room to determinehow to restructure their local electric industries and handle keyissues--such as stranded investment recovery. But he added that FERC wouldstill have to provide the electric power industry with a backstop and``fill in the gap if the states fail.''   Finally, FERC Commissioner William Massey asked the state commissionersto consider a practical approach in which FERC regulated interstate retailtransactions, but guaranteed states control over some piece of thedistribution system. But what piece? ``How much do you need?'' Masseyasked. ``Will the last inch do?''Worst of both worlds?   After some head scratching, the state commissioners said that theywanted the last inch for sure, but giving FERC a major say in regulatingretail transactions still raised major concerns. According to IowaUtilities Board Member Emmit George, it could be difficult to load up thatlast inch with charges for conservation programs, renewable energy,low-income programs, and stranded-investment recovery. At the same time,George commented, ``the real challenge'' is to insure that the last inchapplies to all situations and therefore, the charges would benon-bypassable and equitably shared by all customers.   But Wayne Shirley, chairman of the New Mexico Public Utility Commission(PUC), claimed that the problem goes beyond the ``last inch,'' noting thatif most state regulation is handed over to a federal jurisdiction, thenlocal interests could get lost in the shuffle. For example, New Mexicoelectricity users would face a more expensive process to have their caseheard by less responsive regulators in Washington.   What's more, Renz Jennings, chairman of the Arizona CorporateCommission, pointed out FERC's lack of expertise with environmental issuescompared to state commissions' work on plant siting issues, resourceselection, and use of conservation and renewables. By ceding control of theelectric system to federal jurisdiction ``we may wind up with the worst ofboth worlds,'' commented Jennings. ``FERC will move in to assert itsauthority but at the same time back away from environmental stewardship.''Leave it to FERC   The New Orleans debate did not settle anything, but instead, actuallyhighlighted the intense, though friendly, game of tug-of-war now beingplayed out between the state and federal regulatory groups over thenation's electric system. The two sides quickly declared the attempt atdialogue a smashing success and said they hoped to continue the process assoon as possible.   If it did anything, the debate underscored the contradictory and almostbizarre situation facing state regulators. As political power shifts awayfrom Washington to the states, state commissions should be exercising thepower they retain under federal law to regulate local utilities with lessfederal interference--not more. But the dynamics of electric power industryrestructuring, and the physics of electricity, seem to be working againstthis.   Right now, it simply seems more efficient to do away with stateregulation of retail transmission and declare all electricity part of asingle national market under federal regulation. Besides the technicalarguments about freedom of interstate commerce and electron flows, there isFERC's practical experience in dealing with wholesale transmission tariffs.State commissions in the existing system do not see retail transmissiontariffs because they are bundled with power sales costs and have alwaysbeen an invisible part of ratemaking.   The ``leave it to FERC'' concept was supported by a proposal submittedin July by the Electric Consumers Resource Council (Elcon), aWashington-based trade association representing large industrial users. Oneupshot of the Elcon plan was to effectively kick state regulators out ofthe electric arena once and for all. Ironically, if total deregulation ofthe electric sector happens, a majority of utility executives say that theywould prefer that FERC have control of the wires because FERC is on recordas favoring recovery of stranded investment costs--and has approved sucharrangements for deals among wholesale buyers and sellers.   State regulators, on the other hand, who are directly elected byratepayers or appointed by governors, are at best lukewarm about shiftingthe whole cost of stranded assets to customers.Regulators or referees?   As state legislators openly question the need for regulators in an ageof deregulation, many attendees at the New Orleans conference wereunderstandably nervous about what they will be doing five years from now.While most believe there still will be a valid need for public utilitycommissions after year 2000, they tend to believe their functions willchange greatly. Instead of regulating monopolies, state commissionersexpect to be refereeing markets and acting as ``gatekeepers,'' deciding whowill participate in the local electric power business and on what terms.   State commissions probably will also spend more time policingutilities--which will become more bottom-line oriented. Instead of rateregulation, prudency reviews, and dissecting integrated resource plans, thekey functions of PUC staffs will become consumer protection, determiningaccess to markets, and antitrust enforcement.   In a nutshell, said Illinois Commerce Commission chairman Daniel Miller,regulators will have to ``know how to establish the ground rules forcompetition and choice, while still protecting consumers against unduemarket power.'' According to Robert Anderson, a member of the MontanaPublic Service Commission and outgoing president of Naruc, ``Ten or 15years ago, state regulators were for the status quo. Now we feel that ifderegulation can be introduced it is better than regulation.''   While the state commissioners have a general idea of where they aregoing, the discussions in New Orleans showed that, at least in theelectricity sector, there are still plenty a questions about how to getthere--and the jurisdictional tussle with FERC is just one issue.   Kenneth Gordon, former chair of the Massachusetts Dept of PublicUtilities warned that regulators face a difficult change of mindset goingfrom reliance on political and administrative processes to reliance oncompetition and markets. He said state regulators could fall into a``schizophrenia syndrome'' in which they were split between the conflictinggoals of opening up markets and continuing to pursue social policies. As aresult, they could be tempted into ``fooling with prices'' which wouldfrustrate the move to free markets.Transparent to customers   The ``public utility concept''--which includes support for energyconservation and renewable energy programs, while allowing new marketforces to exist--is ideal, although only attainable in the long term. Inthe short term, some state commissions, which are lobbied by strongconservation and environmental groups, have been reluctant to simply dropsuch programs as a price for electric power industry restructuring.   Instead, the regulators have begun to look seriously at imposinguniversal service charges on all retail customers to provide a source offunding for the programs that previously were lumped into general utilityrates. This is a key reason why the commissioners want to hold onto their``last inch'' of wire and retain some option to control revenue flows--evenas traditional utility ratemaking fades out.   But no one knows whether average consumers will want to pay for socialprograms, especially if the up to $10 per month charge suddenly becomesvery easy to find on the monthly electric bills. In the old system, nobodyliked to give utilities rate increases, but the economic justifications forthe hikes were so arcane that the public wound up with little sense of whythings were happening. This actually gave commissions much more leeway toorder programs with high pricetags.   By unbundling rates, costs become naked and regulators will have to getused to justifying any decision that affects pocketbooks. In fact, anothermajor challenge to the state regulators will be to refocus their mainattention on customers after spending years carefully balancing theinterests of regulated utilities and customers--and frequentlyoverprotecting the utilities.Add value to regulation   According to Daniel Fessler, president of the California PUC, the mostcritical job of regulators will be to design delivery mechanisms thatensure the benefits of the competitive market flow to the small users.Government will not need to protect the interests of the ``large, strong,and articulate players in the market,'' he told the convention, and itshould not just stand back and assume that benefits of competition will``trickle down'' to all users. ``If government has any role at all, it isto guard the interests for those who are too busy, too preoccupied, toosmall, or too politically insignificant to achieve what the more fortunateare able to achieve.''   Fessler noted that with the ``appetite for government solutions at anall time low,'' regulators had to find some way to ``add value'' to theprocess. Of course, the first and most important test of this new consumerorientation may be the coming battle over stranded investment where, saysMontana's Anderson, ``the irresistible [forces of the market] meet theimmovable object of utility stranded-investment costs'' now estimated atabout $135-million nationwide.Stranded stockholders   The main question already on the table in California, Massachusetts, NewHampshire, and several other states is how to restructure their electricindustries. The real issue driving that question is whether utilitystockholders will be compensated for former investments, or whetherconsumers will pick up the tab and pay high upfront charges for atransition period before the promised benefits of retail choice emerge. Theissue is further complicated because the obvious ways to collect the fundsare either through a universal service charge on distribution utilities, tobe based on the ``final inch''; or in the near term, utilityretail-wheeling tariffs. In both cases, the state/federal jurisdictionissue immediately presents itself.   So far, commissioners have been very cautious about giving utilities ablank check to receive all stranded costs. In some states, such as Maineand New Hampshire, commissions have proposed a 50% recovery as a sort ofholding maneuver. But anything short of 100% recovery has usually incurredthe political wrath of local utilities.   The preferred approach, so far, has been to put off as long as possibleany final decision by state officials on the issue. Or--better yet--let theparties directly involved negotiate a deal on how much stranded investmentrecovery will be allowed.   At the New Orleans convention, the question revolved more around whethercommissions and state legislatures, which order electric power industryrestructuring, might duck the stranded-investment issue altogether, therebyinsuring ratepayers would get the full benefit of the free market at once.   In such places as California and New England, where above-marketinvestment in nuclear plants and independent-power contracts have pushedrates up far above the national average and alternative market rates forpower are considered ``dirt cheap,'' the temptation for regulators to letthe utilities absorb the losses is great.Absolute authority will fade   Another issue to resolve will be how much control state commissions willretain over the energy supply portfolio available to electric users intheir state. In simpler days, when most utilities built powerplants intheir territory and sold electricity to local users, PUCs wieldedsignificant power in determining if new capacity was needed, where plantsshould be built, and what fuel to use. Then, as integrated resourceplanning, federal rules supporting non-utility generation, andenvironmental concerns came into play during the last 20 years, the powerwas expanded until many PUCs had absolute authority over the shape of thestate electric system.   However, such powers seriously eroded by the 1990s, as overbuilding ofgenerating units and the sparse market for new independent power meantdecisions on new capacity were less important. Also, commissions have begunbacking away from resource planning rules as the competitive market nowmakes decisions for utility management, and incentive-based conservationprograms have lost their allure.   In the proposed new market system, the notion of states building uptheir local resource portfolios will be all but obsolete, as electricitywill be offered from resources on a nationwide or regional basis. The jobof the state commissions will be more to decide who will be allowed to sellpower in the state, and not make decisions on where power will begenerated. State commissioners will suddenly have to pay more attention topolicies of surrounding states and understand what larger markets andregional grids their indigenous utilities operate in. This presents major,new opportunities for cooperation--but also conflict.   In New England, for example, where there is a tradition of regionalcooperation on electricity issues, strong restructuring drives inMassachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island are forcing the other statesto consider moving quicker than planned. At the same time, in NewHampshire, political leaders supporting restructuring declare that they donot want to tie their actions to a slower regional effort and delay movingto lower power rates that could help the state compete economically withits neighbors.Required reciprocity   Another emerging problem is whether states will require reciprocity inregulating electricity sellers based in each other's state--and how stateswill ensure that local power isn't replaced by cheaper out-of-statesupplies based on lower environmental standards?   Also, the basic question seems to be: How will restructuring actions ineach state--splitting up the generation, transmission, and distributionbusinesses--be accomplished? Through ``functional'' unbundling that leavesthe large utility structures intact, or through an actual break up ofutilities into smaller companies. And, what types of organizations will dowhat jobs? Will exiting utilities continue to own transmission, or will thegrid be run by an independent operator? Will generation be sold directly toend users or be channeled through a poolco which would protect smallerusers from the uncertainties of direct competition? This last issue hasalready generated a furious debate in California and held up progress onrestructuring for over a year.A new antitrust role   State regulators say such issues amount to the first major step incarrying out their new antitrust or ``competition policeman'' role. Howeach state sets up its playing field and how much integration each leavesbetween the parts of the electric system may have a lot to do withdetermining how much time and effort each state will spend in the future asa policeman.   Already, states completing retail competition tests are wrestling withwhether to allow a franchised utility to provide energy to its owncustomers--or whether this creates an unfair advantage.   Cheryl L. Parrino, chair of the Wisconsin Public Service Commission andnewly elected president of Naruc, told the group that while the antitrustapproach is less pervasive than the old rate-regulation approach, it comeswith the ``heavy hammer'' of possible criminal penalties. She notes thatmany state commissions have already gained antitrust experience controllingthe relationship of their still-regulated electric utilities withnon-regulated affiliates, and that this issue will become increasinglyimportant as competitive lines of business grow.   Parrino added that the state commissions should realize that unliketraditional antitrust enforcement by state and federal legal officials,which seeks to remove barriers to free competition, utility commissionstook a more positive antitrust role of structuring the industry and marketsto allow free competition. But, she warned that utilities also must realizethat they will no longer be protected by regulation, and will therefore bemuch more vulnerable on antitrust issues.Move to a national market   At the New Orleans meeting, several officials on both sides reiteratedthat a dual state/federal approach to handling transmission issues wouldwork better than holding endless debates to define a clear boundary betweenjurisdictions. State representatives noted that in the past, FERC and thestates had found ways to split responsibilities.   For example, FERC created a general regime for determining avoided costsunder the 1978 Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act, and each statethen adopted its own system for setting local avoided costs and authorizingutility contracts with non-utility generators.   The New Hampshire PUC--which has little time for debate because it wantsa retail wheeling pilot program in place by May--has floated a plan underwhich utilities would voluntarily file retail transmission tariffs to boththe PUC and FERC. Then, each agency would take whatever action on theproposed tariffs that it believed necessary.   At the same time, New Hampshire PUC chairman Douglas Patch has suggestedthat eventually, mixed boards of federal and state officials could be usedfor dealing with the retail transmission issue.Photograph(s):Photograph: As political power shifts away from Washington to the states,state regulators should be exercising the power they retain under federallaw to regulate local utilities with less federal interference--not morePhotograph: Moler made clear that the object of the meeting was to find``practical and workable'' solutions to issues posed by changes in theindustry--which neither side has full control overPhotograph: Many state commissions believe that complete FERC control ofthe wires could force state regulators out of the electric sectoraltogetherPhotograph: Massey suggested that FERC regulate interstate retailtransactions, while guaranteeing states control over some piece of thedistribution systemPhotograph: While the antitrust approach is less pervasive than the oldrate-regulation approach, it comes with the ``heavy hammer'' of possiblecriminal penalties, said ParrinoCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. ALLIANCE   Hadson Gas Services Inc and Peoples Energy Corp reach an agreement on aninnovative strategic alliance that will enhance market opportunities forboth companies. Among the ventures planned are joint management of somephysical facilities and contractual assets and joint development ofbusiness opportunities in the upper Midwest and Chicago areas.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. BRIEFS   Framatome Technologies Inc is the new name of B&W Nuclear Technologies,reflecting Framatome's ownership of the US firm . . . LG&E Power Inc andWestmoreland Energy Inc complete the conversion of an $87.6-millionnon-recourse construction loan to a term debt loan for Roanoke Valley, a50-MW coal-fired facility.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. ALLISON ENERGY CO   Allison Energy Co will develop a new family of turbine engines that formthe basis for an advanced turbine system under an $82.5-million contractawarded by the Dept of Energy.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. LEGALITIES   Patowmack Power Partners is denied approval by the Virginia StateCorporation Commission (SCC) to construct a demonstration plant in LoudounCounty. The SCC determined it could not approve the 185-MW combustionturbine plant because there is no identified public need for power from thefacility.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS   Westmoreland Energy Inc acquires The Corona Group from OESI Power Corp.Corona provides technical, repair, and maintenance services to the electricpower industryCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. PROFILE IN BRIEF   IBM Utility and Energy Services Industry and Northern Indiana PublicService Co began producing the Integrity/Customer Services System inNovember. The system, which is designed to provide quick response toutility customers on all inquiries, offers the utility company new lines ofbusiness, such as payment insurance and meter reading for other utilitycompanies. The two companies are jointly marketing the system.   As a network-intensive application, Integrity/CSS provides customerservice representatives with real-time information, enabling customerrequests to be tracked through the entire service connection process. Forexample, a request for service to a new home can be traced from an engineerentering and updating milestone information for permit requirements throughservice installation to installation and servicing of appliances.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WEB SURF SITES   American Public Power Assn launches APPAnet, a new forum on CompuServeInformation Service . . . Power magazine establishes a web page athttp://www.powermag.com . . . The Southern Company can be reached athttp://www.southernco.com . . . North American Electric Reliability Councilis at http://www.nerc.com. nCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. B&W RINGS IN THE NEW YEAR WITH BIG CONTRACTS   With work just starting on approximately $420-million in new powerplantcontracts, Babcock & Wilcox Co (B&W), Power Generation Group, is ringing in1996 with good cheer and moving full steam ahead. Recent awards from theEgyptian Electricity Authority and Sumitomo Corp (Tokyo, Japan) account forthe company's renewed optimism. ``While the market has remained fairlystable for the past 10 years, B&W continues to increase its internationalmarket share,'' explains Walter E. Boomer, president of B&W PowerGeneration Group. ``These contracts reflect the steady progression of ouroverseas activities.''   Egyptian Electricity Authority issued the newest contract award forsteam generating equipment for the new Sidi Krir and Ayoun Moussapowerplants. Scope of supply for B&W is two 320-MW gas/oil-fired boilersand accessories. Additionally, in conjunction with Nuova Cimimontubi, anItalian construction firm, B&W will supply the balance-of-plant, erection,and construction services. B&W's share of the contract is valued at about$120-million.   Steam drums will be manufactured in North America; the remainder of theboiler units will be fabricated at Babcock & Wilcox Egypt, a joint venture.Contracts set the completion of the Sidi Krir units in September 1998 andMarch 1999. The Ayoun Moussa units are scheduled for completion about ayear later.   Under the terms of the Sumitomo contract, B&W will supply two 660-MWcoal-fired boilers for the Tanjung Jati B powerplant in central Java,Indonesia. B&W will be responsible for about 33% of the total powerplantproject, valued at about $900-million. Scope of supply for B&W, beyond theboilers and accessories, includes electrostatic precipitators and acomplete wet flue-gas desulfurization system to meet Indonesianenvironmental standards. Work on the Sumitomo contract is split between P.T. Babcock & Wilcox Indonesia (a local B&W subsidiary) and B&W's NorthAmerican facilities. Contract completion is set for 1998.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. SARGENT & LUNDY   Sargent & Lundy contracts to conduct an asset utilization study ofEncina Units 1 and 2 for an Electric Power Research Institute tailoredcollaboration with San Diego Gas & Electric Co. Study includes lifeassessment of components that could be reused if the 100-MW units wererepowered, as well as turbine repowering technology options and acomparison of repowering and greenfield installations.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP   Westinghouse Electric Corp announces a contract valued at $30-million tosupply Wisconsin Electric Power Co's Point Beach nuclear station with steamturbine equipment and servicesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. FRAMATOME TECHNOLOGIES INC   Framatome Technologies Inc receives a contract from North AtlanticEnergy Service Corp to perform automated inspections on thermal sleeveguide funnels at Seabrook, an 1150-MW Westinghouse Electric Corppressurized-water reactor . . . Primesouth Inc now operates the SavannahRiver Site D Area powerhouse under an agreement with South CarolinaElectric & Gas Co, which leases the 70-MW coal-fired powerplant from theDept of EnergyCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. FOSTER WHEELER ENERGY CORP   Foster Wheeler Energy Corp acquires Zack Power & Industrial Co, afull-service mechanical contractor. The company will be known as FosterWheeler Zack Inc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. GRAPHIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP   Graphic Data Systems Corp will provide Winnipeg Hydro withautomated-mapping/facilities-management (AM/FM) and geographic informationsystem (GIS) software. Pilot phase began in December; the system will befully integrated in December 1996Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CSW ENERGY INC AND PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO   CSW Energy Inc and Phillips Petroleum Co agree to construct a 300-MWcogeneration plant at Phillips' Old Ocean site, which houses a largerefinery and chemical-plant complex. The new cogeneration plant willprovide steam and electricity to the complexCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WESTMORELAND ENERGY INC   Westmoreland Energy Inc receives initial siting approval from Madison(Ill) to build a 66-MW independent power project. Permitting is expected tobe complete by late summer, financial closing later this year, andcommercial operation by mid-1998.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. INSIDE UTILITY MERGERS: TRENDS WITHIN THE TRENDBy:Cate Jones   If you're an electric-utility executive, you probably understand why theexpression ``May you live in interesting times,'' is a curse--not asalutation. The present is indeed an interesting time for the industry, asfederal and state authorities prepare to deregulate parts of the businessand replace guaranteed service territories with free-market competition.   Already, anticipation of deregulation has increased the number ofutility mergers, as companies scramble to improve their competitivepositions. According to Doug Kimmelman, vice president of the Utility Groupof Goldman, Sachs & Co, New York, NY, top managers of virtually everyutility in the US are discussing mergers as a competitive strategy withintheir companies, and many have extended the discussions to includeprospective merger partners.   ``There is sufficient anecdotal evidence to suggest that many utilitiesare looking very hard at other companies to calculate the best mesh ofstaff exchange, operating practices, management of assets, and so forth,''says M. Douglas Dunn, partner and chair of the Utilities Practice ofMilbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, New York, NY. Dunn adds that mergernegotiations often result when top executives of two utilities discoverthat they have a similar ``strategic vision,'' or long-range plans. Suchwas the case with the PSI Resources/Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co (CG&E)deal, he says. Dunn expects today's frenzied pace to continue for a while.How frenzied is it now? ``Right now,'' Dunn quips, ``if you call early inthe week, you get a better date on Saturday night.''   As for the future, many pundits are predicting that more ``mergers ofequals'' will take place. Typically, such marriages combine the assets oflow-cost producers, yielding economies of scale that reduce costs even moreand give the newlyweds a competitive edge in the wholesale power market.Low-cost producers often seek out partners with lower production costsand/or better growth prospects. Today, it remains to be seen whetherhigh-cost power producers will even be able to get a date on New Year'sEve.The trigger event   Mergers--and utility mergers in particular--are extremely complexbusiness transactions requiring ``hundreds of different moving parts tomesh,'' notes Kimmelman. Only about 30% of the mergers that Kimmelman'sgroup works on ever succeed, which proves how tenuous and sensitive mergersare, just as business deals. What's more, mergers within highly regulatedindustries--such as electric power--require the approval of state, federal,and even local authorities--a process that often takes 18 months or longerto complete, says Clifford M. Naeve, a partner with Skadden Arps SlateMeagher & Flom, Washington, DC, and a former Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission (FERC) commissioner.   Why the recent spate of utility mergers? Lawrence J. Makovich, associatedirector of Cambridge (Mass) Energy Research Associates (CERA), contendsthat the mergers' watershed event came in April 1994, when Californiaregulators proposed a retail-wheeling scheme that would allow customers tobypass their local utilities and buy power directly from market suppliers.The boldness and scope of the proposal sent shock waves through theindustry, says Makovich, because it sent a message that not only wascompetition more likely, but that it was also likely to arrive sooner thanexpected. Many utility executives came to the conclusion that, ifderegulation were to be imposed on a fast-track schedule, they couldn'timprove their utility's competitive position fast enough to survive withoutthe help of a partner.Illusion or driver?   On the surface, the motivation for most mergers is the promise of costsaving and operating synergies that will benefit utilities andshareholders. Most industry observers agree that potential cost savings arethe primary driver, and are necessary for regulatory approval--particularlyby FERC. But other rationales are used to cement deals between twoutilities (see box, p 60).   Makovich argues that looking for cost saving is nothing new, and mayeven be an illusion. Reducing costs through manpower and operatingsynergies, he claims, cannot produce significant results because thoseareas represent such a small portion of current operating costs. Hecontends that manpower, for example, typically represents 5% of theoperating costs at a utility, so a 10% reduction of 5% of a utility's costscan make, at best, a tiny impact on its cost structure.   On the other hand, fuel costs at, say, a coal-fired plant typicallyaccount for the lion's share of that plant's total costs, with capitalcosts accounting for the remainder. Makovich postulates that the the realstrategic reasons for mergers are the following factors, each of whichhelps determine utility cost structures in a competitive environment:   -- Diversification of the fuel mix for power generation. Underregulation, fuel-adjustment clauses are used to transfer fuel-price risksto customers--but that tool won't be available under competition.Accordingly, some mergers aim to shift price risks back to producers byimproving fuel diversity--seeking a merger partner who feeds differentfuels to his stable of powerplants.   -- Undervalued assets, the flip side of stranded assets. Some utilitieshave largely depreciated, low-cost generating units that will be worth morethan their current rate-based value in a competitive environment (EW,November 1995, p 46). Mergers allow acquisition of such assets before anupward competitive evaluation can take place.   -- Transmission and distribution (T&D) systems. It is still unclear howutilities will be compensated for use of their T&D systems for retailwheeling. However, mergers are a way of stocking up on an unknown butpotentially valuable commodity: grid miles.   Makovich further contends that if wholesale competition does not playout as expected, then many predicted merger benefits will not materialize.Puhca revisited   One interesting trend in the recent electric-utility mergers (see table)has been greater use of the registered holding company structure by themerging parties. As Sheldon Adler, a partner with Skadden Arps, points out,at one time the structure was in disfavor because it imposed another levelof regulation on the merged entity.   According to Naeve, Adler's colleague at Skadden Arps, the 1935 PublicUtility Holding Company Act (Puhca) permits three corporate structuresunder which utilities can merge. The first and simplest--because it avoidsregulation under Puhca--is an organization without a holding company at thetop. That was the tack that the PacifiCorp/Utah Power & Light Co andMidwest Energy Inc/Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co mergers took.   The second structural option that merging utilities have is to create anexempt holding company, making the merged entity exempt from most Puhcarequirements. However, the guidelines for that option are quite stringent.For example, if an intrastrate exempt holding company--a so-called 3(a)(1)company--is set up in a state, all of the utility subsidiaries whichprovide more than 5% of the holding company's income must be incorporatedin that state, and derive at least 80% of their income from customerswithin the state.   PSI Energy Inc, before its merger with Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co(CG&E), was a 3(a)(1) exempt company. Setting up a 3(a)(2) exempt holdingcompany, on the other hand, requires only that the holding company bepredominantly a utility, and that its utility subsidiaries provide no morethan 20% of its revenues. Before merging with PSI, CG&E was a 3(a)(2)exempt company.   The third option is the registered holding company, which is subject tostrict regulation by the Securities & Exchange Commission (SEC)--includingprohibitions on electric-utility ownership of significant natural-gasproperties. Although CG&E had gas properties when it merged with PSI, thetwo utilities chose to do so by creating a registered holdingcompany--CINergy Corp--because they correctly anticipated that the SECwould relax some of its strict ownership requirements.Holding on to holding companies   After the CG&E/PSI merger raised the collective industry opinion ofregistered holding companies, more mergers--some of which would not haveoccurred otherwise--took a similar approach. While the option is often notutilities' first choice, because it still incurs burdensome regulations,establishing a registered holding company does have several advantages.Most important, it gives the merged companies more flexibility to operateover state lines. At the same time, the umbrella holding company alsoprovides a vehicle for the merging utilities to maintain their identitiesand brand recognition among customers and concerned shareholders. Finally,the holding-company structure is proving to be one of the best ways fornumber-crunchers to pin down assets and costs, points out Dunn. TheNorthern States Power Co/Wisconsin Electric Power Co, Public Service Co ofColorado/Southwestern Public Service Co, and the Wisconsin Power & LightCo/IES Industries Inc/ Interstate Power Co mergers all involved theestablishment of a registered holding company.   ``The CG&E/PSI deal created the template for all future mergers ofequals,'' says Adler, whose Skadden Arps represented PSI, while Milbank,Tweed acted on behalf of CG&E. The lawyers and utility executives producedan evenhanded merger document that contemplates everything from thecompanies' representation on the board of directors to succession issues.Inability to establish succession plans has caused more than one merger tofail, according to Kimmelman. Edward Tirello, senior vice president forequities research at Natwest Market Securities, New York, NY, believes thatthe succession issue is even more key: He claims that the US electric powerindustry is ``being held hostage by 300 people. It is the only industrywhere the corporate officers don't hold stock.''   Establishing a succession plan was only one reason why the CG&E/PSImerger succeeded, says Dunn. Here are some others:   -- The managements of the two utilities shared the same strategicvision, and each was convinced that the other was the most-logicalpartner.   -- The merger allowed both companies to minimize their risks, as wellas explore emerging technologies, such as fuel cells.   -- The characteristics of the two utilities' service territories werecomplementary--excess generating capacity, but promise of growth in PSI's,and restricted growth in CG&E's backyard.Balancing capacity and demand   Balancing demand growth and generating capacity is a common strategy inmergers. According to Adler and Naeve, little saving on the generation sideis possible if both utilities are already in the same energy pool--althoughsubstantial savings can still be realized. But if one company has most ofits demand peaks in the winter peak demands and the other in the summerpeak, generating profiles would dovetail nicely. That approach has a bigfan in Kimmelman, who says it makes sense for utilities in the North, wherethere typically is excess capacity but low demand growth, to seek partnersin the South, where there is less capacity but higher growth. Of course,the southern utility could also make the first move.   The three-way merger between Wisconsin Power & Light, IES Industries,and Interstate Power Co exemplifies the balancing approach: Because themerged utilities will have a service territory that surrounds, on the northand west, that of high-cost Unicom, the merger will let the new partnerstake better advantage of wholesale power markets. As Dunn, who representedInterstate Power in the negotiations, points out, mergers have changed therole of utility executives from its traditional custodial nature to onethat demands dynamic management of assets.Controlling the channels   If the history of other deregulated industries tells us anything aboutthe potential effect of competition on the electricity sector, it is thatbigger will be better. Whenever companies have been forced to compete,``larger companies have historically fared better, because they are able tosurvive the discounting that inevitably results in the battle forcustomers,'' says Kimmelman. And since distribution is the business that isclosest to customers, he adds, acquiring more distribution channels willbecome increasingly important, and the objective of future mergers.   Certainly, expansion of distribution was in mind during negotiation ofthe Southwestern Public Service Co (SPS)/Public Service Co of Colorado(PSCo) merger--the first between utilities with non-contiguous serviceterritories. After a high-voltage interconnecting transmission line isbuilt when the ink is dry on the merger documents, the as-yet unnamedholding company will have one of the largest service territories in theUS.Expanding business opportunities   With many utilities experiencing anemic domestic earnings, mergers mayalso provide an opportunity to expand business opportunities. Here again,bigger is better because you need a large balance sheet in order todiversify. Merger partners may be considered for their successfulunregulated earnings growth, or for their ventures outside of the corebusiness. The rationale for the SPS/PSCo merger included some of thoseelements. In addition to having a faster-growing service economy, PSCo hadnatural-gas operations, and innovative information-technology andenergy-services programs. SPS was not only strong in power generation,engineering, and fuels diversity, but it also had a subsidiary, Quixx Corp,which is involved in a several successful non-utility power generation(NUG) projects, both in the US and overseas.The shape of things to come   Mergers are definitely reshaping the utility landscape. While theindustry consensus is that FERC will require utilities to unbundlethemselves into separate generation, transmission, and distributioncompanies, no one can yet say when that will happen.   But some are already guessing what the structure of the new industrywill look like. NatWest's Tirello, who lightly refers to himself as avisionary, foresees extreme consolidation that will produce, once the dustsettles, only nine regional energy holding companies in the US.   According to Tirello, each ``superutility'' will have: three to fivegenerating subsidiaries; separate transmission and distribution entities;and companies that will offer a wide range of communicationsservices--cable TV, voice and data links, security hookups, etc--toconsumers. The way he sees it, electricity will be a low-margin commodity,distribution will remain regulated by states, generation will be lightlyregulated--if at all--and independent power producers will sell power tothe big energy companies, signaling the beginning of the end for merchantplants. But Kimmelman disagrees, saying that although the industry willcontinue to consolidate, Tirello's vision is too extreme. One reason itwon't happen, Kimmelman explains, is the difficulty of closing a mergerdeal--something he has learned first-hand, in the trenches.Top 10 rationales for successful mergers   According to Doug Kimmelman of Goldman, Sachs, New York, NY--whichconsulted on four of the six mergers announced during 1995--there are 10rationales underlying current and future mergers. The first five arecritical; they are common to all utility mergers to date, and will likelybe common to all future mergers. All or some of the next five rationales,although not critical, have been and will be part of past, present, andfuture mergers.The five critical rationales:   1. Cost reductions and improving competitive position. Federal and stateapprovals are required before a merger can be finalized, and the mergermust demonstrate it is good for ratepayers and competition.   2. Earnings enhancements through synergies. Being able to reduceinternal costs through synergies is a plus to shareholders.   3. Diversification of business, to minimize risk. Included here areefforts to expand the utilities retail and industrial customer base, spreadthe business risks resulting from regulation over several states, and widenthe mix of generation fuels.   4. Enhancing size. Bigger will be better under competition, and biggernumbers on the bottom of balance sheets will support more-diverseinvestment strategies.   5. Solving succession issues. All successful mergers to date have had awell-defined management-succession plan.The five less critical rationales for mergers:   1. To reduce vulnerability to an unwanted takeover.   2. To lower a utility's dividend profile.   3. To offset exposure to stranded-investment risk, by blending andaveraging the risk of stranded assets.   4. To achieve premium valuations. Because many electric-utility stocksare overvalued, mergers can achieve a premium valuation for shareholders atthe cost of a slight loss of control.   5. To assess higher growth, unregulated ventures. Given today's weakoutlook for domestic earnings growth in regulated businesses, it makessense for utilities to try to enter unregulated energy businesses or makeequity investments overseas, where growth--and, unfortunately, risk--arepotentially higher.Recent mergers among investor-owned electric utilities:Company 1                Company 2                              StatusWPL Holdings Inc        IES Industries Inc/Interstate Power Co  Pending        Baltimore Gas &Electric Co             Potomac Electric Power Co               PendingNorthern StatesPower Co                Wisconsin Electric & Power Co           PendingPublic Service Coof Colorado             Southwestern Public Service Co          PendingUnion Electric Co       Cipsco Inc                              PendingWashington WaterPower Co                Sierra Pacific Resources                PendingMidwest Resources       Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co         CompletedCincinnati Gas &Electric Co             PSI Resources                           CompletedNew England ElectricSystem                  Nantucket Electric Co                   CompletedTexas Utilities Co      Southwestern Electric Service Co        CompletedEntergy Corp            Gulf States Utilities Co                CompletedIndiana MichiganPower Co                Michigan Power Co                       CompletedKansas Power &Light Co Kansas         Gas & Electric Co                       CompletedUnitil Corp             Fitchburg Gas & Electric Co             CompletedNortheast Utilities     Public Service Co of New Hampshire      CompletedNortheast Utilities     Fletcher Electric Light                 CompletedIE Industries Inc       Iowa Southern                           CompletedUtilicorp United Inc    Centel Corp                             CompletedEastern UtilitiesAssociates              Newport Electric                        CompletedMidwest Energy Inc      Iowa Resources                          CompletedCompany 1             Company 2             Date completed   New companyWPL Holdings Inc      IES Industries Inc/                      Interstate Power Co                   InterstateEnergyBaltimore Gas& Electric Co         Potomac Electric Power Co             ConstellationEnergyNorthern StatesPower Co              Wisconsin Electric &                      Power Co                              PrimergyPublic Service Coof Colorado           Southwestern Public                      Service CoUnion Electric Co      Cipsco Inc                           Ameren CorpWashington WaterPower Co              Sierra Pacific Resources              Altus CorpMidwest Resources     Iowa-Illinois Gas &                      Electric Co                 Jul 1995  MidAmericanEnergyCincinnati Gas& Electric Co         PSI Resources               Oct 1994  CINergy CorpNew EnglandElectric System       Nantucket Electric Co       Oct 1994Texas Utilities Co    Southwestern Electric                      Service Co                  Jan 1993Entergy Corp          Gulf States Utilities Co    Dec 1993Indiana MichiganPower Co              Michigan Power Co           Feb 1992Kansas Power& Light Co            Kansas Gas & Electric Co    Mar 1992    WesternResourcesUnitil Corp           Fitchburg Gas & Electric Co Apr 1992Northeast Utilities   Public Service Co of                      New Hampshire               Jun 1992Northeast Utilities   Fletcher Electric                      Light                       Sep 1992IE Industries Inc     Iowa Southern               Jul 1991    IESIndustriesUtilicorp United Inc  Centel Corp                 Sep 1991Eastern UtilitiesAssociates            Newport Electric            Mar 1990Midwest Energy Inc    Iowa Resources              Nov 1990     MidwestResourcesPhotograph(s):Photograph: ``The foreward-thinking executives are moving away from amerely custodial role to one actually managing assets'' M. Douglas Dunn,Tweed, Hadley & McCloyPhotograph: ``PSC brings a faster-growing service-area economy to themerger, while SPS brings strong generation and engineering'' Bill Helton,who will be appointed chairman of the SPS/PSC merged companyPhotograph: ``The contiguous territories and similar customer-focusedstrategies make the combination a natural''Clifford L. Greenwalt,President/CEO, CipscoCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. WHY UTILITY BOARD MEMBERSHIP IS CHANGINGBy:Marie Leone   How do electric-utility boards compare to the boards of the nation'slargest corporations? To start, electric utility boards are younger, lesshighly compensated, and have a greater outside representation than otherlarge US companies. In addition, utility board members have a shortertenure, and fewer utility companies offer stock options than theircorporate counterparts in the private sector. This information comes fromSpencer Stuart's (Houston, Tex) first survey of electric--utility boards.   Spencer Stuart, an executive search firm, has created its annual SpencerStuart Board Index (SSBI) by surveying the boards of 100 leading publiclytraded US companies--including firms such as AT&T Corp, Exxon Corp, and IBMCorp. Now, the firm has created a utility board index (UI)--the firstindustry-specific survey that Spencer Stuart has conducted. Jonathan A.Crystal, a partner with the firm, expects the UI to become an annualoffering and predicts that many utility boards will change significantly inthe coming years as the economic climate for utilities grows morecompetitive.Turnover expected   For example, Crystal says that, over the next five years, board-memberturnover will be higher at electric utilities than in other types ofcompanies. Why? Utilities are moving away from their local business focus,he says. By ``local,'' Crystal refers to utilities' traditional``semi-public'' obligation, which is usually manifest from therepresentation on the board of local corporations, businesses,not-for-profit organizations, universities and hospitals. That's differentfrom companies in the SSBI group, whose goal is to serve stockholders, notthe community. Essentially, Crystal explains, the monopoly structure of theelectric-utility industry made the utility business local in nature.   However, as deregulation forces utilities beyond their local roots,board makeups will likewise move beyond local representation. In fact,Crystal believes that more international, marketing, and financial expertswill become part of utility boards as US utilities look to increaseearnings growth in domestic and international markets.Changing times, changing data   According to Spencer Stuart's inaugural UI report, the average tenure ofboard members is 8.1 years, and ranges from 13.3 to one year. Ten boards(20%) averaged over 10 years of service, and 10 averaged less than sixyears of service.   Other survey data say that the average age of a UI director is 59, vs 61for an SSBI director. The latter average has been constant at 61 for thepast six years. But Crystal says that the 2-yr age spread does not reflectthe whole story, because the age group dispersion of UI and SSBI directorsis further apart than the average would indicate. For example, only 42% ofutility-board directors have an average age over 60, as compared to 78% ofthe SSBI boards.   In 1994, UI boards had a 5:2 ratio of directors that came from outsidethe utility company to directors that worked for the utility. This comparesfavorably to SSBI boards, which had four outside directors for each insidedirector. Thirteen UI boards (26%) included the CEO as the only insider, ascompared to 14% of the SSBI boards. UI boards averaged two inside directorsvs three for SSBI boards.   In addition, 25 of the 50 UI boards offered stock options and/or grantsto outside directors in 1994. That number increased to 27 by 1995. Thosefigures compare to 56 SSBI boards in 1994, and 61 in 1995. Crystalcomments that there is a movement afoot in corporate America to requiredirectors to buy stocks when joining a company's board, so that theireconomic interests are more closely aligned with those of stockholders.Compensation considered   In the area of compensation, the average total cash compensation for UIdirectors is also markedly less than the compensation of the directorsincluded in the SSBI survey. The results say that 74% of the UI boards payless $40,000 per year, compared to 10% of the broader survey of major UScompanies. UI board compensation ranges from a low of $18,785 at HawaiianElectric Industries Inc to a high of $58,622 at Public Service Gas &Electric Co (PSE&G). The only other utility paying less than $20,000 intotal director compensation annually is Illinova Corp, paying $18,800.Three utilities other than PSE&G pay more than $50,000 to board members:The Southern Company ($52,500); Consolidated Edison Co of New York Inc($51,500); and CMS Energy Corp ($51,444).   Crystal says that the comparison between board compensation for the UIgroup and SSBI group is simple economics. In general, utilities are smallercompanies, and therefore pay less. He notes that the UI index comprises the50 largest US utilities in terms of revenue, which puts Pacific Gas &Electric Co in the top spot with over $10.4-billion in revenue. This is afar cry from some of the SSBI companies that take in more than $100-billionin revenues each year.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. THE 1995 JAMES H. MCGRAW AWARDS`Industry is always ready for leadership' James H. McGraw, founder, TheMcGraw-Hill Companies   On November 29, Electrical World's 1995 James H. McGraw Awards werepresented to four electric-power companies to honor their pacesettingindustry achievements and significant contributions to the advancement ofthe electric-power industry. Conferred upon the winners at a specialluncheon ceremony during McGraw-Hill's ``Globalization of ElectricityMarkets'' executive summit, the awards were presented by Harold W. McGrawJr, chairman emeritus, The McGraw-Hill Companies, and grandson of thecompany's founder.   The winners--Duke Power Co (Charlotte, NC), Glasgow Electric Plant Board(Glasgow, Ky), Nigen Ltd (Belfast, Ireland), and Sithe Energies Inc (NewYork, NY)--were recognized for a diverse range of accomplishments andinnovations which included: the integration of strategic non-regulatedbusinesses with the utility operation; telecommunication serviceinnovation; creative financing; and competitive business practices.   Significant about this year's winners is that they and theirachievements represent a departure from the domestic-based, utility-onlywinners of the past. This year, two independent power companies werehonored--one based overseas. Also, each company was cited for achievementsthat clearly extend beyond the traditional role of electric-powercompanies. Thus, in keeping with its creator's philosophy, the 1995 McGrawAwards, and Electrical World, continue to reflect the dynamic and evolvingelectric-power industry and the issues important to the people that run itsbusinesses. Congratulations on a job well done.Duke Power Co   In recongnition of strategic and groundbreaking efforts to align utilityand non-utility activities with the competitive market.   Duke Power's Associated Enterprises Group (AEG), formed in August 1994,brings together eight of the corporation's non-utility business units,thereby underscoring Duke's increased emphasis on its diversified segmentsin a time of rapid change in the electric-power market.   Through AEG, Duke Power is active in the: independent power business(Duke Energy); the power marketing business (Duke/Louis Dreyfus); thetelecommunications sector (DukeNet Communications Inc); and worldwidedesign, engineering, and construction (Duke Engineering & Services Inc andDuke/Fluor Daniel.)   In addition, the company ranks high in customer satisfaction, brandloyalty, and operational excellence. Duke Power also is part of the teamnow managing DOE's Civilian Radioactive Waste Management Systems programand has assumed a principal role in the management and operation of DOE'sIdaho National Engineering Laboratory.Nigen Ltd   In recognition of financial innovation in a competitive market asdemonstrated by the Kilroot Electric Bond Offering.   Presented with the challenge of a newly deregulated market and theobstacle of raising funds needed to compete without sinking deep intolong-term bank debt, Nigen Ltd issued the $320-million Kilroot ElectricBond Offering that completely replaced bank loans that the company took outduring its privatization.   The bond issue--underwritten by Salomon Brothers and Barclays de ZoeteWedd--was devised by the same group of in-house engineers who have run theprivate power company since its inception, at the dissolution of thestate-owned Northern Ireland Electricity. The bond offering, afirst-of-its-kind in Europe, will not only free directors from the oftenonerous day-to-day constraints of bank supervision, but will also speed theday when employees at all levels can share in the company's success.   Nigen, one of Northern Ireland's two main electric generating companies,operates two plants in the region which produce close to half of theprovince's electricity.Sithe Energies Inc   In recognition of the company's pioneering efforts in fosteringelectric-power competition as demonstrated by the Independence project.   From a business perspective, some industry experts claim that Sithe'sIndependence project ushered in a new age of competition by initiating thefirst retail-wheeling transaction using the yet untested 1992 Energy PolicyAct (EPAct). Others called it the last ``sweet'' deal for cogenerators.But, the one thing all industry participants agreed on was that theIndependence project, located in Scriba, NY, near Lake Ontario, did, andcontinues to, test the legal and regulatory framework of the newcompetitive electric-power market in the US.   By offering low-cost power from the Independence project, Sithe luredaway the local utility's largest customer--Alcan Rolled Products. Then, byusing the EPAct's open-access provision, Sithe obliged the utility toprovide transmission access from the Independence project to Alcan'sfacility to complete the private-power transaction. Thus, Sithe forcedstate and federal regulators to take a practical and realistic look at thenew law, and make decisions that will set precedents in the markeplace.Glasgow Electric Plant Board   In recognition of successful development and innovative commercial useof a coaxial-based broadband network.   The Glasgow Electric Plant Board already has its 13,000 customers betterlinked to the world than most of the ``industry-leading'' organizationsstill conducting small-scale pilots. Through its 120-total-mile, coax-basedcommunications network--that has drops to every location where the companyhas a meter--GEPB has created a variety of cyber services thatstrategically complement its electricity business.   GEPB competes in the local cable television market and has, to date,captured 55% of the area's customers; offers a second local telephoneutility service; connects customers to a city-wide computer data networkthat links virtually every computer in Glasgow, including home, school,city and county office, library, business, and medical facilities; offersinteractive television in local schools; owns and operates a fullydigitized geographic information system landbase of the county;synchronizes all of the 22 traffic signals in the city; and can bundle allavailable services on the coax network in one bill.Photograph(s):Photograph: Harold McGraw Jr (left) congratulates Robert A. Lessenberry,chairman, Glasgow Electric Plant Board, on the success of the company'stelecommunications ventures. GEPB General Manager William Ray displays theMcGraw AwardPhotograph: William A. Coley, president, Duke Power Co's AssociatedEnterprises, addresses the audience after accepting the award for hiscompany's achievements in meshing regulated and unregulated businesses tomeet new market demandsPhotograph: Ralph Grutsch, senior vice president of operations, SitheEnergies Inc, talks about his company's competitive strategies and theIndependence power facility--the project that was honored by a 1995 McGrawAwardPhotograph: John Greer, Nigen plant manager accepts the 1995 McGraw Awardfrom Harold McGraw Jr, in recognition of the Belfast-based company'sinnovative bond offering--a first-of-its-kind in EuropeCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. THE HISTORY   An Electrical World tradition since 1925, the annual James H. McGrawAwards, named for the founder of The McGraw-Hill Companies, are presentedto corporations and project owners and operators that have made asignificant contribution to the advancement of the electric power industrythrough innovative and constructive business practices.   In an excerpt from one of James McGraw's letters, he writes about theaward: ``I hope that it is well understood that the giving of this award ispurely symbolic. It would be manifestly impossible to attempt to make theintrinsic worth of such an award indicate any measure of the importance orthe value of the service for which it is presented in commemoration. Theintent is rather to give public recognition and to express industryappreciation of a contribution to the advancement of the electricalindustry which oftentimes may indicate and offer possibilities for goodbeyond appraisal. The award is but a symbol of the honor that would come tocompanies and their employees, who unselfishhly give of their time, theirthought, their energy, and their spirit to promote the interest of all theelectrical industry. Such companies and people the industry should indeeddelight to honor.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. HYDRO PACTS REVAMP OPERATIONS AND MARKET STRATEGIESBy:Ray Pospisil   As competition accelerates in the electricity sector, electric powercompanies are looking to reap competitive benefits from their existinghydroelectric powerplants--which provide low-cost power and reduce outlaysfor air-pollution control equipment and strategies. However, most hydroplants owned by investor-owned utilities are scheduled for relicensing overthe next two decades by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)--aprocess that can take five to seven years, requires extensive studies, andoften involves contentious litigation--an ordeal that can dampen a hydroproject's market advantage.20 But, with competitive forces nipping at their heels, hydro utilitiesare working hard to avoid the delay and expense of the relicensing process.And in some cases, to expedite the renewal process, utilities are reachingsettlements with environmental advocates, recreational groups, and publicagencies that change the way they operate powerplants.20 ``When these projects were built in the early part of the century,they were seen as engineering marvels. Now they're seen by some asecological disasters,'' says Cleve Kapala, director of relicensing for NewEngland Electric System (NEES). ``But we prefer to deal with constituenciesrather than depositions.''   What are the realities of changes in operations? For one thing, suchchanges often reduce generating output--if water is diverted away fromturbines to accommodate fish, for instance. In addition, greater flows maybe requested during off-peak periods, diminishing the value of these plantsas peakers and forcing utilities to generate power when market prices arelow. Lastly, the changes all cost money, and utilities are reluctant toincur more costs at a time when they are trying to streamline to meetcompetitive demands.   And even though some utilities are willing to negotiate to keep theirplants out of the relicensing abyss, there remains at least one reportedcase where a utility--Pacific Gas & Electric Co (PG&E)--decided to sellsome projects rather than absorb the extra costs associated with renewal ofthe licenses.A river view   The most active conservation group in terms of hydroelectric issues isAmerican Rivers, based in Washington, DC, which has already worked outsettlements with Niagara Mohawk Power Corp (NiMo), NEES, and Central MainePower Co. American Rivers and other conservation groups are currentlyworking on settlements with other electric power companies in the US.20 Margaret Bowman, director of hydropower programs, says theorganization usually fights for several key changes: increased flows,rerouting of water to the bypass reaches (away from turbines), constructionof fish passage for migration, installing screens and other protectivedevices to keep fish from getting sucked into turbines, and protection ofland around reservoirs.20 ``Utilities are recognizing that the conditions we seek are requiredby law, and are necessary for managing multiple uses of rivers,'' she says.``By working with us, they can come to agreements that are win/win, ratherthan going through a contentious process.'' Bowman says American Rivers andother intervenors are making a greater effort to get involved early, ratherthan waiting to formally intervene at FERC. ``If we have input into theselection of the consultants that utilities use, we are less likely tochallenge their results and request more studies,'' she says. ``We don'twant utility money going into studies--we'd rather they spend it onmitigation.''   Early involvement by stakeholders and agencies is one of the key demandsthat the National Hydropower Assn (NHA), Washington, DC, made in a petitionto FERC. NHA, which includes utilities, independent power producers, andindustrial hydro operators as members, notes that most of the relicensingapplications submitted to FERC in 1991 have still not been approved, andthat tens of thousands of megawatts of hydro power must be relicensed overthe next two decades.A new pact   Conservation groups, including American Rivers, recently signed onto asettlement covering six NiMo dams on the Black River in New York, aftercompleting negotiations that involved the New York Dept of Conservation,the US Fish & Wildlife Service, the National Park Service, New York RiversUnited, and others. Negotiations did not just resolve differences betweenNiMo and intervenors, but settled other disagreements--often wildlifeinterests do not always agree with boaters, who do not always want the sameflows as fishermen, who disagree among themselves about the merits ofrushing water vs standing pools. However, by the end, a settlement washammered out that will allow NiMo to submit its final application to FERCwithout facing challenges by any of the interest groups or agencies.   As part of the settlement, NiMo will contribute $105,000 to a BlackRiver restoration fund that includes over $1-million from this and earliersettlements involving NiMo and the Watertown (NY) municipal powerplant.NiMo has not yet calculated the cost of the alterations, but it hasestimated that generation will be reduced by 6%, according to a spokesman.Some releases will also force the utility to operate turbines when it wouldprefer to hold water back for later peaks.20 Nevertheless, the changes could boost tourism and create economicdevelopment benefits for the service territory, NiMo spokesmen note.Altogether, the company is relicensing 30 plants under nine licenses,accounting for about 700 MW, or 10% of its generation. NiMo has 20 staffmembers working on relicensing and expects to spend $113-million on theeffort through the 1990s.20 NEES will lose about 12% of the energy output of its Deerfield projectbecause of environmental and recreational changes, says Kapala. Over the40-yr license that NEES is seeking, this could cause a revenue loss of$21-million (net present value) from the series of eight dams that produce85 MW. Part of that loss results from releasing water on weekends--when thepower is less valuable--in order to accommodate whitewater sports. Inaddition, the company will spend $6- to $7-million on fish passage andother improvements.20 ``We have to anticipate the changing market, where all generation willcompete,'' he says. ``You don't want to strand environmental costs thatcannot be recovered.'' NEES decided to go ahead with these changes afternegotiating formally for two years and informally for two or three yearsbefore that.20 The value of the project as a peaker, and as a zero-emissions resourcewere ``part of the overall calculus,'' Kapala says. He adds, however,``There were some things we were asked to do that were just noteconomically feasible.'' For instance, some environmental groups complainedthat fluctuations in water storage affect wildlife habitats around thereservoirs.   But, a big advantage of the hydro dams is the utility's ability todispatch them for peaking power, and NEES refused to give up that benefit.He adds that those reservoirs were built by NEES, and were never naturalformations.West Coast water   PacifiCorp is also trying to balance the costs of relicensing againstthe benefits of its 1100-MW hydro system, says Terry Flores, hydro policyadministrator. ``The irony is that the costs to operate and relicense hydroare increasing at the same time that the market is providing lower-costalternatives,'' she says. ``We are taking a hard look at the economics ofeach project, but the process is not conducive to keeping costs down.Licenses can be loaded up with so many conditions.'' She says governmentagencies often see the licensing process as an opportunity to makeimprovements for which they lack capital.20 Flores also criticizes the process itself, saying too much money isspent on studies, instead of going to protect or improve resources.PacifiCorp has already spent $14-million to relicense a 185-MW project inOregon, yet most major issues remain unresolved, she notes. The companyalso spent five years trying to relicense a 1-MW plant, but was recentlyinformed that FERC has no jurisdiction since the river is not navigable.20 The cost of some environmental upgrades may be considered prohibitive.PG&E recently agreed to sell two hydro plants that produce about 5 MW tothe Calaveras County Water District, citing the $6-million cost forrecreation upgrades required by the US Forest Service a major reason forthe sale. The company may seek to sell others, says a spokesman, adding,``In the deregulated market, we won't be able to pass these costs along toratepayers.''   That is also a concern for Southern California Edison Co (SCE), whichhas 1156 MW of hydroelectric capacity. In the new market, hydro would bethe cheapest resource, but mitigation expenses could threaten thatadvantage, notes SCE Biologist Geoffrey Rabone. The utility, which operatesin one of the most polluted air basins in the country, also relies heavilyon its hydro resources to hold down emissions, adds Ron Schroeder, managerof relicensing and compliance. Therefore, the 10% reduction in power outputthat he expects from settlements could affect the company's complianceefforts.20 Schroeder says that SCE's dams are ``high-head, low-flow'' units, forwhich the drop is much greater--over 1000 ft in most cases, and up to 2400ft--compared to eastern dams that are typically less than 50 ft high, butwith greater flow. Thus, flow changes have a bigger impact on the units.20 In one settlement, SCE has reached an agreement with state and federalagencies to spend $2.5-million on hatchery projects and other improvementsto ease relicensing of a 36-MW, run-of-the-river plant. However, a groupcalled the Kern River Valley Community Consensus Council wants the utilityto completely decommission the plant, saying the proposed improvementscannot alleviate the impact to habitats and recreation.Hydro's competitive edge   Aside from zero fuel costs and zero emissions, hydroelectric power isbeing touted in the competitive market for its storage ability.Hydro-Quebec (H-Q) stresses storage in its power marketing efforts throughHQ Energy Services, Montreal, Que, Canada, comparing its 30,000-MW hydrosystem to ``a big battery.'' This could allow utilities to keep plantsrunning at their most efficient, peak capacities and bank the excess forlater use. Utilities could also take advantage of swings in the market bydrawing down power and selling it when prices rise.20 Further, H-Q sees a gradual merging of deregulated energy markets, sothat utilities or end users might shift between gas and purchased powerdepending on prices. With that approach, power producers might generatepower when natural gas is cheap and bank it, then draw it down later.   Along with HQ Energy Services, H-Q is involved in Energy AlliancePartnership (EAP), a power marketing joint venture that includesConsolidated Natural Gas (CNG), Pittsburgh, Pa, and Quebec-based gasdistributor Noverco.20 A 10-second responseMt Hope Hydro, Rockaway, NJ, is also offering the quick-dispatchadvantage--which will be possible when its proposed 2000-MW pumped-storageproject in New Jersey is completed. By quick dispatch, the projectdevelopers mean within 10 seconds.20 In addition to its dispatch capabilities, the project will also offerpower companies in the Northeast the chance to increase the amount ofinexpensive electricity they can import from Canada, say company sources.That is because the quick availability would prevent inrushes of power ifgenerating plants are lost on the receiving end--therefore, utilities canload their transmission lines closer to capacity. Mt Hope is a jointventure of Kvaerner Inc of Norway, ABB Generation Inc, Littleton, Colo, andother partners.Photograph(s):Photograph: Funding for river restoration and changes in powerplantoperations are two of the negotiated items included in a recentutility/conservation group settlement that promises to speed up hydrorelicensing proceduresPhotograph: NEES will lose about 12% of the energy output of its Deerfieldproject because of environmental and recreational changes. However, utilityexecutives believe the changes are worth the trade-off of keeping the hydroplant operationalCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. THE NAME GAME: A LEXICON FOR DISTRIBUTIONBy:L. Patrick Briody   Here's a question for all the power company executives who are about toenter the information technology age. What is the difference betweenautomatic meter reading (AMR) and automated meter reading? The answer isnot very obvious. One well-regarded utility industry researcher considersthe latter a subset of the former. In Chinese, automatic and automated arethe same word, Zi-Dong (self-move). Another researcher that publishesin-depth reports at $875 a copy on the subject of AMR, defines it asautomatic meter reading. Has our focus on technology caused us to losefocus on communications at a time when communicating with partners, powerbrokers, industry colleagues has become paramount to surveying in acompetitive environment? If that is the case, here is an executive guide tothe next phase of distribution management--the technology that provides thefinal, and vital, link between an electric power company and its customer.What's the buzz?   Since computers were first used in electric utilities, communicationbetween technical professionals and end users has been hampered byimprecise terminology. Such miscommunication has largely been caused by thedifferent business perspectives of the two groups, the jargon of theirrespective disciplines, and the over- and underlap of differentapplications of information technology. Moreover, at times vendors haveclouded the issues to serve their own marketing purposes--a tactic referredto as the ``muddy-the-waters marketing strategy.'' In addition,interutility communications, which lacks the common organizational andgeographic context of an individual utility, are even more difficult.Lastly, as the industry ``globalizes,'' translating already vaguely definedterms seems destined to create a modern Tower of Babel.A decoder ring   According to Input, a research firm located in Mountain View, Calif,the utility software and services market is growing at a 14% rate, secondonly to telecommunications. Within utilities, the fastest growingapplications are clustered in the distribution operations side of thehouse. They can be called collectively the ``distribution managementsystem.'' Because of the current focus on this area, defining these termsprecisely is more important than ever.20 In an attempt to develop some measure of consistency in this area,five leading utilities were examined to understand how they perceivetechnology achieving their operational goals in distribution operations.Their approaches to application integration were also probed. Thisinformation was synthesized and a set of application definitions reflectinga model of application relationships was developed.20 The contributing utilities are Consolidated Edison Co of New York Inc(Con Edison), Los Angeles Dept of Water & Power, Nevada Power Co (NPC),Northern Indiana Public Service Co (Nipsco), and Southern California EdisonCo (SCE). They provided a cross-section of thought, from size, geographic,and ownership viewpoints. All contributed unique perspectives. Con Edisonin particular is moving judiciously toward an automatic crew dispatchapplication. SCE has implemented an innovative outage management system.Keeping the lights on   The phrase, distribution management system, is one of the moremisunderstood terms in the increasingly confused utility vocabulary. First,its acronym, DMS, is so readily confused with the fading DSM (demand-sidemanagement) as to degenerate many potentially constructive discussions intobouts of arm waving as participants talk not over, not under, but aroundone another's heads. Indeed, the two terms are intertwined in that bothimply some measure of control over the distribution network. However, DSMimplies influencing demand in order to balance it with supply, while DMSsimply implies assuring that the lights stay on. The term, DMS, takenliterally, clearly describes the overall responsibility of the distributionoperations organization. As a result, it is logically the umbrella-term fordistribution operations applications. The outage management line separatingpower control and crew control also separates these application sets intotwo different levels of capital intensity. Power control requires capitalinvestment in control facilities, while outage management, crew dispatchand work management are basically software implementations.Definitions   The definitions in the box above represent a synthesis of the fiveutilities participating in the technology definition effort. Despite theirmany differences in organization and geography, it appears that all fivecould talk to one another more precisely with this mini-lexicon. It dividesthe distribution management system into its two aspects, power and service(work). The power control center, which may co-reside with the servicecontrol center, is distinct from a process standpoint. Its management ofthe distribution network is through remote, real-time sensing and control.In contrast, the service control center manages crews in the field.20 The service side, or control center, uses a work management system forboth planned and unplanned (emergency) work. However, in emergencies, theoutage management system may provide many functions normally viewed as``work management,'' for example: requesting work through isolating afault, designing by providing switching plans, or scheduling through directaccess to crew information within a crew dispatch function. The outagemanagement system is depicted as straddling the line between power andservice control centers, because its role is to bridge the real-time worldof power control to the slower world of work crews. Where outage managementfeeds data on unplanned work into the work management system varies greatlyby each utility and its view of mopping up operations.Whither GIS?   Some will note the absence of AM/FM (automated mapping/facilitiesmanagement) and GIS (geographic information systems) from theseapplications. This is quite deliberate. These terms, AM/FM/GIS, have evolved from extensive efforts among utilities spanning a quarterof a century to improve their capabilities to manage their distributionfacilities, the premise being that a single, geographically oriented database that includes connectivity of the electrical devices would be theultimate enabler of all distribution planning and operations.20 As a data base, AM/FM/GIS is not an application per se. For thisreason, it is not included above. Generally, distribution operations folkdowngrade the importance of geographical accuracy in favor of electricalconnectivity. It is connectivity data that are fundamental to alldistribution operations applications. In the words of an NPC engineer: ``Idon't need to know where it is; they'll call me and tell me. I need to knowwhat it's connected to.'' Techniques for gleaning the necessaryconnectivity data have improved markedly with Nipsco deriving connectivityfrom scanned paper maps and generating one-line diagrams from those data.SCE has derived connectivity from AutoCad (computer-aided distribution)maps. The power applications group does not require a land data base. Infact, their real-time performance requirements cannot be met by the typicalrelational database management systems (RDMS)-based AM/FM/GIS data base. Ascrew dispatch moves towards automatic, it uses geographic attributes inlocating and routing crews. Work management uses them in design andscheduling. The good news is that after years of searching for theAM/FM/GIS Holy Grail--conversion techniques--as well as graphics technologyhave matured. At the same time, utility goals have become more realistic byemphasizing electric accuracy instead of geography.   Those utilities that lagged in AM/FM/GIS development were fortunate tohave avoided the dollar-tipped arrows of the pioneers. But the pioneeringdays are over.20 There are no blockbuster revelations hidden in lexicon. Old habits diehard, particularly in the utility industry. But perhaps the definitionspresented here will stimulate discussion and a better understanding of thedistribution operations community--what it does, and what to call what itdoes. If that happens, this most important aspect of a utility will bebetter understood.What's in a name: Defining critical distribution functions   -- Distribution management system (DMS). The entire range ofapplications necessary to carry out distribution operations. It consists ofpower- and work-related activities, controlled by the appropriately namedcontrol, power, and crew centers. There was a time when it was necessaryfor control centers to reside in the specific service areas they handled,and both the power and crew dispatch functions had to co-reside in theinterest of effective coordination. This is no longer the case, as isexemplified by Southern California Edison Co's outage management system,which capitalizes on modern communications and distributed databasetechnologies.   -- Outage management. The processing and analysis of trouble incidentson the network and support of the appropriate remedial actions, includingautomatic switching plans, to enhance network availability and customerservice while minimizing restoration operation and maintenance expense.   -- Crew dispatch. The communication and direction of work crewactivities in the field from a service control center to optimizefleet/crew resources. (Crews may consist of only one person.) May encompassvehicle tracking and/or routing functionality. Sometimes referred to asfield order dispatch, mobile dispatch, or mobility. Computer-aided dispatchwill inevitably be confused with computer-aided design because of thecommon acronym--CAD--but the term is already set in place and cannot bedislodged. Automatic dispatch differs from CAD in that it assumes nodispatcher intervention in the process.   -- Scada. Substation control and data acquisition. There is a move tochange supervisory to substation in the acronym because Scada providesremote monitoring and real-time control of distribution substations throughthe use of remote terminal units (RTUs), or occasionally, programmablelogic controllers (PLCs).   -- Substation automation. Self-contained data acquisition and controlwithin one (or multiple) substation(s).   -- Distribution automation. Remote monitoring and real-time control offeeders, including sectionalizing devices, auto-transformers, reclosers,capacitors, regulators and switches located in the distribution circuit.The distribution circuit starts with the distribution feeder outside thesubstation fence and extends into the ``smart building.'' Automatic meterreading, load control, and smart building are subsets.   -- Meter reading. The recording of power consumed by the customer toenable billing, and, at times, measurement of load for engineeringpurposes. Today there are two types of meter reading--both confusinglyreferred to as AMR--augmented and automatic. Augmented uses meter readerswith hand-held computers; automatic is accomplished without meter readersthrough a variety of communications technologies. AMR should be used onlyto signify automatic. Hand-held methods are referred to as hand-held, notAMR.   -- Load control. Direct control of load at the customer's premise,usually to shut down power-intensive appliances, machinery, and equipment.Load control is a subset of the broader term, load management, a categoryof demand-side management actions that can be accomplished with a varietyof computer and non-computer-related methods, for example, rate incentives.Load control restricts its meaning to the computer-related subset only.   -- Smart building. The activation of electrical devices within thecustomer's premise to enable services beyond the simple distribution ofpower, for example, alarming. The term ``smart home'' means strictlyresidential customers, while smart building encompasses all customers.   -- Work management. The process of 1) requesting work, 2) design, 3)scheduling, 4) reporting, and 5) closing requests for work on thedistribution network. Initiators may be requests for construction(customer-driven), requests for systems maintenance/improvements (customer,field, or engineering-driven), or an unplanned incident--for example, anoutage. The first two, both planned, include all five elements of theprocess. The latter--unplanned-- includes only reporting and closing.Photograph(s):Photograph: Mission critical control: Southern California Edison controlcenter exploits modern communications and distrtibution databasetechnologiesPhotograph: Time bridge: The outage management system bridges the real-timeworld of power control to the world of work crewsAbout the Author(s):Patrick Briody is a principal with Briody Associates, a utility informationsystems consulting firm based in Newtown, Conn.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CAN RETAILING WORK?By:Karl Stahlkopf   With all the recent coverage the trade and consumer press have given theelectric power deregulation debate, one critical question remains: Isretail wheeling feasible?   As deregulation sweeps the US electric power industry, individual powerproviders are coming to grips with the challenges of increased competitionat both the wholesale and retail levels. And electric power executives arerealizing that evaluation of these market sectors cannot be conducted inisolation from each other. In fact, the question of whether retail wheelingis feasible depends on changes in technologies and markets for bulk powerand vice versa.20 The reasons are straightforward, and to some extent, resemble thechicken and egg dilemma: Which should come first, regulatory reform of thewholesale market to stimulate a retail electricity price drop, or reform ofthe retail market to stimulate a drop in wholesale electricity prices. Thegoal of retail wheeling--to provide customers with better service at lowerprices--cannot be fulfilled without comparable market reform to makelow-cost wholesale electricity more widely available through bulk-powertransactions. Conversely, retail wheeling--or some alternative approach toretail deregulation, such as regional Power Pools--will be needed totranslate cost savings in the bulk power market into lower prices forcustomers.A complex machine   But the feasibility question goes beyond just politics and regulation.From a technological point of view, the two market segments are even moreintimately related, since they represent activity in different portions ofa single, huge physical network for electricity. So tightly connected isthis network--sometimes called the most complex physical machine evercreated--that power generators separated by thousands of miles must rotateat exactly the same speed and at a carefully specified angle of separation.Without this exquisite synchronism, power could not be transferred from onepart of the country to another in hopes of reducing overall costs.   The question of whether retail wheeling is feasible must, therefore, beanswered in terms of what opportunities are available for improving powerdelivery and market mechanisms all the way from the powerplant to the homeor workplace. In fact, an unprecedented number of such opportunities areemerging from a technological revolution now taking place in powerdelivery, as power electronics devices are being used to exert more precisecontrol over utility transmission and distribution systems. In addition,recent research on the issues of cost desegregation and market managementhas revealed new ways to increase the economic efficiency of the electricpower industry (see box, below).The once, and future, grid   One of the most important competitive challenges now facing utilities ishow to comply with the latest notice of proposed rulemaking (NOPR) from theFederal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), commonly known as theMega-NOPR. Although the terms of the proposed rule have not yet beenfinalized, it essentially mandates open access to transmission networks andsets out minimum conditions of service that utilities must offer.20 Open access is expected to increase both the number and complexity ofbulk power transactions on the nation's transmission grid. Already, some40% of the electricity generated in the US is sold by the producing utilityon the wholesale power market, and some bottlenecks have begun to appearalong some transmission corridors. Construction of new transmission linesto ease these bottlenecks, however, has become more difficult. Therefore, amajor priority for utilities is to exert better control over their bulkpower systems, using advanced technology to maximize the use of limitedtransmission assets.20 Distribution's futureMoving to the distribution side of power delivery, customers areincreasingly concerned about the vulnerability of their sensitiveelectronic equipment to power disturbances. The total cost to customers ofsuch disturbances in increasingly significant--amounting to about $3- to$5-billion per year in the US alone. Many customers now install their ownuninterruptible power supplies to provide ride-through capability, butthese battery-dependent devices are expensive, energy-inefficient, andoften require maintenance beyond an owner's immediate resources. Sinceabout 90% of outages affecting customers originate on the distributionsystem, there is a pressing need to provide utilities with new ways tooffer premium quality power to customers with sensitive loads.A question of cost   A major concern of FERC in creating open access is how to set tariffsfor transmission services under open access. But before the industry canset prices, it must first understand costs. One solution is the developmentof a common technical basis that facilitates open discussion on costs andtariffs. To that end, the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), PaloAlto, Calif, has published a Transmission Services Costing Framework, atool that utilities can use to better understand their own transmissioncosts.20 Another requirement of the Mega-NOPR is that tariffs for transmissionservices apply equally to the owner of a transmission system and to thirdparties seeking access to the system. The level of such tariffs are stillbeing aggressively debated by utilities that want to recover strandedinvestment costs and third-party users that want to provide low-cost power.According to the Mega-NOPR, these tariffs and the supporting informationare to be posted electronically so that all players have access to them inreal time.The real-time challenge   To make retail wheeling work, the industry needs to devise retail ratestructures that more realistically match retail price to the cost ofsupplying power--while still giving customers greater choice and providingload relief during critical demand periods.   Studies at Niagara Mohawk Power Corp, for example, found that loadcurtailments could be achieved much more cost-effectively through areal-time pricing (RTP) mechanism than they could be through aninterruptible service program. The cost to customers for a load voluntarilyforegone in response to appropriate price signals was only 10% of the costof an interrupted load, because customers had more flexibility inconfiguring their own electricity usage.20 The largest controlled RTP experiment to date is being conducted atGeorgia Power Co. So far, this demonstration program has shown not only anability to affect the load patterns of existing customers, but also anability to attract new customers. During the first 15 months of theexperiment, the new service option brought approximately $500-million ofnew investment into Georgia--including the Sara Lee Knit Products plant.Customers using the RTP program have seen their average electricity costper kilowatt-hour decrease by about 5%, while their kilowatt-hour usageincreased by more than 10%.In a nutshell: Yes, it's feasible   So, to answer one of the most frequently asked questions: If advancedtechnologies are used to improve both the physical control of electricaltransmission and distribution systems--and the management of both wholesaleand retail markets--retail wheeling is indeed feasible. Now the remainingquestion is: Feasible for whom? Answer: Most likely, the proactive powerproviders that are taking advantage of the revolutionary technologies thatare transforming the industry.EPRI's competitive push   If technology advances are pushing the industry closer to retailwheeling, then the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Palo Alto,Calif, is pushing technology. Witness some of the organization's technologyresponses to the competitive market:   -- Facts (flexible ac transmission system). A pioneering concept of ahigh-tech system that uses power electronics to control power flow on bulkpower networks. Specifically, this transmission system will enableutilities to direct more power along specific corridors, enhancing overallsystem stability by reacting almost instantaneously to transientdisturbances, and allowing transmission lines to be loaded closer tothermal limits.   Facts has a rich history. The first generation of Facts devices--such asthe thyristor-controlled series capacitor (TCSC)--could increase power flowon specific lines, but only by switching a large capacitor bank. This year,the second generation Facts device debuts--the static condenser (Statcon),which can provide voltage support without the need for large externalcircuit elements. The third generation, such as the unified power flowcontroller (UPFC), expected to enter utility service by 1997, will be ableto control all three critical variables of power flow simultaneously:reducing impedance, shifting power angle, and increasing voltage support.   -- Custom power research. This program refers to the use of powerelectronics controllers on utility distribution systems to prevent powerinterruptions and other disturbances that affect customers directly. Thissolution is often a more cost-effective, energy-efficient way to protectsensitive loads than having a customer install an uninterruptible powersystem. The inherent advantage of these controllers is their ability torespond almost instantaneously to developing problems--compared, forexample, to the six cycles often required by mechanical reclosers.20 Several demonstrations of custom power controllers are now under way.One currently in use is the solid-state transfer switch, which providesuninterrupted power to a customer by switching a load from a faulted feederto an independent, unfaulted feeder within a quarter cycle. Anothercontroller being demonstrated is the dynamic voltage restorer (DVR), asolid-state controller that protects a critical load from power-linedisturbances--reacting to momentary voltage sags and swells by exchangingreactive power with a distribution line.20 A third controller system being demonstrated involves the distributionstatic condenser (D-Statcon), which protects the distribution system fromthe effects of a ``polluting'' electrical load by continuously adjustingthe level of line compensation for varying load conditions.   -- Transmission services costing framework. The framework was actuallydeveloped before the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) announcedits proposed rule making on transmission access, and was intended to be abroadly applicable tool that utilities could use to better understand theirown transmission costs. Applying the framework involves a straightforward,three-step process: definition of transmission services in terms of theirattributes; identification of service components and associated costs; andactual calculation of costs. By following these steps in detail, a utilitycan not only develop a rational basis for submitting tariff proposals toFERC, but also determine how best to control transmission costs on aparticular system.   -- Transmission services information network (TSIN). On Oct 13, 1995,EPRI submitted a report to FERC recommending how a nationwide TSIN can beimplemented to facilitate such an information exchange. This report wasprepared in close coordination with the North American Electric ReliabilityCouncil, Princeton, NJ, which helped determine what data should be madeavailable on TSIN. The first phase of the implementation of TSIN isexpected by June 1996 and will involve use of the public Internet. A secondphase, involving access through private networks, will provide a higherlevel of functionality.Illustration(s):Illustration: Three easy pieces: The transmission services costingframework provides a three-step process for utilities to understandtransmission costs on their particular systemPhotograph(s):Photograph: ``The short answer--yes, retail wheeling is feasible'' KarlStahlkopfPhotograph: TCSC at Bonneville Power's Slatt substation represents thefirst generation of Facts--a device that can control power flow on anindividual transmission lineAbout the Author(s):Karl Stahlkopf is vice president, Power Delivery Group, EPRI.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. NOPR PRICING DEFINEDBy:The editors   A new study--authored by Richard H. Hilt, a partner in Bright LineEnergy Inc, Palo Alto, Calif, and published by UDI/McGraw-Hill, Washington,DC--can help utility executives see the future more clearly. Titled,``Winning in the Competitive Wholesale Power Markets: How the Top ElectricUtilities Fare Under New FERC Rules,'' the study analyzes the possibleimpact of Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) final rules at thenational and regional levels, as well as on individual investor-ownedutilities.20 Analysis is based on data from the utilities' 1994 Form 1 filings toFERC, which fix the size of today's utility wholesale market at $16-billionannually--or 25% of the investor-owned utility total. Other estimates placethe future size of the wholesale market--after retail wheeling becomes areality--at about $200-billion a year.20 The study also analyzes the effect of the final rules on open-accesstariff calculations for the nation as a whole, and for specific utilities.For any utility, the tariff can be calculated if one knows the value of itsexisting transmission system, the peak demand on that system, and thegeneric cost of capital. For 1994, the study calculates that the nationalaverage tariff for transmission service between designated points was about$21/MW/yr.   ``Winning in the Competitive Wholesale Power Markets: How the TopElectric Utilities Fare Under New FERC Rules'' is available fromUDI/McGraw-Hill for $395, or with utility data base for $695. For moreinformation, call 1-800-486-3660 or fax 202-942-8789.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CONGRESS TO DOE: TAKE THE WASTEProfiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters   Lost in the current budget debate is legislation (HR 1020) whichreaffirms the federal government's obligation to receive and store spentfuel from nuclear powerplants. Specifically, the bill would require theDept of Energy (DOE) to take the following steps:   -- Construct and operate a central interim storage facility for spentnuclear fuel by 1998. The two-phase facility would operate for 20 yearsbeginning in 1998 with a capacity of 10,000 metric tons of uranium. PhaseII would increase the facility's capacity to 40,000 metric tons under a100-yr license.   -- Construct and operate a permanent repository. DOE must apply to theNuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) by 2001 for authorization to build arepository which must begin operating by 2010. If site characterizationproves the Yucca Mountain site cannot meet NRC criteria, the program willbe terminated.   -- Develop a transportation system to move the spent fuel from nuclearpowerplants to the interim and permanent storage facilities beginning in1998. Included in this are fuel acceptance schedules and transportationroutes and emergency planning assistance to affected states, localities,and Indian tribes.   -- Begin moving spent nuclear fuel by Jan 31, 1998, as required by theNuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982.   The House Rules Committee began reviewing the legislation afterThanksgiving. It has already been approved by the House CommerceCommittee.   HR 1020 would replace the current nuclear-waste funding system with auser fee to ensure that consumers pay only what DOE spends on the civilianwaste-management system. In a letter to House Speaker Newt Gingrich,members sponsoring the bill explain that the new user fee takes responsiblesteps to ensure that the ratepayers are protected from federalmisappropriation of their contributions.   To enable DOE to meet its 1998 obligation, the legislation outlinesresponsibilities under the National Environmental Policy Act for each majoractivity to develop the integrated system. For example, instead of DOE andNRC preparing separate environmental impact statements (EIS) for theinterim facility, only the NRC would file an EIS but with DOE input. DOEwould be responsible for preparing an EIS on the construction andtransportation facilities from existing rail lines to an interim storagefacility and in conjunction with a license application for a repository.   A hearing on a similar bill developed in the Senate (S 1271), which alsocalls for DOE to build and operate an interim storage facility for spentnuclear fuel, has yet to be scheduled for review by the Senate EnergyCommittee.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. PARK SERVICE HUNTS FOR POWER SAVINGSProfiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters   The National Park Service is looking to electric utilities for ideas onmanaging its energy use. While most people think of the Park Service asland managers, it operates 368 facilities in 49 states, plus territoriesand commonwealths. The facilities provide services for 300-million visitorsannually and range from visitors' centers at remote national parks andbattlefields to urban memorials like the St. Louis (Mo) arch, to historicsites , such as Ford's Theatre in Washington, DC.   Some facilities, such as the Independence Center in Philadelphia, Pa,consume more power than others. According to Mike Eisenberg, an engineer inthe agency's Denver (Colo) Service Center, the Park Service plans to spend$100-million over the next 10 years renovating and installing efficientheating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment. One projectalready under way is the new HVAC system at the White House.   Eisenberg says the Park Service is a perfect match for electricutilities wishing to ``try out new ideas,'' because it offers a diversityof facilities and a desire to explore new technologies.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. GAS INDUSTRY SEES OPPORTUNITY IN ELECTRIC'S REVAMPProfiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newsletters   The natural gas industry faces many structural, financial, andregulatory issues because of the impending electric power industryrestructuring, but will also benefit from new opportunities for growth,according to a study released recently by the American Gas Assn (AGA). Thereport, ``Electric Industry Restructuring and its Implications for theNatural Gas Industry,'' points to power generation, new technologies in thecommercial and industrial sectors, natural-gas vehicles, and gas cooling asmarkets with growth potential.   The electric power industry is unlikely to adversely affect natural-gasmarkets in the near future, because, explains AGA President Michael Baly,``of the renewed strength of gas in those markets, the large existinginvestment in natural-gas equipment and appliances, and the limits onelectricity price decreases imposed by transition costs.''The report suggests that gas demand for power generation will growsubstantially between now and 2010, but for the next several years willremain fairly flat at about 3-trillion ft3/yr.   As federal and state regulatory commissions proceed with restructuring,it will in the long term cause fundamental changes for some gas companies.   But the opportunities created by a more competitive marketplace canprovide the gas industry with a growing and healthy future, Baly says.   Partnerships and strategic alliances between energy companies of alltypes provide natural gas utilities with another avenue to satisfy customerneeds. Combination electric and gas utilities have provided retail serviceand will no doubt continue to do so, just as some companies will specializein either gas or electric service. But, Baly concludes, ``there is noquestion that companies that market both natural gas and electricity ascommodities to energy customers nationwide could play an important role ina new era of energy buying and selling.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightELECTRICAL WORLD via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 210, No. CARE TO COMMENT ON HYDRO RELICENSING?Profiles of current matters of regulatory interest and note as reported inMcGraw-Hill Energy Group's Electric Power Daily, Electric Utility Week,Inside NRC, and Inside FERC newslettersBy:Elizabeth A. Bretz   The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) issued a notice offiling in response to a National Hydropower Assn (NHA) petition proposinghydropower relicensing reform. This officially opens the comment period onthe proposed reforms.   NHA's proposal addresses specific areas in the current process that itsees as impeding the overall effectiveness of project relicensing. Forexample, in 1991, over 160 license applications were submitted to FERC forapproval. However, as a result of the regulatory quagmire within theexisting relicensing process, the majority of those licenses have yet to berenewed. As a result, licensees, state and federal resource agencies, andconservation groups have found common ground--equal frustration with thesystem.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B34-14IA059-000325-B002-301http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey86.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230809 text/html 17168HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:06:14 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:24 GMTContent-length: 16981Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey86.html Sample Issue Copyright ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GEORGIA APP. CT. REVERSES DEFENSE VERDICT FOR GEORGIA POWER, OGLETHORP (596 words) VIRGINIA SUP. CT. RULING AWAITED IN EMF PROPERTY DEVALUATION LAWSUIT (397 words) TORT REFORM AND UTILITIES GROUPS SUBMIT AMICUS BRIEFS FOR SDG&E (834 words) 9TH CIR. AFFIRMS NOAA'S CHOICE OF DOPPLER RADAR TOWER SITE IN CALIFORNIA (575 words) CopyrightELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GEORGIA APP. CT. REVERSESDEFENSE VERDICT FORGEORGIA POWER, OGLETHORP     Holding that the trial court impermissibly allowed defensewitnesses to enter hearsay testimony regarding the opinions ofunidentified, non-testifying witnesses, the Georgia Court ofAppeals on Nov. 30 unanimously reversed a defense verdict in anEMF personal injury suit against Georgia Power Co. and OglethorpPower Co.  Jordan v. Georgia Power Co. et al., No. A95A1585(GA Ct. App.).     The appeals court, however, affirmed the grant of summaryjudgment to the defendants on plaintiff Larry and Nancy Jordan'strespass claim, and sustained Douglas County Superior Court JudgeDavid T. Emerson's directed verdict on the Jordans' nuisance andproperty damage claims.     Although the Jordans offered expert testimony from anelectrical engineer who said EMF radiation is tangible because itobeys physical laws and can be measured, the appeals court saidit must affirm the trial court because of a lack of evidence thatEMFs can constitute a physical trespass.  "Although the Jordans'trespass action could present a jury question, we conclude thatfor policy reasons the trial court's grant of summary judgmentwas proper," the panel said.  "The scientific evidence regardingwhether EMFs cause harm of any kind is inconclusive; the invasivequality of these electric fields cannot presently constitute atrespass."     The appeals court cautioned that its ruling was not intendedto "close the door on the possibility that science may advance toa point at which damage from EMFs is legally cognizable and atrespass action may lie."     The grounds for reversing the verdict, the appeals courtsaid, was the testimony by defense experts Drs. Richard Bland andSaul Rosenberg that the scientific-medical community did notconsider magnetic fields from power lines a cause of lymphomas ingeneral, or of non-Hodgkins lymphoma (as suffered by NancyJordan), in particular.  The panel said such testimony shouldhave been confined to each doctor's personal belief that Mrs.Jordan's disease was not caused by magnetic fields from powerlines.     "Though it was proper for the court to allow the doctors'testimony regarding their own opinions of the cause of Mrs.Jordan's illness, the court committed reversible error inadmitting this 'consensus' testimony," the panel said in anopinion by Presiding Judge Marion T. Pope.  "Neither Dr. Blandnor Dr. Rosenberg clearly identified the 'community' of expertsfor which he was speaking, nor did either doctor preciselyexplain the method by which he ascertained the 'consensus.'"     Citing the Georgia Court of Appeals' 1994 ruling in In theInterest of A.S.M., the opinion said "an expert may give anopinion upon the facts testified to by other witnesses, but notupon their opinions.  A witness' opinion must be his own and hecannot act as a mere conduit for the opinions of others."     The appeals court also considered the Jordans' claim that 27of the 36 persons in their jury pool should have beendisqualified because they belong to Greystone Power Co.cooperative, which receives all of its power from Oglethorp.  Thetrial court should disqualify Greystone members, the appealscourt said, if the Jordans submit evidence that Greystone bylawsvest in its members the right to share surplus revenues.     The plaintiffs are represented by Robert E. Shields ofDoffermyre, Shields, Canfield & Knowles in Atlanta; BruceDeBoskey and Steven Kelly of Silver & DeBoskey in Denver; andGerald P. Word of Word & Flinn in Carrollton, GA.     Robert L. Pennington and Scott A. Farrow of Troutman Sandersrepresent Georgia Power.  James A. Orr and Elizabeth Boswell ofSutherland, Asbill & Brennan represent Oglethorp Power.  All arelocated in Atlanta.Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VIRGINIA SUP. CT. RULINGAWAITED IN EMF PROPERTYDEVALUATION LAWSUIT     The Virginia Supreme Court is expected to decide this monthwhether a trial judge erred in allowing jury commissioners in acondemnation case to consider testimony about the effect ofelectromagnetic fields on the value of property.  VirginiaElectric and Power Co. v. Dolzer, No. 950622 (VA Sup. Ct.).     During oral arguments in November, Virginia Electric andPower Company (VEPCO) contended that Louisa County, VA, CircuitCourt Judge F. Ward Harkrader, Jr. committed numerous errors inthe handling of the utility's right-of-way suit against defendantproperty owners John F. and Janet E. Dolzer.     VEPCO's expert placed the total damage from a 230,000-volttransmission line in a 150-foot wide easement across the Dolzers'140-acre farm in Louisa County at $14,530, including the 7.06-acre easement and the effect of the line on the rest of theproperty.  The Dolzers' experts placed the damage at more than$900,000, and the jury commissioners awarded them $966,915.     On appeal, VEPCO contended that the trial court erred inallowing the commissioners to speculate about "the fear of theunknown" from EMFs.  The utility argued that the court erred inrefusing to allow it to amend its condemnation petition to makeit clear that a railroad spur would be permitted across theeasement and to reduce its right of access to the easement.VEPCO also contended that the court erred in admitting testimonyabout a $1.85 million offer for the tract before VEPCO sought theeasement.     The property owners responded that the testimony about EMFscame in the context of their effect on the value of other piecesof property that the experts used as comparable sales indetermining the reduction of the value of the property by theeasement.  With that foundation, no speculation was involved, theowners contended.     They also argued that VEPCO failed to appreciate the uniquenature of the property, which had a knoll that separated anindustrial site from a residential estate that dated to 1785.The easement barred a railroad spur to the property, and thevisibility of the power lines from the residential portion of theproperty ruined it for use as a country estate, the Dolzers said.     VEPCO is represented by John E. Holleran of Hunton &Williams in Richmond, VA.  Charles F. Purcell and Craig B. Davisof Purcell & Purcell in Louisa, VA, represent the Dolzers.Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TORT REFORM AND UTILITIESGROUPS SUBMIT AMICUSBRIEFS FOR SDG&E     In separate amicus briefs submitted Oct. 2, the Associationfor California Tort Reform (ACTR) and the California MunicipalUtilities Association (CMUA) weighed in on the side of San DiegoGas & Electric Co. in the utility's quest to have the CaliforniaSupreme Court affirm the California Public Utility Commission'sfull authority over all electromagnetic field-related issues.San Diego Gas & Electric Co. v. Superior Court of the State ofCalifornia for the County of Orange, Covalt et al., real partiesin interest, No. S045854 (CA Sup. Ct.); see Electromagnetic FieldLR, December, 1995.     In their briefs, ACTR suggested that EMF fear cases bejudged under the "more likely than not" damage test outlined inPotter v. Firestone (see Electromagnetic Field LR, February,1994), and CMUA insisted the PUC must maintain full jurisdictionover EMF issues for the sake of having a uniform set ofregulations free from court-to-court interpretation.     "It is against common sense and sound public policy topermit property owners to recover compensation for unreasonablepublic fears about EMFs while requiring those who believe theyhave been injured by EMFs to show their fear is reasonable," ACTRsaid in suggesting the "more likely than not" test as a means ofsorting reasonable and unreasonable fears.     "When...two kinds of interests are allegedly injured by thewrongful acts of another " in this case a public utility thatmodified its power lines to increase service to its consumers andwith it, also increase EMFs " we are told individuals must meet amore stringent test to obtain compensation to their persons thanto their property," ACTR said.  "This proposition stands the lawon its head; it distinguishes property rights and personal rightscontrary to the steady progression of the law since the foundingof the Republic and this state.  If individuals  who believe theyhave been harmed by exposure to EMFs must prove that it is 'morelikely than not' that they will suffer the feared healthconsequences of that exposure in the near future " and plaintiffsand their amici do not disagree with that evidentiary threshold "how can one possibly justify a lesser standard for injury toone's property?"     ACTR said "one can do no better" in deciding what is arational or legitimate fear deserving of recognition in theassessment of compensable property diminution than Potter'srequirement that such fear "stems from a knowledge, corroboratedby reliable medical and scientific opinion, that it is morelikely than not that the feared cancer will develop in the futuredue to toxic exposure."     CMUA's brief refutes the Covalt's assertion that the PUC hadmade no effort to regulate EMFs prior to SDG&E's upgrade of thepower line in question, holding that, as of 1989, the PUC had a"definite policy with respect to EMF," of conducting research andnot undertaking mitigation measures for fear that such actionscould worsen the matter (PUC Health Effects Report, ExecutiveSummary, B-4, 3 Exh. p. 613).  "[G]iven the PUC's position, therewas no reasonable likelihood that mitigation costs would havebeen recoverable in utility rates," CMUA noted.  "[T]hecontention that the PUC had not taken a position on EMFmitigation as of the upgrade at issue is simply not credible.Penalizing a utility for failing to take mitigation measures " aswould be the case were the lawsuit at issue here permitted toproceed " would clearly and directly interfere with the statedposition of the PUC."     The Covalt's have failed to sustain a claim for inversecondemnation, CMUA added, because they have not shown they were"singled out" or have suffered a "special and peculiar" impact asa result of the placement of the SDG&E line's placement orupgrade.  "Transmission lines, like highways or railroads,traverse the state and are beneficial," according to theconsortium of 29 publicly-owned utilities.  "The law is clearthat ordinary detriments suffered by all landowners as a resultof proximity to railroads or highways is not sufficient tosustain a claim in inverse condemnation.  There is no reason toadopt a different rule for power lines."     The CMUA concluded, "if this court, as CMUA urges, affirmsCovalt, all utilities would recognize that a failure to followthe PUC standards would subject them to endless and costlylitigation.  For all these reasons, it is obvious that the EMFstandards promulgated by the PUC are being and will be followedby all utilities in California, whether they be investor-owned orconsumer-owned."     ACTR is represented by Fred Hiestand in Sacramento, CA.  TheCMUA is represented by Daniel Davidson and Scott Strauss ofSpiegel & McDiarmid in Washington, DC and David S. Kaplan ofDeCuir & Somach in Sacramento.     SDG&E is represented by Frank Rothrock and Gary Weisberg ofPalmieri, Tyler, Wiener, Wilhelm & Waldron in Irvine, CA; DuncanBarr and Joel Lamp of O'Connor, Cohn, Dillon & Barr in SanFrancisco; and William Young of Smith Helms Mulliss & Moore inGreensboro, NC.Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19969TH CIR. AFFIRMS NOAA'SCHOICE OF DOPPLER RADARTOWER SITE IN CALIFORNIA     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 29 said theNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) did notact "arbitrarily and capriciously" in deciding to locate aCalifornia doppler radar weather station without first preparinga site-specific environmental impact statement (EIS) on thefacility or a study of its potential radio frequency radiation(RFR) emissions.  Environmental Coalition of Ojai et al. v. Brownet al., No. 94-56164 (9th Cir.)     The ruling affirmed a U.S. District Court's refusal to issuea temporary restraining order requested in a suit by theEnvironmental Coalition of Ojai claiming that the governmentfailed to comply with the National Environmental Policy Act of1969 (NEPA) when it decided to go ahead with the Sulphur Mountainstation project in 1993 based on several 1980s governmentstudies.     The Ninth Circuit affirmed the earlier ruling by Judge TerryJ. Hatter of the U.S. District Court for the Central District ofCalifornia, holding that NOAA complied with the NEPA.  Inaddition, the district court said residents received appropriatenotice of the project, by virtue of a 1984 programmaticenvironmental impact statement, a 1986 preliminary site survey, a1987 in-depth site survey, and a 1989 finding of no significantimpact (FONSI).  The government review process, it noted, alsoincluded two site specific environmental assessments (EAs), and aDraft Supplemental Environmental Assessment (SEA) issued by theU.S. government's Joint System Program Office.     The Ojai, California facility, part of NOAA's NextGeneration Weather Radar Program (NEXRAD), is one of 55 suchstations across the nation and was completed and placed inoperation during the appeal process.  NEXRAD is part of theagency's overall effort to update weather forecasting abilitiesunder the Weather Service Modernization Act.     Actor Larry Hagman, who lives near the station, joined theCoalition in its argument that the EIS was a prerequisite for thestation's construction.  The coalition said such a study wouldhave included review of multiple source RFR levels in the area,including those from an neighboring FM radio tower.     "The government did consider the question of 'additive RFR'from NEXRAD and other possible sources in its SEA," the NinthCircuit ruled, in an opinion by Third Circuit Judge Ruggero J.Aldisert, sitting by designation.  "The SEA concluded thatcumulative RFR levels were extremely unlikely to exceed'ultraconservative' health standards.  The Government explainedthat 'the emissions from the WSR-88D radar will not materiallyadd to the emissions present in those areas from other sources'."     The appeals court said, "the Government's decision, based onits site-specific [EAs], not to prepare a site-specific EIS wasnot arbitrary and capricious.  NEPA does not require an agency toprepare site-specific environmental impact studies for eachindividual location....  The purpose of the environmentalassessment is to provide sufficient evidence and analysis fordetermining whether to prepare an environmental impact statementof a finding of no significant impact."     Concluding, the panel said, "in its 1986 and 1987 site-specific EAs, the Government considered the environmental impactof the NEXRAD installation on Sulphur Mountain.  Havingdetermined that the Sulphur Mountain NEXRAD installation wouldhave no significant local impact, the government reasonablyissued a FONSI in 1989 instead of preparing a site-specific EIS."     Lead defendant Secretary of the Department of Commerce,Ronald H. Brown is represented by Assistant U.S. AttorneysPatrick J. Walsh and Donna J. Everett of Los Angeles.  TheCoalition is represented by Oxnard, CA attorney Dale G. Givner.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-15IA059-000325-B003-23http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey59.html 205.156.212.5 19970114230932 text/html 70636HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:07:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:07 GMTContent-length: 70449Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey59.html Sample Issue Copyright ENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES OUTLOOK Energy Conservation on the Internet (684 words) 1995 Is Warmest Year on Record (552 words) Analyzing Repeal of Speed Limit (247 words) GOVERNMENT Free Marketing for Efficient Equipment (258 words) Panel Urges More Vehicle Efficiency (339 words) STATE INITIATIVES University to Slash Energy Consumption (190 words) Portland Saves When Wind Blows (239 words) INTERNATIONAL Why Russian Buildings Use More Energy (222 words) Honeywell Upgrades District Heating (550 words) NedWind to Sell 110 Wind Machines (251 words) ENERGY MANAGEMENT Onsite Announces $5 Million Contract (257 words) Energy Services Company Formed (145 words) INDUSTRIAL CONSERVATION Sensors Used in BOF Steelmaking (600 words) Kaiser Saves with Fuel from Tires (385 words) COMMERCIAL CONSERVATION CFC Substitute Forane 408A Superior to R-502 (211 words) RESIDENTIAL CONSERVATION Improving Insulation of Water Heaters (121 words) Japanese Condos Cut Energy Bills (157 words) U.S., Canada Report Data from 1993 (662 words) ALTERNATIVE ENERGY Geothermal Well Comes in Hot (142 words) Sanyo Expects Solar Business to Grow (91 words) Ford's Concept Car Pushes Limits (261 words) California May Scuttle EV Quotas (403 words) UTILITIES TVA's IRP Stresses Energy Conservation (145 words) Forecasting Cuts Costs by 5% (276 words) NEW TECHNOLOGY Inverter Improves Motor Efficiency (620 words) Desulfurization Process Could Boost Oil Supply (312 words) More Orders for New Compressor (241 words) INDUSTRY NEWS Big Investment in Halogen Bulb Plant (177 words) RESOURCES Stay Up-to-date with Free Energy Catalogue (123 words) German Windpower Report Available (317 words) CALENDAR (50 words) CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Energy Conservationon the InternetIf you aren't a netsurfer yet, it may be time to try out theInformation Superhighway. According to Jon Schupp, co-author of thejust-published Energy Guide to the Internet (UDI/McGraw-Hill), agrowing number of energy companies, trade associations,professional societies, research centers, academic institutions,and regulatory agencies have gone "online" in hopes of capitalizingon the Internet's tremendous potential.Through their own Internet "home pages" on the World Wide Web,these forward-thinking companies and organizations are givingpotential customers easy access to information about their productsand services.  Companies use the Web to educate current andprospective investors by providing copies of annual reports, pressreleases and financial data on their corporate home pages.Other organizations are using the Web to provide fast andinexpensive access to databases, technical papers, trade journals,policy directives, program descriptions, and more to network users.Here is a sampling, from Mr. Schupp's "Guide," of currentlyavailable online energy information resources:Corporate Home Pages. Utilities like PECO, Illinois Power, ConEd,Northern States, and others use their new electronic "storefronts"to attract and educate customers with detailed descriptions oftheir products and services.  These storefronts almost alwaysshowcase energy conservation programs, making them a terrific placeto learn about a utility's residential, industrial and commercialDSM strategies.  Southern California Edison's "HomeLink" Web pageis a good example.Dozens of manufacturers ranging from GE Power Systems and HoneywellIndustrial Automation and Control to Thermomax USA have also gotteninto the act on the Internet.  Visitors to these companies' homepages will discover a wealth of product specification andperformance information available online.  Looking for an energyefficiency consultant?  You can save time assembling a short-listof candidates by starting your search on the Web, where you'll findbackground information on Proctor Engineering Group, EnerActionInc., and TGK Consulting, to name just a few.Professional Organizations. Energy industry professionalorganizations typically include membership information, electronicnewsletters, directories, and publications catalogs as well asannouncements of upcoming industry trade shows, conferences andtraining seminars on their World Wide Web home pages.  TheAssociation of Energy Service Professionals, the InternationalDistrict Energy Assn., the Air-Conditioning & RefrigerationInstitute, and the Combined Heat and Power Assn. are just a fewexamples of professional organizations that are using the Internetin this manner.The Internet also facilitates interactive discussions amongindividual energy industry professionals located around the world.For example, the misc.industry.utilities.electric USENET newsgroupserves as an electronic meeting place where participants canexchange news, information and opinions on a wide range of businessand technical issues of interest to the electric power industry.Internet mailing lists such as Plant-Engineer-Forum, ENCON-L (anenergy conservation mailing list), and EV (the electric vehiclediscussion group) afford participants the means of keeping up withthe latest technical advances in these and other specialized areasof interest, as well as giving them a chance to "network."Research Centers. The Energy & Environmental Research Center at theUniversity of North Dakota Web site and the home pages of theUniversity of Florida's Energy Analysis and Diagnostic Center andthe Thermal Storage Applications Research Center at University ofWisconsin, among others, offer visitors access to a wealth ofinformation pertaining to ongoing research and related activities.Not-for-profit research organizations such as the Institute of GasTechnology and EPRI also make a great deal of information availableon the Internet, although access to at least some of the materialon their home pages is often limited to registered members.Government. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Dept.of Energy (DOE) each operate large Web sites. The DOE site haslinks to dozens of home pages maintained by individual DOE Offices,agency programs like the Biofuels Information Network, and  theNational Labs. More than a dozen state public utility commissionsnow make hearing agendas and minutes, rulings, press releases, andpolicy papers available on their Internet home pages.For further information about the Energy Guide to the Internet,contact: Jon Schupp, Industry Analyst, TASC, Inc., Tel: 703/834-5000.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 19961995 Is WarmestYear on RecordAccording to preliminary data from the Climate Research Unit of theUniversity of East Anglia, the average surface temperature of theEarth rose to a record high of 58.72(F in 1995. This development,along with the recently released Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (IPCC) reports on global warming, is likely to generate newinterest in "energy efficiency" initiatives.Jim Woolf, writing in The Salt Lake Tribune, quotes Stephen R.Connors, director of the Electric Utility Program at MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, as saying, "There's a high possibilitythat CO2 emissions will be regulated sometime around the year 2000.We have no idea what those regulations will look like. They may benegligible and they may be serious, but managers are beginning toask how they can prepare for them."Those preparations will undoubtedly include more energy-efficiencymeasures. For example, in IPCC's report, Second Assessment Report,Summary for Policymakers: Impacts, Adaptations and MitigationOptions, they recommend energy efficiency as one measure to reduceglobal CO2 emissions. "Numerous studies indicate that 10-30% energyefficiency gains above present levels are feasible at little or nonet cost in many parts of the world through technical conservationmeasures and improved management practices over the next 2 to 3decades."Even greater efficiency gains of 50-60% are technically feasible.In the transportation sector, the report says greater technicalefficiencies and other measures could cut global annual CO2emissions from transportation by roughly 40% by 2025. The IPCC sayssuch higher energy efficiencies are crucial if CO2 emissions are tobe sharply reduced and if the overall costs of new energy systemsare to be kept relatively low.According to a review of the IPCC report by the Center for GlobalChange (1347 Massachusetts Ave. SE, Washington, DC 20003-1540; Tel:202/547-0850), large CO2 reductions can be achieved at relativelylow costs by implementing appropriate policies, deploying bettertechnologies and shifting towards a less carbon-intensive mix offuels (away from coal and toward natural gas, nuclear or renewableenergy).The report emphasizes that exploiting the opportunities to limitemissions at relatively low costs will require "initiatives tocounter lack of information and overcome cultural, institutional,legal, financial and economic barriers which can hinder diffusionof technology or behavioral changes." Furthermore, the costs of theneeded technologies could not be reduced and their performancecould not be improved sufficiently without "intensified researchand development by governments and the private-sector."This call for a greater investment in research, development anddemonstration of energy efficiency and renewable energytechnologies comes at a time when the Congress is planning majorfunding cuts, and private sector investment is unlikely to fill thebreach. At a Washington, DC, press conference where the IPCC reportwas released, Working Group II chairman Robert Watson said that theCongress was "moving in the wrong direction" with its budgetproposals. Watson, who also is associate director for theenvironment at the White House Office of Science and TechnologyPolicy, said that at the Congressionally proposed spending levelsit would be "difficult if not impossible" to achieve large USemissions reductions at the rates and relatively low costssuggested by the IPCC report.Contact: IPCC Working Group II Technical Support Unit, 300 D St.SW, Suite 840, Washington, DC 20024; Tel: 202/651-8260.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Analyzing Repealof Speed LimitThe recent repeal of the federal speed limit is projected tosignificantly increase average speed on the nation's highways and,therefore, motor vehicle fuel consumption. According to Mark Fulmerof the Tellus Institute (11 Arlington St., Boston, MA 02116-3411;Tel: 617/266-5400; email: mfulmer@tellus.com), at highway speeds,aerodynamic drag is the dominant loss factor.Since drag increases with the square of the velocity, even a 5 mphincrease in speed leads to significant increases in fuelconsumption. For example, increasing speed from 60 to 70 mph--whatone might expect with the less stringent speed limits--increases infuel use by about 15%. Increasing speed from the 1973 level of 55mph to 70 mph may increase fuel use by as much as 25%." Fulmer alsonoted that, "these highway speed increases will significantlyincrease carbon dioxide emissions."According to Fulmer, "Considering that over 400 billion vehiclemiles are traveled each year on rural interstates and other majorrural highways, the energy impacts become very substantial.Increasing average speeds on these rural freeways by 10 mph (60-70mpg) increases highway energy use by over 100 million barrels ofoil a year, an increase of 4.5% in our oil imports.  This is enoughgasoline to run over 7 million average American cars for one year(500 gallons per car per year)."Tellus used data from primary sources including Highway Statistics(Federal Highway Administration) and the Transportation Energy DataBook:  Edition 15 (Oak Ridge National Lab) in their analysis.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Free Marketing forEfficient EquipmentProducers of energy-efficient equipment may benefit fromregistering with the Environmental Technology Network for Asia(ETNA). This free, government-sponsored service helps linkbusinesses with export opportunities in Asia.Here's how it works: US-AEP representatives based in ten Asiancities - Bangkok, Bombay, Colombo, Hong Kong, Jakarta, KualaLumpur, Manila, Seoul, Singapore, and Taipei - gather leads aboutspecific opportunities for environmental technologies both forpollution prevention and amelioration, and energy efficiency. ETNAelectronically matches these leads to appropriate U.S.environmental companies registered within its database.Companies whose services match a requirement in Asia are alerted byfax - within 48 hrs. of the entry of the lead - to facilitate aquick response. ETNA recently expanded its coverage to LatinAmerica. Through an agreement with the U.N., ETNA now collects  anddisseminates trade leads from eleven Latin American countries:Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico,Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.To register with ETNA, point your Web browser to:http://www.conet.com/etna/. The online registration form is splitinto several pages. The first page asks for all the necessarycontact information so that the trade leads are correctly sent. Thenext few pages cover the 484 technology codes split into two media-specific sections (Pollution Control, Treatment and Disposal, andClean Technologies) and one non-media specific section(Environmental Management). You are allowed to register for amaximum of 18 technology codes.For more information, contact the ETNA office at: US-AEP ETNA, CTISSA-2, Room 100, 515 22nd St. NW, Washington, DC 20523-0229; Tel:800/818-9911.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Panel Urges MoreVehicle EfficiencyA little over a year ago, President Clinton assembled apresidential advisory committee and charged them with the task ofdeveloping policies to cost-effectively return greenhouse gasemissions from cars and light trucks to their 1990 level by theyear 2005. Committee members included state and local governmentofficials, corporate executives, and public interest grouprepresentatives.The committee's report (Majority Report to the President by thePolicy Dialogue Advisory Committee to Recommend Options forReducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Personal Motor Vehicles),has just been released. It recommends policies that would meet thepresident's goal in 2005 and overachieve in 2015 and 2025.The package for returning U.S. car and light truck CO2 emissions totheir 1990 level includes policies in three areas:    fuel economy (including feebates for low rolling resistancetires and mandatory efficiency standards);    reduction of vehicle miles traveled through increased taxes;    and use of alternative fuels.The most important policy for reducing emissions to the 1990 levelis a 6% annual increase in fuel economy standards over 10 years,starting in 1998. Other key recommended policies include anequitable shift of state and local road subsidies to cost-of-driving fees, land use changes away from auto dependency, workplaceparking subsidy reform, and incentives for liquid biofuels andelectric and natural gas vehicles.The near-term outlook for improvements in transportation sectorefficiency has dimmed due to the repeal of the Federal speed limit.Congress has also included in the Dept. of TransportationAppropriations for 1996 a "rider" authored by Rep. Tom DeLay (R-TX)prohibiting the DOT from engaging in a rulemaking to increase fueleconomy standards.That provision freezes for a year the DOT's already-underwayprocess to raise gas mileage standards for light trucks, as well asprevents any increase in car standards that the Administrationmight consider. Finally, Rep. Fred Upton (R-MI) has introduced abill, H.R.2200, that would take away the executive branch'sauthority to raise car gas mileage standards administratively; thatbill currently has over 100 cosponsors.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996University to SlashEnergy ConsumptionA performance contracting project spearheaded by the State ofHawaii Dept. of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism'sEnergy Div. will allow the University of Hawaii at Hilo to cut itsannual energy bill by $500,000 and trim its annual energyconsumption by 1.4 million kWh, saving taxpayers approximately $5million over the next ten years.Johnson Controls (5757 N. Green Bay Ave., Milwaukee, WI 53209-4408;Tel: 414/228-1200) was selected through an open competition whichsought qualified proposals. Under this contract, Johnson Controlswill finance, design, install, and maintain a turnkey energy-efficiency project that includes campus-wide lighting retrofits,air conditioning modifications, an energy management system, andcogeneration for the main campus.The future savings from the retrofit will be used to pay for theproject. The project allows businesses and government agencies toimplement various energy-saving measures with no up-front capitalcosts. Energy devices and technologies can be installed at a timeconvenient to the facility with little disruption to day-to-dayoperations. The contractor bears the risk for equipment performanceand there is a strong incentive for ongoing preventive maintenance.Contact: Elizabeth Raman, Tel: 808/587-3806.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Portland SavesWhen Wind BlowsA creative power purchase contract between the City of Portland andPortland General Electric (PGE, 121 S.W. Salmon St., Portland, OR97204-2977; Tel: 503/464-8000) will save the city about $175,000 inthe first year and as much as $850,000 over the next five years.PGE has agreed to purchase or generate approximately 11 million kWhof wind generated electricity during the term of the five-yearagreement. Enough wind power is generated to run City Hall ,Multnomah Arts Center and ten fire stations.This innovative arrangement, which is the first of its kind in thenation, was suggested to the city by PGE as a way to accomplish twocity energy goals: reduce city government energy bills and promoterenewable energy resources. Under a new experimental pricingschedule, annual power purchases of about $2 million will be tiedto the wholesale cost of electricity. The savings will appear onthe bills of industrial-type facilities such as wastewatertreatment plants at Columbia Boulevard and Tryon Creek, water pumpstations at Washington Park, and the city's flagship officefacility, the Portland Building.PGE also agreed that it will purchase or generate wind power in anamount equal to 5% of the energy purchased under the new tariff.The city's renewable wind purchase will be over 2 million kWh ofelectricity each year, an amount equal the output of about 2.5 windturbines.Contact: Mike Lindberg, Tel:  503/823-4145.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Why Russian BuildingsUse More EnergyAccording to work performed by Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology (77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139; Tel:617/253-1000) researchers, on a climate-adjusted basis, theRussians use about twice as much energy to heat their buildings asthe Swedish, and a third more than Americans.  To find out why, MITfaculty, led by professor Leslie Norford, have worked with Russianenergy experts for six years to better quantify energy use inRussian residential buildings and pinpoint the sources of wastedenergy.They compared annual heating-energy consumption as predicted frombuilding-construction data and as measured. Data were collected forboth a single, carefully studied multifamily building in Moscowand, with less detail, for the aggregate housing stock in Moscow.In both cases, it was found that buildings are using about 60% moreenergy than would be expected from engineering estimates. For themultifamily building, the source of about two-thirds of the wastedenergy was overheating in spring and fall, caused by inadequatecontrol of the district-heating system.The next phase of the work is to collaborate with the Russians todraft new-building energy codes that will establish requirementsfor building design and operation, based on technological potentialfor conservation and the institutional mechanisms needed to achievesavings. This work is being funded by the NSF, the Toda Corp., andthe EPA.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Honeywell UpgradesDistrict HeatingHoneywell (Honeywell Plaza, Minneapolis, MN 55408; Tel: 612/951-1000) announced in December that it has received its first districtheating contract in China, a project that builds on Honeywell'sextensive district heating work in Europe and the Commonwealth ofIndependent States. (To-date, Honeywell has contracts with 136heating districts in 15 countries in Europe, Eastern Europe and theCIS; that's up 36% from the number of contracts two years ago.)The contract, valued at $2.4 million and extending over two years,is with the Beijing District Heating Co., a state-owned supplier ofheat that serves more than 20% of all residences and commercialbuildings in the city of Beijing. Under the agreement, Honeywellwill provide monitoring and control systems to help the districtimprove productivity, save energy, reduce air pollution and providebetter temperature control for its residents.The agreement, which comes after three years of discussions, opensa new Asia-Pacific market segment with vast potential as citiesseek to improve their infrastructures with more modern controls.The World Bank is funding the project as one means to help improvethe living environment and conserve energy around the world.While most urban residents in China get their heat from coal-burning furnaces in individual homes and apartments, the trend incities is to convert to centrally operated district heating, whichdistributes heat to homes and buildings via a network of pipes. Infact, the government has mandated that buildings be district heatedin cities in which the average daily temperature falls below 41(Ffor more than 90 days a year. Nearly 100 million Chinese live incities with these temperature conditions. Many of these cities facethe need to build new or upgrade existing plants to comply with themandate and to reduce pollution and lower energy costs.While district heating may represent an improvement over theinefficiencies and environmental impact of millions of small coal-burning furnaces, it, too, is wasteful without proper controls. Andmany district systems do lack controls--at the point of generation,distribution or heat consumption--resulting in overheating in someareas and insufficient heating in others. Unoccupied buildings maybe heated needlessly at night. District heating customers mayhave no controls with which to regulate heat in their homes,apartments, factories or offices.Under the contract, Honeywell will install a SCAN 3000 system toprovide supervisory control and data acquisition at the heatingdistrict's central operations. This microprocessor-based systemwill provide single-point, central monitoring and supervision ofthe overall heating network, including substations. AdditionalHoneywell products will be installed to create an integrated systemthat permits operators to automatically manage and monitor heatproduction. The Honeywell system also will enable heating companymanagers to forecast heat demand accurately and take appropriateactions to improve burner efficiency and energy management and toreduce operational costs.Honeywell expects to begin installing the systems in early 1996,with completion slated for October 1997. The resulting energysavings could be significant. District heating systems in EasternEurope and the CIS, some of which consume 2.5 times or more energythan comparable systems in Western Europe, have typically realizedsavings from 20-30% when Honeywell controls were installed. BecauseEuropean heating districts typically burn coal, improving theefficiency of such systems reduces pollution as well.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996NedWind to Sell 110Wind MachinesAccording to Tom Gray of the American Wind Energy Assn. (122 C St.NW, Fourth Floor, Washington, DC 20001; Tel: 202/383-2500), Dutchwind turbine manufacturer NedWind Rhenen BV has signed contracts tosupply more than 110 machines for use in power projects in Chinaand India.The company has established a joint venture with Weizmann, Ltd., inIndia called Windia Power Limited which will build a 33-MW windfarmin the southern part of India near Kayathar, in the state of TamilNadu.  Sixty NedWind 500-kW turbines will be used in the project,which is planned in two phases.  The first 25 units were to havebeen installed by September 30, 1995 and the remaining 35 machineswill be in the ground by March 31, 1996.  Windia will also beginwind resource monitoring at four sites near Rameshwaram.In China, NedWind will provide 53 500-kW turbines for use in awindfarm being developed in Xinjiang Province.  The machines willbe owned by Xinjiang Wind Power and will be part of theXinjiang Wind Power General Plant in Urumqi.  The contract for theproject is supported by a grant from the Dutch Ministry of ForeignAffairs and is to be in place within 15 months of thegrant's final approval.The Dutch grant program provides partial payment of investmentprojects with positive environmental impacts in selected developingcountries.  The grants are available toprojects initiated by Dutch companies, which are evaluated based onenvironmental impact and economic development potential.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Onsite Announces $5Million ContractOnsite Energy Corp. (701 Palomar Airport Rd., Suite 200, Carlsbad,CA 92009; Tel: 619/931-2400) announced that it has receivedpurchase orders from a major aerospace manufacturing company in theSouthern California Edison (SCE, 2244 Walnut Grove Ave., Rosemead,CA 91770; Tel: 818/302-1212) service territory to provide energy-efficiency equipment and services including audits, lightingequipment installation, (ballasts, reflectors and lamps) andconstruction/project management.Onsite will also provide post-installation measurement andverification and operation and maintenance services over a three-year period following the anticipated completion of the project inmid-1996.  Gross revenues to Onsite under this contract will beapproximately $5 million.The project for the manufacturing company will incorporate asubstantial payment to Onsite from SCE over the three yearsfollowing completion of the project, pursuant to the DSM Agreementsbetween Onsite and SCE.  The project for the manufacturing companyis expected to provide up to 30 million kWh in energy savingsduring the first year of operation.  Payments from SCE are based onactual project performance and delivery of actual energy savings.According to Richard T. Sperberg, president of Onsite, "Thecontract with this major manufacturing company will make asignificant contribution toward fulfilling our commitment to SCEpursuant to the SCE Agreements."  The SCE Agreements are a resultof competitive bids submitted in 1993 and subsequent approval bythe California Public Utility Commission for Onsite to provide upto approximately 60 million kWh in energy savings throughinstallation of energy-efficiency services projects in hostcustomer facilities within SCE's service territory.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Energy ServicesCompany FormedEastern Utilities Associates (1 Liberty Square, Boston, MA 02109-4827; Tel: 617/357-9590) and Duke/Louis Dreyfus LLC (10 WestportRd., Wilton, CT 06897; Tel: 203/761-8000) have signed an agreementto form a company to market energy-related services in New England.The new entity--Duke/Louis Dreyfus Energy Services (New England)LLC--will engage in electric power and fuels marketing andassociated market hedges; own or lease generating facilities; andparticipate in other energy-related activities such as energy-efficiency services and management of energy assets.Each partner would share in ownership, operating costs, revenuesand profits of the new company.  EUA's participation in thealliance is through a new wholly-owned subsidiary, EUA EnergyServices, Inc. Finalization of the agreement to form the jointenergy services company requires approval of the SEC for EUA EnergyServices, Inc.  Also, the new company requires FERC approval toengage in power marketing.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sensors Used inBOF SteelmakingSensor technologies originally developed to monitor coal combustionand welding in the laboratory are being applied to improve theefficiency of steelmaking. The technology employs a laser-basedsensor that can track the conversion of iron and carbon into steel.Underway since 1993, this is part of a four-year project managed bythe American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI, 1101 17th St. NW,Washington, DC 20036-4700; Tel: 202/452-7100) under theCongressionally-mandated Steel and Aluminum Energy Conservation andTechnology Competitiveness Act of 1988, the so-called "MetalsInitiative."Fifteen AISI members fund 30% of the $3.5 million project. Theremainder is funded by the Dept. of Energy's (DOE) Office ofIndustrial Technology. Bethlehem Steel Corp. (1170 8th Ave.,Bethlehem, PA 18016-7600; Tel: 215/694-2424) is the sponsoringsteel company and hosts plant trials. Insitec Measurement Systems(2110 Omega Rd., Suite D, San Ramon, CA 94583; Tel: 510/837-1330)and Berry Metal Co. (2408 Evans City Rd., Berry Bldg., Harmony, PA16037-9110; Tel: 412/452-8040) are the other partners, responsiblefor commercialization of the Sandia-developed sensors.The research focuses on improving the energy and process efficiencyof the basic oxygen furnace (BOF), which is used to make 60% of thecountry's steel. Upstream of the BOF, iron is produced by reducingiron ore with limestone and coke in a blast furnace. The molteniron is converted to steel in the BOF by burning off carbon.By implementing fast, real-time sensors in the BOF process, boththe time for each 'heat' and oxygen consumption can be reducedwhile improving the efficiency and reliability of the process fromheat to heat. The Sandia team is testing several infrared lasermethods to measure the temperature, water content, ratio of carbondioxide to carbon monoxide, and the presence of particles above themelt. The carbon dioxide-to-carbon monoxide ratio is useful indetermining how much carbon remains; this content is normallyanalyzed before final metallurgy adjustments.Beth Fuchs and three other Sandians have worked with Insitec, BerryMetal Co. (the principal manufacturer of oxygen lances for thesteel industry), and Bethlehem Steel to design and package thesensor. Timken Steel's (1835 Dueber Ave. SW, Canton, OH 44706-2728;Tel: 216/438-3000) Faircrest Plant hosted field trials. The sensorpackage has two miniature video cameras, filters for controllingboth the wavelength and the intensity of the light reaching thecameras, laser diodes, coherent fiber optics for guiding images,single fiber optics for guiding laser light, and circuitry forcontrolling the filters. These components are inserted into acompact package near the tip of the lance.The sensors monitor temperature at the combustion zone, the bathsurface where a blast of oxygen pushes aside thick, foamy slag. Thefirst direct images of this "hot spot" were taken during fieldtrials in May. Temperature at this spot can indicate final carboncontent. At the end of an oxygen blow, the device also detectsradiance from the bath, indicating melt temperature. The lanceinstrument package also collects real-time information on the bathheight. After the melt is poured, the instruments may also revealany wear and tear or slag build-up on the ceramic lining.The steel industry's vision for the mill of the future is to movefrom steelmaking to near-net-shape casting to finishing in onefast, continuous process. To do this requires development,validation and commercialization of fast sensor systems throughoutthe process. Success of the Sandia project will lead to theavailability of validated prototype sensors that can then bequickly commercialized and implemented throughout the U.S. steelindustry.Contact: Sandia Combustion Research Facility, Tel: 510/294-2321.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Kaiser Saves withFuel from TiresCommencing November 29, 1995, Kaiser Cement (3000 Busch Rd.,Pleasanton, CA 94566-8403; Tel: 510/846-8800) began a 90-day testof a tire-derived fuel which has saved energy and reduced pollutionemissions at cement plants around the country. The test is beingoverseen by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD)at the cement plant near Cupertino, CA.  Kaiser Cement embarked onthe test after studying successful results using tire-derived fuelat 4 other California cement plants and 23 across the nation."Using tire chips for fuel appears to be a win-win situation,"explained Earl Bouse, VP of manufacturing services. "If our testconfirms the results seen elsewhere, we will show air-qualityimprovements and be able to save energy."During the test, the tire chips would replace up to 15% of thecurrent fuel, primarily coal, used in the cement plant's kiln. Noblack smoke or odors associated with open-air tire fires occur whentire chips are used at cement plants because the enclosed kilnoperates at such intense heat (2,800( F) that the fuel is totallyconsumed.A major attraction of using tire chips is energy savings. ThoughKaiser Cement has energy-efficient plants, fuel is still theirsingle largest operating expense. According to Bouse, "as tirechips contain more heat value than coal, the cost to us--includingtransportation--is much less." In other locations, tire-derivedfuel has been shown to successfully reduce emissions from cementkilns. Kaiser Cement already has achieved a low level of NOxemission for cement production.While additional reductions are expected by using tire chip fuel,the extent must be confirmed through the test. The test also willestablish if any other contaminants are affected by using TDF.Kaiser Cement currently is below the risk level that requirespublic notification under the California air toxics programadministered by the BAAQMD. The company will not use TDF if thetest shows an increase in health effects.Regulators, including the federal EPA, California Integrated WasteManagement Board and other agencies consider burning TDF in cementplants to be an ideal solution to tire disposal problems. Inaddition to air improvements, there is no waste product as thecement process consumes all parts of the tire--even the steel beltsbecome part of the product.Contact: Earl Bouse, Tel: 510/426-4084.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CFC Substitute Forane408A Superior to R-502According to Elf Atochem (2000 Market St., Philadelphia, PA 19103-3231; Tel: 215/419-7027), the findings of a recent refrigerantperformance test show that their CFC substitute Forane 408A issuperior to R-502 in energy-efficiency for medium and lowtemperature refrigeration systems. In a laboratory test performedby VACOM Technologies and ASW Engineering for Energy Services Inc.,Forane 408A was found to be, on average, 5-8% more energy-efficientthan R-502 in a simulated supermarket environment containing atypical freezer display case fixture.Forane 408A is intended as a drop-in replacement for retrofittingexisting equipment currently using R-502, such as food display andstorage cases, cold storage rooms, ice machines, transportation andprocess refrigeration.  It has been available for the past 18months and has found a broad market acceptance in its retrofitapplications. One of the largest expenses for the supermarketindustry is cost of electricity to run the refrigeration systems.According to an Atochem spokesperson, "the results of these testsare  very positive news for the supermarket industry, as well asany industry that utilizes R-502 in medium to low temperaturerefrigeration systems.  By retrofitting their equipment now withForane 408A, they will potentially realize a cost savings throughenergy efficiencies, while becoming CFC-free at the same time."Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Improving Insulationof Water HeatersThe New York State Energy Research and Development Authority andStor-Ex New York, Inc. (1710 Flushing Ave., Queens, New York 11385;Tel: 718/417-9700) are beginning work on a $429,000 project todevelop and demonstrate a high-efficiency indirect water heater inresponse to increasing regulations requiring heating-equipmentmanufacturers to improve the energy and environmental performanceof their products.The water heater will be designed for residential and smallcommercial buildings and will reduce standby heat loss throughadditional jacket insulation. During the project, Stor-Ex willconstruct and perform laboratory tests on prototype units withvarious storage capacities in the range of 40-115 gals.  Later, sixproduction models will be installed and tested at demonstrationsites throughout New York.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Japanese CondosCut Energy BillsAccording to wire reports from the Kyodo News Service, condominiumsequipped with energy efficiency and rainwater collection systemsare selling well in Japan. Housing complexes utilizing clean energysources are currently on sale at three locations across the nation,two in the Tokyo area and another in Kitakyushu on Japan's mainsouthern island of Kyushu. In all cases, each building has solarequipment on its roof to help residents save on gas and electricitybills and is equipped with an underground tank to store rainwaterto supply water to greenery and vegetable gardens.These condominiums have been contracted for sale even though theyare more expensive due to higher construction costs. ConstructionMinistry officials said construction of ''environmentallyfriendly'' condominiums is now under way or planned at 86 placesacross the nation. The officials said the ministry offers subsidiesfor construction of such energy-efficient housing while thegovernmental Housing Loan Corp. provides preferential loans forbuilders.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996U.S., Canada ReportData from 1993The Energy Dept. recently released the results of its 1993Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS).  That's right--1993.But some of the data is interesting.It is the ninth such survey performed since 1978. According to datapresented in volume II (Household Energy Consumption andExpenditures, 1993), new homes (built between 1988 and 1993 wereintentionally oversampled to learn more about their energyefficiency) use, on average, only 82% of the energy used by homesbuilt before 1980. Most of this gain comes from improvements inspace heating equipment and thermal integrity.According to the survey, more than half of the electricity used inhomes operates appliances - lighting, TV, clothes dryers, freezers,ranges, ovens, and others. For the first time, the RECS surveyprovides separate estimates for the average annual per householdkWh consumption for lighting (940 kWh), cooking (458 kWh), clothesdrying (875 kWh), and dishwashing (299 kWh).The report notes that, despite efficiency gains (particularly forrefrigerators), the consumption of electricity for appliances isincreasing, likely as the result of absolute growth in the numbersof appliances. For example, in 1980 only 14% of households usedmicrowave ovens, but in 1993 84% of households used one. Personalcomputers have also become more common; in 1990, 16% of householdshad personal computers, a percentage that grew to 23% in 1993.To obtain a copy of the RECS survey report, contact the NationalEnergy Information Center, Tel: 202/586-8800.Meanwhile, in Canada, NRCan is also playing catch up. It releasedthe 1993 Survey of Household Energy Use, which is the firstcomprehensive national survey of energy use in Canadian housing.The report provides extensive data on thermal envelopes, heatingand hot water systems, appliances, lighting, and air conditioningby house type and age. The survey was undertaken as part of thedevelopment of a National Energy Use Database, which NRCan hopes toupdate every four years.Survey results highlight some potential retrofit opportunities.Perhaps most striking is that in this current age of "superwindows," one third of all windows are either single-glazed orsingle-glazed with a storm. Also, in spite of the many conservationprograms in the past, the majority of homes have not had theirinsulation upgraded.A large number of heating systems and appliances are old and willneed replacement soon. Air-leakage problems at windows and doorsare reported by one-third and one-half of households, respectively.Window airtightness has not been improved in 59% of homes and doorairtightness has not been improved in 48%. Thirty-two percent ofwindows are single-glazed (with or without a storm); 64% of homeshave not had any windows replaced.Thirty-two percent of basement walls remain uninsulated; 62% ofhouseholds have not upgraded their attic insulation. Furnaces andboilers are more than 15 years old in 60% of oil-heated homes and33% of gas-heated homes. With regard to appliances, 44% of ranges,38% of dryers, 37% of refrigerators, 32% of clothes washers and 25%of dishwashers are more than 10 years old. In the area of lighting,incandescent bulbs still outnumber fluorescent ones by 10:1.The survey did find, though, that some energy-efficienttechnologies have succeeded in substantially penetrating themarket. Ten percent of Canadian homes are reported to have airexchangers, and more than half of these are used all year-round.Water-saving showerheads are found in 40% of homes with hot waterheaters. Programmable thermostats are found in 18%. Surprisingly,almost 10% reported having basement floors which are fully orpartially insulated.From the perspective of possible moisture problems, somequestionable practices and deficiencies were also uncovered. Morethan a third of households do not heat all or part of theirbasement, and more than half do not have any bathroom exhaust fans.Contact: Andr Bourbeau, NRCan, Tel: 613/995-7307. To obtain copiesof the report (Cat. No. M92-85-1994E), contact: Energy Publicationsc/o Canada Communication Group, Ottawa, Ontario K1A-0S9; Fax:819/994-1498.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Geothermal WellComes in HotPacific GeoPower, the joint venture formed between Canadian CrewEnergy Corp. and Guy F. Atkinson Holdings Ltd. to develop the SouthMeager Geothermal Project, has now completed the drilling andinitial testing of a deep well into the geothermal resource northof Pemberton, B.C. Well temperatures exceeded 250(C, and geo-chemical analyses of the fluids sampled support the existence of adeep, higher temperature reservoir, in addition to the knownshallower reservoir.While this particular well did not penetrate a fluid conduit thatwould provide commercial production, additional drilling will berequired to locate permeability within the resource to fullydetermine the capability of the reservoir. Interpretation of theresource data provided from the drilling program has encouraged thejoint venture partners to proceed with further exploration of theSouth Meager geothermal resource.Contact: John M. Darch, Tel: 800/444-9284.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sanyo Expects SolarBusiness to GrowSanyo Electric Co. Ltd. (666 5th Ave., New York, NY 10103; Tel:212/315-3232) established a wholly owned subsidiary in Osaka onDecember 1 to handle Sanyo's solar energy-related business. The newcompany, Sanyo Solar Industries Co Ltd, will be capitalized at 450million yen and have 180 employees.Its operations will include the engineering, manufacturing andmarketing of solar products as well as the design, sales andinstallation of solar cell applications. Sanyo expects that thesolar cell business will continue to expand, amid growing demandfor clean energy.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Ford's Concept CarPushes LimitsA new Ford (American Rd., Dearborn, MI 48121; Tel: 313/322-3000)hybrid electric vehicle concept car, Synergy 2010, built on an all-aluminum unibody and incorporating highly advanced technologiescould theoretically triple the fuel efficiency of a typical familysedan. Ford unveiled the car at the company's year-end newsconference and it will be on display at the North AmericanInternational Auto Show in Detroit from Jan. 6-15.According to the company, a key purpose of this concept car is toexplore how highly fuel efficient technologies could be packaged ina well styled car of the future. Loaded with advanced technologyfeatures such as voice-activated controls, an advanced navigationsystem, heads-up displays and solar-powered cooling, the car isone-third lighter and 40% more aerodynamic than today's sleekestFord, yet still roomy enough for a family of six.In the Synergy 2010, a small, 1.0-liter direct-injection,compression-ignited engine mounted in the rear would power agenerator that produces electricity for motors located in eachwheel.  Up front, a flywheel would collect excess engine andbraking energy, which in turn would be released to augment theengine when, for example, the car needed to accelerate quickly orclimb hills.In a direct-injection, compression-ignited engine, high pressure orheat is used instead of spark plugs to ignite the fuel, resultingin higher efficiency.  Theoretically, the Synergy 2010'sperformance with this smaller engine would be comparable to today'stypical mid-sized family sedan because of its decreased weight,improved aerodynamics and lower rolling resistance.Contact: Pam Kueber of Ford, Tel: 313/337-2456.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996California MayScuttle EV QuotasSeveral important EV developments were announced during December.First, the California Air Resources Board staff presented aproposal to scuttle the 1998 2% Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV)requirement. The year 2003 requirement for 10% would stand. Thisproposal, presented in outline form and subject to revision untilMarch of 1996, calls for a demonstration project in Sacramento andLos Angeles. This would require only 3,750 ZEVs available between1998 and 2000 versus 60,000 under the original proposal.In another EV development, Green Car Media, an independentalternative fuel research organization, released a study whichconcludes that if automakers treated electric vehicles the same waythey do their conventional cars and trucks, then electric vehiclescould be priced competitively with their gasoline-poweredcounterparts. "Current EV cost and price estimates from the majorautomakers are arbitrarily high," said Ron Cogan, one of thereport's authors.  He added that EVs could be treated like otherindustry programs, for example, Chrysler's Viper, where substantialdevelopment costs were both absorbed under corporate programs andshared with outside suppliers.The study, Pricing For Success: Using Auto Industry Models toReview Electric Vehicle Costing and Pricing, reviewed historicvehicle costing and pricing practices long used by the autoindustry both for vehicles and individual components such asairbags, catalytic converters and emissions control equipment.The study found that market and marketing considerations have ledauto companies in the past to absorb high vehicle research anddevelopment costs, while keeping vehicle retail prices competitive.Examples cited were the development of General Motors' Saturn,Chrysler's Viper, and Ford's just-introduced 1996 Taurus/Sable. Ineach case, the true development costs were not amortized in thevehicle's initial price.  Other less tangible considerations, suchas corporate image and positioning, also were shown to be a factorin the automakers' pricing decisions.Finally, according to a survey of participants at the WorldElectric Vehicle Assn.'s November conference, 62% of thoseresponding to the survey believe that Europe is ahead of the U.S.in promoting the use of electric vehicles (EVs), but 48% percentexpect the U.S. to catch up. Forty-two percent of the respondentsalso said the U.S. market has the most growth potential. Inaddition, 78% indicated that fleets were the best way to bring EVsinto widespread usage. Respondents said EV development in Europe isa result of higher gasoline costs and the urgency of pollution inEuropean cities.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TVA's IRP StressesEnergy ConservationIn response to public comment, TVA (400 W. Summit Hill Dr.,Knoxville, TN 37902; Tel: 615/632-2101) has revised its IntegratedResource Plan (IRP) to include more energy-efficiency programs andrenewable energy technologies in the next five years. The finalplan, Energy Vision 2020, was released in December by the TVABoard, which made the revisions after reviewing public comments.Among the changes are plans to investigate the potential for windpower and biomass generating projects in the TVA service area. Theplan also calls for the implementation of 650 MW of DSM by 2002 andup to 2,200 MW by 2010 and further work to develop renewable energyoptions including studies on using a flexible wind project, abiomass refinery, a combined garbage and biomass facility, landfillmethane, coalbed methane, and photovoltaics for power generation.Contact: Barbara Martocci, Tennessee Valley Authority; Tel:423/632-8632.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Forecasting CutsCosts by 5%A method of load forecasting based on a recursive maximumlikelihood estimation adaptive forecasting technique hasdemonstrated savings of 5% in production costs for electricgenerating and district heating plants in Europe.  Already provedin use at plants throughout Scandinavia, the "Power LoadForecasting Service," sold by Vitec AB (Box 1465, S-90124, Umea,Sweden; Tel: 46(0)90-15-49-00) has been shown to provide plantoperators with significant cost savings through increased operatingefficiency.For example, while in use at the combined electricity generationand district heating plant at Umea in northern Sweden over the lastthree years, the Vitec service reduced the plant's production costsby no less than 5%, providing a financial savings of $500,000 to$700,000 per year. By achieving these cost savings at Umea andelsewhere, the service has been frequently proved to repay itsannual subscription costs in just its first day of operation - evenin its first hour.Once installed at a plant, the Vitec system is accessed via an IBM-compatible PC which is connected to the plant's existing processcontrol computers via a serial link or LAN. It also connects viamodem to Vitec's control center, for example, allowing the centerto upload process data and download forecasting data for thespecific plant location.Because it is adaptive, the forecasting technique constantlyadjusts its current forecasts to take into account the accuracyachieved by previous forecasts. This self-correcting capability isreinforced by constant quality assurance, with the Vitec controlcenter verifying accurate operation daily and taking additionalcorrective measures if the forecast load differs from the actualload by more than 2% in any 24-hour period.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Inverter ImprovesMotor EfficiencyElectric vehicles, adjustable-speed motors, heat pumps, fans andcompressors may benefit from a new electric power inverterdeveloped by researchers at the Dept. of Energy's (DOE) Oak RidgeNational Lab (ORNL). The Resonant Snubber Inverter (RSI), inventedby engineers in the Digital and Power Electronics Group, improvesefficiency and reliability, is smaller, lighter, greatly reduceselectromagnetic interference (EMI) and potentially lowers the costof electric power inverters. Inverters, used with many electricdevices and motors, convert available power to the type needed--such as direct current to alternating current.The RSI is about 80%t efficient at low speeds and 98% efficient athigh speeds. Conventional inverters are about 60-70% efficient atlow speeds and 94%t efficient at high speeds. Inverter efficiencygains of that magnitude--especially at the lower speeds typical ofits use in a car--could help electric vehicles become a viableoption, researchers say.To perform their function, inverters employ a series of switchesand electronic components. A conventional electric power inverterconsists of six power semiconductor switches that turn on or offabout 20,000 times per second in different combinations to providethe desired output.The inverter switch turns on and off at full voltage and current,generating a huge, wasteful power spike. This type of "hardswitching" is an effective way of obtaining a specific current;however, this circuit design causes many problems. In addition toEMI caused by hard switching, conventional inverters putconsiderable stress on silicon devices and other parts within theinverter, causing reliability problems.While the conventional inverter uses six switches to achieve adesired output, the RSI adds three small auxiliary switches thattemporarily--and very briefly--divert current, then route it backto one of the six main switches. This diversion, which lasts onlya couple of microseconds, produces a zero voltage across the switchand helps reduce damaging power spikes. It also enables the RSI'ssoft switching to increase efficiency from 4-15 percentage pointscompared to a conventional inverter.The efficiency gain is dependent on the speed of the motorconnected to the inverter. Greatest efficiency gains occur when themotor is run at less than full speed, typical of an inverter'sfunction in an electric vehicle. While gains in efficiency areimportant, ORNL also claims that the RSI virtually eliminates EMI.Tests using an oscilloscope show EMI is greatly reduced compared toconventional hard switching inverters and previously developed softswitching inverters. EMI can interfere with functions ofappliances, telephones, electronic instruments, televisionreception and other electronic equipment, such as computercontrolled ignition in automobiles.Another benefit of the RSI is that it reduces voltage and currentstress to inverter components. This improves the reliability andallows lower-cost power devices to be used. Because the RSIsmoothly changes the voltage and current during device switching,it can also help reduce the possibility of motor failure caused byinsulation breakdown and bearing overheating. Soft switching alsoreduces the inverter's operating temperature, reducing the need forlarge, heavy heat sinks, which are devices to dissipate heat.Instead, the RSI can use smaller, lighter, less expensive heatsinks. Excessive heat degrades electronic equipment and causesfailures.In a related project, the RSI is being incorporated into anadvanced air conditioner to be installed on electric buses,including one in Chattanooga in 1997. The unit is the product ofORNL's work in advanced electric motor technology and a cooperativeresearch and development agreement partner's new air conditionertechnology. Installation of the unit is expected to eliminate theneed for an auxiliary power unit required for the bus's airconditioner. These auxiliary units are currently powered bypropane, which results in emissions, noise, added weight and cost.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Desulfurization ProcessCould Boost Oil SupplyEnergy BioSystems Corp. (4200 Research Forest Dr., The Woodlands,TX 77381-4257; Tel: 713/364-6132) is commercializing biotechnology-based processes for the petroleum refining and productionindustries.  The company's focus to-date has been on developingbiocatalytic desulfurization (BDS), a proprietary process involvingthe use of bacteria to remove sulfur from petroleum.This process is expected to help refiners worldwide meetenvironmental regulations in a more cost-effective manner and hasthe potential to greatly improve the value of high-sulfur crude oilreserves. In December, the company announced a major advance in theperformance of the biocatalyst which drives the BDS system.Application of recent discoveries has led to a six- to eightfoldincrease in the specific activity of intermediate reactionscritical to BDS economics.  "In the last few months we have appliedthe discoveries reported in September," said Dr. Daniel J.Monticello, VP of R&D at Energy BioSystems. "The resultingimprovement exceeds our expectation of a three- to fivefoldincrease.  We are now significantly closer to the performance levelneeded for commercialization of BDS, but additional development isrequired on a final reaction to produce the prototype biocatalystnecessary for pilot plant demonstration runs," he continued.Further improvements are expected in early 1996 which should leadto the biocatalyst performance required for commercialdemonstration of BDS technology.In December, Energy BioSystems also announced that the U.S. Patentand Trademark Office has issued two new process patents to thecompany. The first patent (U.S. 5,472,875) claims a new reactordesign involving the introduction of air or oxygen-enriched gasinto the oil prior to treatment with the biocatalyst.  The secondpatent (U.S. 5,468,626) claims a method by which a biosorptionagent preferentially adsorbs sulfur-containing compounds frompetroleum.  Such a process design could reduce the size of thebioreactor by concentrating on those compounds requiringdesulfurization, thus reducing capital equipment costs.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996More Orders forNew CompressorDynEco Corp. (564 International Pl., Rockledge, FL 32955; Tel:407/639-0333) has received a new order for eight demonstrationOrbital Vane mobile air conditioning compressors from Trans/AirManufacturing Corp. (P.O. Box 70, Dallastown, PA 17313; Tel:717/246-2627).  Trans/Air is a leading supplier of custom-designedair conditioning systems for fossil-fueled and electric-poweredcommercial and mass-transit vehicles. This is the second order thatDynEco has received recently from leaders in the private andcommercial vehicle A/C markets.The patented Orbital Vane compressor represents an engineeringbreakthrough due to its unique anti-friction (non-contact) design.In an independent test report prepared by the Dept. of Energy(DOE), it was reported that, "this new compressor is compact,lightweight, and more efficient than conventional automobile airconditioning compressors."  It operates with a wide range of gases,including ozone-safe refrigerant HFC-134a.  DynEco Corp. expectsits array of innovative compressors to be highly price-competitivedue to their simplicity and ease of manufacture.Previously, 30 demonstration compressors were ordered bySCS/Frigette (1200 West Risinger Rd., Fort Worth, TX 76134; Tel:817/293-5313). SCS/Frigette is a producer of aftermarket andreplacement automotive air conditioning systems and otherautomotive accessories.Trans/Air will conduct extensive testing of DynEco's Orbital Vanecompressors in anticipation of integrating them into their high-efficiency mass transit air conditioning systems.  The companybelieves that this purchase could lead to a significant market forhundreds of compressors, which would further accelerate growth ofthe Rockledge, FL-based company.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Big Investment inHalogen Bulb PlantIn December, GE Lighting (3135 Easton Turnpike, Fairfield, CT06432-1041; Tel: 203/373-2211) announced that it will invest morethan $100 million over four years in new production lines to expandcapacity at a GE plant in Mattoon, IL. A major part of theinvestment will be used to expand manufacturing capacity for GE'sexclusive Halogen-IR light bulbs--which are the most energy-efficient halogen light bulbs available in the world.This GE high-technology involves a special infrared coating andunique application process applied to the inner filament tube whichcaptures wasted infrared energy and turns it into more visible,useful light.  In addition to providing significant energy savings,Halogen-IR--a global product--produces crisp white light andexcellent color rendering.The inner tubes will be manufactured and coated at Mattoon LampPlant, then shipped to other GE plants for final assembly.  Typicalapplications are retail display lighting and residential andcommercial floodlighting.  Other types of high efficiency halogenlight bulb production will also be added at the plant.Contact: Jay Pomeroy of GE Lighting, Tel: 216/266-3762.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Stay Up-to-date withFree Energy CatalogueInformation on the latest energy research is available from theNational Renewable Energy Lab's (NREL) recently released NRELInformation Resources Catalogue: A Collection of Renewable Energyand Energy Efficiency Information Resources 1995.  The cataloguedescribes recent publications produced by NREL for the Dept. ofEnergy, and lists services available on energy efficiency andrenewable energy programs and technologies.Documents in the catalogue were published during fiscal year 1995and include general interest publications, technical reports,conference papers, journal articles, book chapters, and patents.New this year is a title index by subject.Copies of the catalogue are available through NREL's DocumentDistribution Service; by Tel: 303/275-4363, Fax 303/275-5043,email: evanss@tcplink.nrel.gov, or U.S. mail: 1617 Cole Blvd.,15/1, Golden, CO 80401-3393.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996German WindpowerReport AvailableAccording to Paul Gipe (Paul Gipe & Assoc., 208 S. Green St., No.5; Tehachapi, CA 93561; Tel: 805/822-9150), one of Germany's majorsolar energy research institutes recently issued a detailed reporton German wind development. According to Mr. Gipe, "this report isone of the most detailed documents yet on the makeup of the Germanwind program. Germany is in a frenzy of wind development not seensince the great California 'wind rush' of the mid 1980s."By the end of 1995, Germany will have installed a total of 1,000 MWof wind-generating capacity." At the current rate, Germany'sinstalled capacity will exceed that in California sometime in mid-1997 and will exceed that in all of North America by the end of1997. Wind turbines currently generate 4% of the electricity in thenorthern German state of Schleswig-Holstein and are expected todeliver nearly 10% by the year 2000.Two organizations follow German wind development, the German WindEnergy Institut (Deutsches Windenergie Institut) at Wilhelmshavenand the Institut fur Solare Energieversorgungstehnik or ISET inKassel. Both are excellent sources of information on the technicalside of wind development in Germany. ISET is specifically chargedwith tracking the performance of Germany's "250 MW" incentiveprogram. Under the 250 MW program, Germany pays 6 pfennigs($0.035)/kWh of generation from selected wind turbines. Between1989 and 1991 this program spurred development of the Germany windindustry. In 1991, Germany implemented the Electricity Feed Lawthat has further spurred rapid development of wind energy in thecountry.The report, "WMEP 250 MW Wind Jahresauswertung 1994" (1994 AnnualReport of the 250 MW Wind Program) is in German with Englishsummaries.The report can be purchased from ISET for DM 30 (about $20) plusshipping and handling. Contact: ISET, Koenigstor 59 D34119 Kassel,Germany; Tel: 49/561 72 940; Fax: 49/561 72 94 00, email:mdurst@ws-01.iset-ks.de.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY CONSERVATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARMarch 4-8, 1996, Successful Energy Project Analysis and Selection,Madison, WI. Contact: Keith Kempski, Tel: 608/262-0468.March 31-April 3, 1996, ElectroTEC '96, St. Louis, MO. Contact:Susan Mitchell, Tel: 202/508-5901.April 3-4, 1996, GLOBALCON: Nat'l Forum for Energy Efficiency,Denver, CO. Contact: Ruth Bennett, Tel: 770/447-5083, ext. 210.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-16IA059-000325-B003-71http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey57.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231022 text/html 62877HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:08:31 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:05 GMTContent-length: 62690Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey57.html Sample Issue Copyright THE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNet January 2, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HAPPY NEW YEAR (36 words) WHAT ARE THE WILD WINDS SAYING? (270 words) MARVIN RUNYON (531 words) RICHARD LAWSON (557 words) RICHARD BALZHISER (271 words) EDWARD BURKE (272 words) DANIEL DREYFUS (734 words) KEN HOLLISTER (873 words) GUS SPETH (98 words) JAMES MILLER (363 words) MARK LUFTIG (373 words) LARRY HOBART (148 words) EDWARD TIRELLO (210 words) WILLIAM DERRICKSON (203 words) JERALD HALVORSEN (367 words) GEORGE LAWRENCE (452 words) KENNETH CARR (363 words) DAVID BARDIN (217 words) MARC GOLDSMITH (258 words) PAUL PARSHLEY (350 words) JOHN SILLIN (308 words) WILLIAM McCOLLAM (305 words) DENNY ELLERMAN (81 words) DAVID MOSKOVITZ (407 words) JOHN ANDERSON (487 words) THE LAST WORD...JAMES WATKINS (588 words) CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990HAPPY NEW YEAREvery man naturally persuades himself that he can keep hisresolutions, nor is he convinced of his imbecility but by lengthof time and frequency of experiment....Samuel Johnson, English lexicographer and philosopher (1709-1784)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990WHAT ARE THE WILD WINDS SAYING?"What are the wild winds saying...?" Charles Dickens had aplaintive child enquire in  Dombey and Son.  The question wasnever really answered and a few chapters later Dickens dispatchesthe child in one of the tearful deathbed scenes that endeared himto Victorians.As the energy industry enters the 1990s, the wild winds are asincoherent as ever but the willingness of many industry leadersto have a pop at deciphering their sound is intact. In thisforecast issue (a long-standing New Year tradition at The EnergyDaily) some 23 experts predict, exhort and reflect--and a fewhappily seize the opportunity to poke some light-hearted fun atthe institutions and personalities of energy.In January 1980, the first issues of the decade dwelt on topicsthat get less coverage nowadays: indoor air pollution, SouthKorea's nuclear construction program, wavepower research inBritain and DOE's synthetic fuels program. But there wereperennial topics too: the NRC was struggling with deadlines forreactor safety changes, coal producers were predicting a recordyear and (with impressive prescience) a study commissioned by theClimate Research Board of the National Research Council concludedthat "global warming caused by carbon dioxide build-up from theburning of fossil fuels represents a real problem for thefuture."But if the 1980s was a hard decade to forecast, the 1990s arelikely to be even more tumultuous and competitive. Short-termforecasting is a notoriously dangerous game. However, it has itsown seductive allure and so  The Energy Daily is delighted topresent on the following pages the predictions of itsdistinguished panel of experts.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990MARVIN RUNYONThe electric utility industry is becoming more competitive eachyear and consumer choice is the driving force behind thiscompetition. "Choice" is an American value reflected throughoutour nation's experience in everything from the way we selectpolitical candidates to the growing variety of consumer productsbeing made for American consumption.Regulated utilities are among the last areas in which ourcitizens have been limited in their ability to make such choices.But that economic environment is changing and increasingcompetition implies that utilities will take action to make their"products" and services less costly and more attractive toconsumers.If we respond to this challenge in a responsible way--withoutcompromising safety, reliability and the environment--consumersand competitive utilities will both be winners.While the issue of sufficient generating capacity is not new--ornews--in the electric utility industry, in 1990 we are likely tosee this issue gain increasing recognition among opinion leaders,government officials and consumers generally.The costs of new generating capacity have made many utilitieshesitant to build, but electric utilities can't compromise theirobligation to provide a reliable and ample electric supply totheir consumers.Whether future load projections are met through energyconservation, load-management, independent power production ornew generating capacity, one thing is certain. Each utility willhave to search for the most cost-effective way to keep its costsdown and its reliability up. Responses will vary from region toregion and utility to utility.Clean air issues also are familiar to the electric utilityindustry--and with congressional action pending, those issueswill remain in the 1990 headlines. We are glad that PresidentBush introduced his proposal for cleaner air. We believe that itis possible to have cleaner air and competitive rates.Utilities ought to be among the leaders in advocating reasonableand effective clean air legislation. If the public perceives usas obstructionists who approach each new proposal from a worst-case perspective, we risk being isolated on the wrong side ofthis issue. And if that happens, there's a much higherprobability that utilities will face punitive legislation.To meet the challenges of competition and choice, capacity andclean air, we must work to shape change rather than resist it. Myfavorite formula for change states that 1 percent actuallyinitiate change, 9 percent watch it happen and 90 percent ask,"what happened?"To bring about the bright future we all want, utilities are goingto have to be among that 1 percent making the right kind ofchange happen in the 1990s.To meet the future, we're changing at TVA. We've held ratesconstant for two years and believe we're in good shape to reachthe third year of our three-year goal of no rate increases.We initiated a growth credit program that provides rateincentives for businesses adding new capacity to our system andnew jobs to our region. We're getting in shape for the future andwe believe that means offering competitive rates, providing anample and reliable supply of power and being a good environmentalcitizen.Marvin Runyon is chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990RICHARD LAWSONThe year 1990 marks the beginning of a new decade leading us tothe turn of the century and hopefully continued economicprosperity, growth and world peace. Some things, no doubt, willbe different than they were in the 80s; other things won't changeat all. Here are but a few of the events we can prognosticatethat should, could or might just happen during the coming year. *  The U.S. coal industry will achieve its fourth consecutiverecord-year, with production and consumption reaching nearly 1billion tons; *  The U.S. Congress will quickly commence debate on Clean AirAct amendments, including costly acid rain controls that couldadd as much as $7 billion a year to consumer electricity costs; *  The National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP)will complete its 10-year $500 million analysis of acid rain andconclude that acid rain is not an ecological emergency; *  One half of the nation's atmospheric scientists will call forCO2 reductions as the means of abating the imminent globalwarming threat to mankind; *  Coal will continue to dominate U.S. electric power generationwith nearly 60 percent of the market; *  American coal exports will reach 100 million tons, reducingthe nation's trade deficit by nearly $4 billion; *  The other half of the nation's global warming scientists willargue against a consensus on the issue and warn instead of aglobal cooling trend; *  Under the leadership of the Department of Energy, the countrywill develop its national energy security plan that places anemphasis on the development and utilization of all domesticresources; *  Technological advances and management practices by coalproducers will lead to another 6 percent increase inproductivity, as has been done annually since 1978; *  Confounding mathematicians, a third, as yet undiscovered,group of global warming scientists will say there is really aconsensus that nobody knows what's going on with future climatetrends, let alone tomorrow's weather forecast; *  One or more of DOE's clean coal technology projects will beoperational, the first step in bringing new technologies to themarketplace, reducing emissions, increasing combustionefficiencies and saving consumers billion of dollars; *  All of the global warming scientists will ask Congress forfunds for additional research; *  Key members of Congress and the administration will actuallyread the final NAPAP report, realize there's no environmentalemergency associated with acid rain, and develop a more rationallegislative package; *  The coal industry will continue its steady progress inrestoring surface mine lands to productive use, benefittingagriculture, recreational uses and wildlife; *  Global warming conferences will be in vogue, with at least aseminar per week through the year, providing the finest minds inthe scientific community the opportunity to travel to some of thenicest hotels America has to offer; *  As U.S. policymakers become more aware of projected growth inpopulation and energy demand in Third World nations, they willbegin to realize America's leadership role in the global warmingissue lies in technology exports, not unilateral reductions; and *  The Redskins will win the 1991 Super Bowl; the Air ForceAcademy will win the national championship in college football.Richard Lawson is president of the National Coal Association.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990RICHARD BALZHISEREnvironmental concerns will continue to shape energy decisions in1990.Society has demonstrated its commitment to environmental well-being and this commitment now speeds the introduction of newtechnologies that use energy efficiently and cleanly. We expectthat the substitution of electricity for the direct use of fossilfuel will play an increasingly important role in meeting theworld demand for energy while reducing environmental concerns.One such example is the electric vehicle, which goes fromprototype to commercial production this year.At the same time, environmental issues such as acid rain andtoxic wastes are bringing together the needed players tocapitalize on innovative clean coal technology. Solutions forsuch issues benefit from collaborative research because of thehigh costs and the need to bring diverse expertise together.Judicious selection of strategies can address economicproductivity and national security as well as environmental well-being. We must take care, however, that the preoccupation withpolitical expediency and risk aversion does not constrain ourability to achieve the anticipated strategic advantages.Issues surrounding the preservation of our global environmentpoint toward another key trend that shows no sign ofdiminishing...that is, the widening international perspective onscience and technology. Just as science and technology are nolonger confined by national borders, environmental issues arealso global. To be sure, the need for international cooperationcan only grow as we move into the final decade of this century,both in understanding the environmental sciences and indeveloping new technologies to ensure an economic and reliableenergy supply.Richard Balzhiser is president of the Electric Power ResearchInstitute.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990EDWARD BURKE1990 will be the year in which the Department of Energy attemptsto develop a national energy strategy. The development of anextensive dialogue on the subject is very important.I am particularly pleased by the recent comments of Henson Moorewhich stress the importance of renewable energy and conservationin a national energy strategy. I am a strong exponent of the useof diversified energy sources in a balanced package. Nuclearpower, petroleum, natural gas and coal (used with maximumenvironmental safeguards)--all will play a significant role inAmerica's energy future.Strong emphasis should be given to renewable technologies. Canadanow provides substantial amounts of renewable hydro-power forexport to the United States. I believe that there is room for asubstantial increase in this source of power, together with thedevelopment of power both in new Canadian nuclear and high-technology coal-fired, fluidized bed generators. Our nation must,however, greatly improve the U.S.-Canadian transmissioninterconnections if the Canadian option is to be fully utilized.Improvement of transmission siting procedures must be in theforecast of our national energy strategy.I predict that the Department of Energy will produce the outlineof a national energy strategy in 1990. It is my expectation thatstate and local energy conservation initiatives will multiply. Itis my hope that progress will be made in addressing the need forimproved U.S.-Canadian transmission ties.I am positive that whenever "energy experts" become too stuffyand pompous in their comments, The Energy Daily will be readywith a wry pinprick.Edward Burke is president of Providence, Rhode Island-basedCanadian Connection, Ltd.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990DANIEL DREYFUSThere were few unexpected developments in energy in 1989. Oilprices firmed in March and have remained in the $18 range (but Ipredicted that). Energy demand, including gas demand, continuesto grow slowly but steadily. This offers another year of evidencethat zero energy demand is now an artifact of history. After along sabbatical, government is again involving itself overtly inenergy policy. Except for a distinct environmental tone, thedirections of the involvement, thus far, remain formative andvague.In terms of specific energy predictions, 1990 looks like more ofthe same. Demand for energy of all kinds will grow moderately innearly all uses. Electric utilities will increase theirconsumption of oil greatly. They increased it by about 35 percentin 1989, but no one took any particular notice!In 1990, gas demand will increase by about 300 Bcf, or a littlemore if the economy continues to defy the economists. The DOEdata series on gas have become so confused, however, that I don'tknow with any precision what amount of 1989 consumption thatincrease should be added to.The most important development is 1989, certainly, has been thedisintegration of the Soviet Bloc. In time, this development willhave profound consequences for the global energy situation. Withthe population of Eastern Europe, and even the Soviet Union,aspiring to Western standards of lifestyles, and with the tradebarriers imposed by the Iron Curtain crumbling, a sea change inworld trade is in prospect. It will rival or exceed the impact ofthe emergence in the 1970s of Japan as a global economic force.Having learned that the yen is mightier than the sword, we arenow discovering that most people would rather be fed than red.The former, self-imposed isolation of the Soviet bloc permittedenergy analysts largely to ignore the internal energy supply anddemand dynamics of communist countries. In any case, energy datafrom behind the Iron Curtain was scarce. From time to time, theCIA would leak reports that Soviet oil wells were suffering fromextreme neglect. But the reports were only of interest to obscureCongressional subcommittees and they proved to be wrong anyway.So we treated the centrally-planned economists as a relativelyinconsequential new export of Soviet oil and Polish coal, or wesimply struck a total with the euphemistic label "Free World" andomitted them from consideration altogether. This offhandtreatment of one-third of global energy consumption and a greaterproportion of its resource base is no longer viable.If the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, let alone China, embarkupon the path to consumer economics, they will dominate theevolution of global energy statistics. Soviet industry today hasan energy intensity comparable to the U.S. in the 1950s, prior tothe much heralded "decoupling" of energy and economic growth.Housing, appliances and above all, transportation are well belowWestern standards in all of the communist world. Changing thatsituation is the essence of "perestroika".The Soviet Union is rich in energy resources and, despite anenormous capacity for increased consumption, can probably remainself-sufficient. Undoubtedly, gas exports to Europe and probablythe Far East will increase as a mainstay of Soviet hard currencytrade. Eastern Europe, however, will no longer be supported bythe Soviet energy system. Many of these countries will turn tothe West for energy trade and to the world oil trade for arapidly expanding petroleum requirement.It is unlikely that the consequences of these events will impactenergy statistics during 1990, but during the next year theimplications for the future may begin to take form.Similarly, initiatives to moderate the "greenhouse" effectcontinue to gain currency in both the U.S. and internationalpolitical rhetoric. Formative notions of what is good or bad forthe atmosphere probably already are introducing subtle biasesinto policy decisions.In 1990, the Clean Air legislation is likely to be enacted withinhours of the Congressional adjournment for the fall elections.The final version might incorporate some hints of greenhousepolicies.Overall, 1990 will probably be a kinder, gentler year in theenergy business. In the vernacular of the energy analyst,however, there are indications that an `'alternative future"might be taking form.Daniel Dreyfus is vice president for strategic planning andanalysis at the Gas Research Institute.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990KEN HOLLISTERThe call for a "National Energy Policy" is once more in the vanas we approach the decade of the 90s. I believe we have had othertries at it in the 30s, 50s and 70s. It seems to be an afflictionsimilar to the 20-year itch.This time around there is once again emphasis on the social useof the product rather than the engineering supposedly needed toaccomplish it. In the 30s, we brought power to rural areas and inthe 70s the call was for a national transmission grid to moveblocks of power across vast distances and hold local rates at lowlevels. As it is now all but environmentally impossible to builda transmission line, (no less a grid), however, the "planners"want to use already built facilities for the "greater socialgood"; roughly translated, that means using investor-ownedproperty for the benefit of the ratepayer through a contributionby the owner.The "policies" surrounding the natural gas segment of theindustry have already undergone major transformations asunregulated producers now strive to sell to stringentlyoverregulated local distribution companies that, in many cases,have only modest prospects for growth, or directly to presentcustomers of the regulated utilities.Managers of some electric utilities view the current ferment interms of opportunity and some fairly significant combinations ofservice territories are brewing. Northeast Utilities seems on thetrack to acquire the properties of the bankrupt Public Service ofNew Hampshire, including the troubled Seabrook nuclear station.PacifiCorp, having merged with Utah Power and Light, is nowproposing to acquire Arizona Public Service and SouthernCalifornia Edison is wallowing in its attempt to merge with SanDiego Gas and Electric. If something happens in the southeast, wewill have the four corners of the country accounted for and wecan work toward the middle. It may not be a national policy butit should contribute to availability.Will there be a "National Energy Policy" in the 90s? With aprofound sense of humbleness, I doubt it. The proposed mergers,combinations and machinations will do little to provide forfuture orderly growth of the industry or provide for the generalwelfare. Just perhaps, if we could define it, we might be able todetermine what a National Energy Policy is supposed to do or be.In the first place, to have an effective national policy, allparticipants must have a mutual regard for the totality and lookfor some degree of fair and equal treatment.In practice, the extreme points of view currently being espousedby some groups that have a meaningful degree of politicalpresence tends to raise the defense mechanism of a range ofopponents from entrepreneurs to bean counters. As a singleexample, the City of San Diego, which for many years was in arunning battle with its electric utility (San Diego Gas &Electric) now finds it the premier utility in the world andadvocates that its proposed merger with Southern CaliforniaEdison be aborted, or at least stopped. The reason, if Iunderstand it correctly, is that it had been a gouging regulatedmonopoly, and if it becomes a bigger regulated monopoly it willgouge the rate payer by a greater amount. (Regulators of theworld unite!) So much for rationality and we shall see whetherthere is a merger or not. Also standing in the way of any"policy" is the question of whether profit will be permitted. Ifnot, sooner or later the question of taking of property will goto court. That could be an interesting group of cases.Another proposed combination, that of Northeast Utilities andPublic Service of New Hampshire, provides a clue to the cost ofbankruptcy to the rate payer: 5-6 percent per year for 5 to 7years is the proposal. If that is compared with the ratereductions put in force when PacifiCorp merged voluntarily withUtah Power & Light and the proposal of rate reductions for SanDiego customers by the Southern California managers, it might beargued that voluntary is better. None of this, however,contributes to National Energy Policy.A respected competitor in the financial end of the world recentlystated: "Why build a plant when it can be bought more cheaply onthe New York Stock Exchange?" Placing aside the strictures of thecurrent Public Utility Holding Company Act, that may be one wayin which the electric companies may be reformed in the 90's.Again, it would not be the basis to a National Energy Policy.Another piece of legislation, the Public Utility RegulatoryPolicies Act of 1978, probably will do much to reshape thefinancial structure of the industry in the 90s as facilities fromgeneration, (and possibly, transmission) are added outside ofthe present state regulatory system. It will test the ability ofcurrent managements to meet the requirements of the basicratepayer and it will test the political system that created thecurrent atmosphere of change. We may not get a policy, but weCertainly ought to have fun.Ken Hollister is a vice president of Jersey City, New Jersey-based W. H. Reaves & Co., Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990GUS SPETH1990 will be the year when global warming has its first impact onnational and international energy planning. Energy efficiency andrenewable technologies will assume a new importance in U.S.energy strategy as a means of reducing carbon dioxide and othergreenhouse gas emissions. And the industrialized nations willrealize that, whatever international treaties are negotiated, itwill be their task to develop and supply the technologies thatwill ultimately allow international CO2 reduction goals to beachieved.Gus Speth is president of World Resources Institute and a formerchairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990JAMES MILLEROur view of the energy industry for the forthcoming year is muchthe same as was our expectation for 1989 made at this time lastyear. We continue to believe that the so called "gas bubble" is agreat misconception and that prices more fairly reflective of itsvalue as a commodity, its clean burning characteristics and itscurrent finding costs will be forthcoming.There have always been seasonal surpluses of natural gas, butconversely, in periods of high demand, there have been naturalgas deliverability shortfalls with ensuing mandated conservationvia temporary school, factory, commercial building and publicoffice closings to reduce natural gas consumption and amelioratethe deliverability shortfall.While recent total natural gas reserve additions have exceededconsumption, that fact has been the product of warmer thanaverage weather which has reduced demand, rather than greatersupplies available from new discoveries of natural gas reserves.Our nation's deliverability available to satisfy peak perioddemand has not improved. An extremely cold, prolonged winter ofthe type which we have not experienced nationally since Decemberof 1983 through February of 1984 will have most seriousconsequences in terms of natural gas supply shortages. Thenatural gas spot market, favored more and more by natural gasdistributors, in such a scenario will see prices spikedramatically higher, and worse, an inability to obtain assumed-to-be-available supplies regardless of price.In turn, the achievement of natural gas prices which recognizethe value of that commodity on the basis of heating value atleast comparable to its primary competitor (fuel oil) willresult. More realistic prices will provide the stimulus toproducers to increase exploratory drilling, bringing onproduction of new reserves of natural gas with the deliverabilitycapacity to meet those peak day requirements.If we see that prolonged cold winter period from December 1989through February of 1990, our forecast at Plains will be a changein 1990 from the public misconception of the "bubble " surplus toa better recognition of what is required to satisfy human needsduring periods of greatest demand.James Miller is chief executive officer of Plains PetroleumCompany in Lakewood, Colorado.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990MARK LUFTIGThe Environment: The most significant event for electricutilities in 1990 is likely to be the passage of environmentallegislation late in the year. Because the outcome is likely to bepolitically motivated, no rational person should hazard a guessat the shape of the final bill. Maybe this will be the year whenall the scientists, climatologists and soothsayers who areinterested in global warming will be locked in a room until theyagree on whether the world's temperature is increasing or not.Mine is.Transmission Access: The dinosaurs and do-gooders will continuetheir battle over transmission access, probably without progress.The debate over changes in the Public Utility Holding Company Actwill continue, also without resolution. The IPPs will prosper butthey will press to be treated on an "equal footing" withutilities. Not to be outdone, the utilities will continuesearching for the elusive "level playing field." The FERC will benotable for its inaction. Someone will resort to the courts.Nuclear Power: Seabrook will go to full power and Public ServiceNew Hampshire will emerge from bankruptcy. Shoreham will beofficially closed as a nuclear plant. There will only be oneinvestor-owned nuclear plant sill under active construction atyear-end. There still will not be any site approved for disposalof high level waste.Mergers: Hearings will continue and continue and continue inCalifornia. The length of the proceedings and legal bills shoulddiscourage others from trying, but it won't. The PacifiCorp offerfor Arizona Public Service either will die an early death or turninto a three ring circus.Deregulation: An interesting concept but the mood could change,at least temporarily, if the economy continues to slow andutilities look to regulators to raise rates to make up for theshortfall in return, while the competitive world is forced to cutprices because of declining demand.The Stockholders: Alas, everyone cannot win. Earnings growth willbe lackluster. Dividend growth will be anemic but payout ratioswill creep up nevertheless. The stockholder is likely to getcaught in the middle when the various factions compromise theirdifferences over acid rain controversy.Mark Luftig is a Vice President with National Economic ResearchAssociates.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990LARRY HOBARTThe question of the 1990s decade is posed by Admiral Watkins: canthe U.S. formulate and implement a national energy strategy? Thedriving forces in determining the answer are economic well-beingand environmental protection. Whether the Administration andCongress decide to make deliberate decisions or leave it tochance, there will be choices affecting public planning, energysecurity, transmission access, fuels purchases, nuclear's future,renewable resources and industry organizations. The price andphysical effects of energy conclusions--caused either bypolitical calculations or market mechanisms--will be visited onconsumers who, together with states, are increasingly looking forinvolvement in the policy process. The most likely 1990 policyscenario: attempts at federal micro-managing of a lot of issues,e.g. acid rain, PUHCA amendments and efficiency standards,without serious consideration of the "big picture." And so itgoes.Larry Hobart is executive director of the American Public PowerAssociation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990EDWARD TIRELLOWith a dawn of a new decade, we foresee major changes occurringwithin the electric utility industry--some we expect to beaddressed in 1990 and some further out into the 1990s. Near term,we expect to see important legislative action regarding two keyissues: acid rain and an amendment to the Public Utility HoldingCompany Act of 1935. In our view, whether or not PUHCA isamended, we see a future for independent power producers.Longer term, we foresee the debate over transmission accessgathering steam. In our opinion, the future of transmissionaccess policy is being shaped now and the industry should beginplaying a more active role in its ultimate formation rather thanattempting to prevent the inevitable.Finally, we see the trend toward consolidation continuing andpossible accelerating by the end of the year as the currentcompetitive forces become more formidable. In our view,transmission access will also be a driving force towardconsolidation.We look for the 1990s to be an exciting time for the utilityindustry--a time of progress and change and a time of preparationfor meeting the challenges and demands of the 21st century.Edward Tirello is senior vice president at Shearson Lehman Huttonin New York.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990WILLIAM DERRICKSONThe licensing process must be changed. Intelligent single-steplicensing must replace existing regulations in order to keep thenuclear option alive. The NRC needs to protect the future ofnuclear power, as well as pave the way for a return to a morehealthy nuclear industry. Right now, I'm not sure there is anindustry, per se.Finally, new financial challenges lay ahead for the utilityfuturist. Perhaps another large nuke plant won't be built duringour careers, or at least not until some of the big uncertaintiesare quantified. The finance people are never going to becomfortable with risks that can jeopardize billions of dollarssitting idle. And the political risk is the greatest of all.Years ago, when he was chairman of EEI, Marshall McDonald perhapsput it best when he said building a nuke plant is like playing"you bet your company." One plant can come to equal the entireproperty and equipment equity of the owner before it's finished,and then there's no guarantee it will ever operate. Clearly,something's gotta give, and it isn't going to be the peopleholding the money.William Derrickson is chairman and chief executive officer ofQuadrex Corporation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990JERALD HALVORSENThe natural gas industry has been in transition, but that'schanging.While the details still need to be filled in, the broad outlinesof the restructured industry have become clearer over the pastyear or so.As pipelines began the shift from merchant to transporter, theywere overwhelmed by take-or-pay costs and they saw their marketstaken by cheap spot gas. Both those situations are improving now.Take-or-pay liability, three years ago a mind-boggling $10billion, has been reduced to the more manageable--but stillexcessive--level of $2.3 billion, according to INGAA's latestsurvey.And as the gas bubble dissipates, local distribution companiesare moving once more to longer-term, more realistic contracts.Gas inventory charges, incentive ratemaking and pipelineexpansions into the Northeast and California are all in the worksand the pipelines can only hope FERC quickens the pace at whichthe specifics are processed. Likewise, we anticipate the issuanceof a pipeline marketing affiliate rule, and hope that it will bea reasonable one.Although FERC's agenda is full, we are encouraged by the earlycommitments made by the new chairman, Martin Allday, to movequickly on the most pressing unresolved problems.On the legislative front, it frequently seems Congress isdetermined to demand the impossible of the gas industry. On onehand, legislators encourage increased gas use in the clean airbill. On the other, they simultaneously threaten to lock up ourmost promising offshore reserves and forbid our pipelines tocross wetlands.This juxtaposition of conflicting demands has the virtue ofmaking INGAA's legislative mission clear. In 1990, we will workto retain a flexible, freedom-of-choice approach to meeting cleanair standards, steering clear of any cost-sharing tax. And wewill try to stave off the imposition of drilling moratoria andtoo-restrictive wetlands policies. Congress must be made to seethat development of gas resources and preservation of theenvironment are not mutually exclusive.If we can meet this challenge, and if exploration can be rousedfrom its present lethargic state, the next few years look verybright for natural gas.Jerald Halvorsen is president of the Interstate Natural GasAssociation of America.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990GEORGE LAWRENCELast year in The Energy Daily's forecast issue I said: "Thenatural gas industry looks forward to a year of progresshighlighted by growing demand, competitive prices, adequatesupply and new market development." Well, it happened. For 1990--indeed, the 1990s--I now make the same prediction...only more so.A hundred years ago, the last decade of the century was referredto as "The Gay Nineties." I think the last decade of this centuryis going to be "The Gas Nineties." All of the barometers pointtoward this inescapable conclusion.We have transcended the predictions of a few vocal, lonely doom-and-gloomers regarding the demise of natural gas. The reality ofthe 1990s is that natural gas will move to a position ofprominence.What are the prime factors? I see three standouts. One is thegrowing confidence in long-term gas supply from virtually allindustry participants. The second is the corresponding worldwiderecognition that natural gas has many contributions to make insolving environmental and energy security concerns. Third, andpossibly most important, is that the gas industry's place ofbusiness is moving away from Washington--away from thedebilitating legislative and regulatory intrusions of the pasttoward the more constructive arena where the normal challengesfaced by buyers and sellers are of paramount importance.In short, the gas industry is moving from the public policyplayground to the marketplace battleground. And, while there isreal competition on both the playground and the battleground, thebattleground is for real!In 1990, the natural gas industry will be characterized by:continued growth in supply and demand; competitive prices forconsumers, that are responsive enough to provide economicincentives for producers; and further confirmation of the crucialrole natural gas will have in solving environmental concerns.Of equal significance is the increased awareness by customers andpublic policymakers alike of the benefits of the three marketapplications AGA has been beating the drum for during the past 10years--natural gas vehicles, natural gas cooling and the high-efficiency electricity generation options of cogeneration,combined-cycle turbines and co-firing of gas with coal.Since this is my last submission as president of AGA to TheEnergy Daily's New Year's Day issue, I want to close with a fewbasic principles, which we at AGA have pretty well lived by.First, get in mind the basic long-term message you hope to conveyand, while flexibility is fine, don't deviate too far from it asthe years go by. History may well confirm your perspicacity.Second, hire people who will make sure you are right. Andfinally, "illegitimus non tatum carborunden!"George Lawrence is president of the American Gas Association.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990KENNETH CARRThe last decade of the twentieth century provides a challenge tothe nuclear industry and those of us who regulate it. Brieflystated, the challenge involves the question of whether it is timeto call the undertaker or whether an ailing industry is about tomake a rebound. The answer rests squarely with those who operatethe plants and manage the companies.If nuclear recovery is to occur, what 1990 brings will beimportant. In reflecting on expectations for the coming year, Ias an optimist see the following: *  Industry will develop a standard for the maintenance ofnuclear power plants that will involve the whole plant, both thenuclear and non-nuclear sides. *  The improved performance of today's operating plants willcontinue. This will result from the industry's efforts toincrease management attention on the safety of operation and theemphasis on training of the people who operate and maintain theplants. *  The NRC will continue to press for progress on defining theissues which are important to considering plant aging and licenserenewal. We must give the industry early guidance so that it canmake decisions in an area which is key to continuity of supplyfor nearly 20 percent of the U.S. electricity. *  Continued progress will be made in the low level waste sitingprocess. *  Much dual regulation will be eliminated as a result of thecombined efforts of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, theEnvironmental Protection Agency, the Department of Energy and theDepartment of Health and Human Services. No one questions thatthe comprehensive regulatory program of the NRC has kept publicexposure and public risk to harmless levels. Duplication ofregulation is a burden on everyone's resources. *  Legislation to convert the NRC into an agency headed by asingle administrator will not be enacted. The NRC is functioning,nuclear plant performance is improving. "If it ain't broke--don'tfix it."For 1990, continued commitment to operational safety, as well asadvances in technology, are the keys to the future of safe,economical nuclear energy.Kenneth Carr is chairman of the U.S. Nuclear RegulatoryCommission.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990DAVID BARDINAn epidemic of tiny, one-seat, solar powered vehicles, importedfrom Switzerland, will infect Aspen and Los Angeles. APPA willfavor a larger, dual-power version with both solar panels and aplug-in battery. Methanol advocates will demand dedicated lanesfor alternative-fuels cars to "level the playing field."Governor Cuomo will advocate removing the Yucca Mountain Projectto Manhattan, or Long Island or the Adirondacks.Governor Sununu will urge a read-my-lips carbon emissions controlresearch surcharge.EPA Administrator Reilly will convince the Clean Air Coalition tosupport "just enough" nuclear power to decelerate greenhousewarming. Gus Speth will persuade Secretary Watkins to start along-term study to determine how much is just enough.The SEC, by a bare majority, will tentatively permit acquisitionof EPRI by AEP. NARUC will ask ChairmEn Johnston and Dingell fora surgical PUHCA amendment to block the deal. The country'slargest combination utility will make a friendly bid to take overGRI.President Bush will bless new Soviet natural gas exports, whileproposing petroleum investments by western oil companies inEastern Europe.As U.S. oil imports rise, Trade Representative Hills willencourage coal-mine, uranium-mine and hydroelectric-siteacquisitions by major European and Japanese investors.David Bardin is an energy attorney with Arent, Fox, Kintner,Plotkin & Kahn.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990MARC GOLDSMITHElectric demand and sales will fall: *  AGA will claim it's the result of their gas marketing effortsand improved penetration of gas appliances. *  Regulators will say it's the result of least-cost energyplanning. *  Electric utilities will attribute the reductions to demand-side management. *  Utility CEOs will breath a sigh of relief and defer theconstruction of anything. *  Developers of independent power projects will claim it's anaberration. *  Congress will take credit for single-handedly reducing acidrain. *  OPEC will smile as oil sales go up. *  Alternate energy sales and municipal solid waste trash-to-energy plants will be put on hold. *  John Sillin and John Siegel will claim that their modelworks. *  Amory Lovins will promote nega-something as the cause andsay, "I told you so in 1968." *  EPRI will claim credit based on new technology and higherelectric efficiency. *  GRI will attribute the decline to new gas cooling technology. *  Economists will claim it's the economy. *  The Energy Daily will send Kennedy Maize and John Egan tofind the cause. *  Others will go searching yet again to show that no linkageexists between energy and GNP.As our crystal ball has run out of juice, we must end ourconjecture with thanks for the year gone by and wishes to all fora prosperous New Year.Marc Goldsmith is president of Energy Research Group in Waltham,Massachusetts.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990PAUL PARSHLEYLike a moth being drawn to a flame, I can't resist the temptationto make some 1990 predictions for the electric utility industry.So, look for the following in the year to come: *  For the first time in almost a decade, Long Island LightingCompany will rejoin the ranks of solid investment gradeutilities, as efforts by the Department of Energy and others toforestall the decommissioning of the Shoreham nuclear plant proveincreasingly irrelevant to continued improvement in the company'sfinancial health. *  PSNH will emerge from bankruptcy as a subsidiary of NortheastUtilities sometime next summer. At that time, PSNH will have thecredit quality characteristics of a very solid investment gradeelectric utility, probably in the High-BBB/Low-A range. From thestandpoint of dramatic credit quality improvement, PSNH will bethe Lilco of 1990. The Seabrook Joint Owners are overlyoptimistic in their expectation that Seabrook will entercommercial operation in March or April, 1990; a fourth quarteronline date seems more likely. *  Midland and (possibly) Zimmer, two failed nuclear projects,will begin operation as fossil-fueled power plants. *  There will be two or three unplanned and prolonged nuclearplant outages beginning in 1990 and extending for at least twelvemonths. *  Strict acid rain legislation will be passed by the Congressand signed into law by the President by the fall of 1990. Thelegislation will impose significant costs on certain utilitiesduring the next five years. *  In response to recent failures in utility diversification,the regulatory pendulum in many states will begin swinging backin the direction of more oversight and control of utilitydecisions to restructure and diversify. *  The future role of Independent Power Producers in helping tomeet the nation's next increment of electric power demand willbecome more clearly defined. *  Finally, and most assuredly, during 1990 The Energy Dailysubscription price will grow by a larger percentage than thenational demand for electric power.Paul Parshley is a senior vice president at Shearson LehmanHutton in New York.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990JOHN SILLINOver the course of the 1980s much has happened. Below are myobservations with regard to several significant issues.1. Regarding the outlook for power shortages: "Where there'ssmoke, there's fire."2. Regarding the appropriate level of utility regulation: "Thegovernment that governs best governs least."3. Regarding the relative merits of utility diversification: "Irefer the reader to the fable of the race between the tortoiseand the hare."4. Regarding the purported need for amendments to the Clean AirAct: "Don't confuse me with the facts, I've already made up mymind."5. Regarding the relative merits of QFs: "Never in the history ofman has so little been made to sound like so much, been made tocost so much."6. Regarding the utility industry's stance on PUHCA reform: "Ahouse divided cannot stand."7. Regarding energy forecasters' inherent desire to foreverextrapolate upward oil prices: "What goes up must come down."8. Regarding the much frequently cited demise of the nuclearpower industry: "The opera's not over until the fat lady sings."9. Regarding the huffing and puffing in Washington over nationalenergy strategy and subsidiary policy issues: "Much ado aboutnothing."10. Regarding proposals to mandate open transmission access:"What's mine is mine and what's yours is mine too."11. Regarding trying to understand Governor Cuomo's and the NewYork PSC's position on Shoreham: "The reader is referred to Alicein Wonderland."12. Regarding the often cited end of the natural gas bubble:"Don't energy forecasters know the difference between a tunneland a bubble?"13. Regarding failure to take these observations to heart: "Thosewho ignore the lessons of history are condemned to repeat them."John Sillin is a consultant based in Management AnalysisCompany's Washington office.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990WILLIAM McCOLLAMAs I complete my stint as EEI's president and turn the reins overto Tom Kuhn in May, I can't help but look back over the 12 yearsI have been in Washington and note the dramatic changes that havetaken place in the electric utility industry during this period.But one thing that has not changed is the importance of anadequate, reliable and secure electric power supply to theeconomic growth and prosperity of our country.I am constantly struck by the increasing globalization of theeconomy and the need for American industry to remain healthy andcompetitive in this new economic climate. Electricity's role inmaking that possible is more important than ever. Further, as westruggle to improve our environment, we must continue to keep inmind the urgent need to prudently balance costs and benefits inorder that we remain competitive internationally.The issues we are facing today are indeed difficult, but notunmanageable. We are entering an era where it will be incumbentupon us to make this nation realize that electricity and ahealthy environment are synonymous. Electricity is the fuel ofchoice to attain that healthy environment. Our local electriccompanies will generate or purchase from independent producers astheir individual circumstances dictate. The automation andresulting efficiencies realized in the 1990s will be astounding.And it will be our greatest challenge to see that this comes topass. Graham Greene wrote in  The Power and the Glory  that"there is always one moment in childhood when the door opens andlets the future in." Our industry is still in its youth, and Ipredict that in the 1990s we will help open that door for thisnation and let the future in.William McCollam, Jr. is president of the Edison ElectricInstitute.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990DENNY ELLERMANThis is the year in which, we are told, coal's fate will be castafter a decade of stonewalling on acid rain. But, of course, acidrain controls are only the beginning. To forestall globalwarming, we must do still more and even more quickly. Can anyonehold out much hope for coal? Only those who take heart from theLittle Engine That Could.A. Denny Ellerman is a vice president in the Washington office ofCharles River Associates.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990DAVID MOSKOVITZNineteen ninety will bring dramatic changes to not only thenation's energy policy, but our actual resolve to actconsistently with the energy policy. Among the highlights will bethe following: *  The long awaited energy strategy will call upon the nation'selectric utilities to start investing heavily in coal and nuclearpower plants. *  The strategy will call for federal preemption of all stateregulation and will specify that all new power plant constructionis per se prudent. *  Energy efficiency and energy conservation will be branded associalistic concepts that belong more properly in hard-lineeastern bloc countries (if any remain). Amory Lovins will becomethe energy czar for the newly formed Federation of DemocraticEastern European Republics. *  Shoreham and Seabrook will commence commercial operation, andboth plants will be transferred to a new federal agency, NuclearOperation (NO), that will take over the previous responsibilitiesof the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The agency will be headedby a single commissioner, Peter Bradford. *  The Committee for Energy Awareness and the Edison ElectricInstitute will become full dues-paying members of NARUC. *  A memorandum from chief of staff John Sununu to other cabinetmembers explaining why global warming is good for the UnitedStates, will be leaked to The Energy Daily. *  To everyone's surprise, the Transmission Task Force will notmerely gather dust; the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission(FERC) will act boldly, initiating reform at every possibleopportunity, and will even follow in the footsteps of the FederalCommunications Commission and the Civil Aviation Board,suggesting structural reform as a cure to the thorny transmissionissues facing the electric utility industry. *  The FERC will undertake to promulgate stringent newtransmission access and pricing policies. Under these policies,any utility will be permitted to do anything they like,notwithstanding any other fact or consideration. *  Public Service of New Hampshire will ask the FERC forpermission to place toll booths on the major north-southtransmission corridors. Two hundred utilities and other interestgroups will intervene opposing the tariff. It will be approvedwithout a hearing. *  Llewellyn King will slash the amount of space in The EnergyDaily dedicated to advertising The Energy Daily conferences toone quarter of the annual column inches. The result will be adoubling of attendance.David Moskovitz is a energy and regulatory consultant in Alna,Maine.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990JOHN ANDERSONWe have just ushered in a new decade, one I believe thatelectricity consumers will characterize later as the decade ofclean air and increased competition. With luck, these two termswill not be mutually exclusive.The generation side of the electric utility industry is morecompetitive now than it was in the past. Cogenerators nowrepresent nearly 4 percent of all generation and utilities havetripled their construction of generation out of rate-base.Meanwhile, independent power generators (IPPs) are being built,although at a slow pace; cities and other public power utilitiesare shopping for lower-cost power sources; and states arecarefully analyzing bidding and transmission as means to achieveends difficult to reach with regulation.In addition, transmission no longer is a dirty word. However, itis still used to protect utility generators from realcompetition. Thus, inefficiencies and cross-class subsidiesremain.The electric utility industry in the 1990s will follow thelessons learned in the natural gas industry in the 1980s. Trulyindependent generators will compete with utilities for the rightto build new generators. The winners of this competition will beboth efficient utilities and non-utilities regardless of anychanges to PUHCA.Transmission will be recognized as a monopoly and a bottleneckfacility. In fact, nondiscriminatory transmission access at cost-based rates will be required as a condition of utilityparticipation in the market.Shortly stated, utilities that attempt to protect themselves fromcompetition will suffer lost load and profitability.Unfortunately, the march down the competitive path may well becharacterized as one of fits and starts along a circuitous route.Specifically, FERC will not address issues in a generic way.Rather, major decisions will be made piecemeal through individualcases. This will require interested parties to intervene in manycases to attempt to shape generic policy, and while the outcomelooks positive, the process will be expensive and time consuming.The dark cloud still looming over the industry from 1989 isconsumers' concerns regarding the cost impacts of clean airlegislation. For the first time, we have a Republican presidentpushing hard for environmental legislation. The Democrats cannotbe viewed as obstacles. To me, this means legislation will bepassed, probably just before Congress adjourns for the 1990elections.The resulting impacts may be substantial. Rates could beincreased 20 to 30 percent, or more.The irony is that clean air legislation may more than offsetefficiency gains caused by increased competition. Indeed, suchlegislation has the potential to eliminate the ability of non-utility entities to build electric generators. Clean airlegislation such as the Senate bill (S. 1630) or the House bill(H.R. 3030) also will be the most important energy policylegislation we've seen in a decade. It may even eclipse the DOE'sNational Energy Strategy.John Anderson is executive director of the Electricity ConsumersResource Council (Elcon).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1990THE LAST WORD...JAMES WATKINSAs we begin the last decade of the twentieth century, once againwe find ourselves at the crossroads of history. The energy crisisof the 1970s made it clear to everyone that energy affectsvirtually every aspect of American life: investment policy,technology research and development, international trade, prices,transportation, defense, agriculture and the environment. Theenergy crisis alerted us to our burgeoning energy needs and thecountry responded with a myriad of innovative solutions rangingfrom energy conservation to development of alternative energysources. Unless we make further progress, the energy problems oftomorrow will be every bit as serious as those of yesterday. *  Domestic U.S. oil production for the first six months of 1989was at its lowest point in 25 years. Meanwhile, oil importsaveraged 7.8 million barrels per day, a level 65 percent higherthan in 1985. Only in the late 1970s did we import more oil. *  As a result, total imports exceeded domestic crude oilproduction for the first half of 1989. Only in the first half of1977 has this occurred before. *  Environmental concerns are putting new pressures on ourability to use our most abundant domestic fuel, which is coal. *  Electricity reserve margins are shrinking across the country.Voltage reductions have already been required this summer in theNortheast. Meanwhile, New York State officials are abandoning acompleted, safe nuclear power plant.To ensure abundant, environmentally-safe and affordable energyfor America's future, we need something the United States hasnever had before: a national energy strategy. The time to devisea National Energy Strategy is now, not while we are in the midstof the next energy crisis. That is why in July 1989, PresidentBush directed me to devise a National Energy Strategy (NES) byDecember 1990.Energy conservation will continue to be a hot issue in 1990. Ourability to conserve energy resources is nearly as unlimited ashuman ingenuity. Since 1973, our economy has grown by 45 percentbut our energy usage has only slightly increased. In 1990,producers of everything from toasters to industrial machinerywill develop more energy efficient products. And utilities willincreasingly sponsor programs to reduce energy demands,especially during peak periods of usage.Coal will continue to be a vital source of energy. With more than30 percent of the world's coal reserves, about 56 percent of U.S.electricity is now generated from coal. But the demand for coal-produced energy comes at a time when greater attention is beingpaid to the integrity of our environment.In 1990, advances will be made in technologies for burning coalcleanly. By 1992, DOE will have spent some $5 billion to fund 50to 75 "showcase" projects, each demonstrating a means of burningcoal more efficiently and cleanly, as efforts increase to replacethe vintage-1960 "scrubbers."We can look forward to incremental improvements in the efficiencyand cost effectiveness of such alternative sources of energy aswind power and photovoltaics. New sources, such as trees andgrass, will be found for ethanol production. Finally, in theyears ahead we will increasingly see nuclear power as a source ofclean, safe and affordable energy.Finally, since I came to DOE, I have given health and safetyconcerns top priority. In 1990, it is my hope that like neverbefore we will see a greater emphasis in the energy industry onhealth and safety concerns.James Watkins is the Secretary of Energy.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-17IA059-000325-B003-131http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey93.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231203 text/html 153831HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:09:01 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:30 GMTContent-length: 153643Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey93.html Sample Issue Copyright ENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WELCOME TO 1996 (661 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW GAS SECURITY AND GENERAL WINTER (2420 words) ENTER THE MIDDLE KINGDOM (2657 words) BOOM NPS GOES BOOM (2741 words) CONFUCIUS, HE SAY... (2075 words) HUNGARY'S MOL SUFFERS A DOWNGRADE FROM DEBTS (1816 words) BRITISH GAS AND A HOTEL IN ROTHERHITHE (1676 words) ENERGY MARKET REPORT: CRUDE OIL & PRODUCTS (4161 words) ENERGY MARKET REPORT: NATURAL GAS (1267 words) ENERGY MARKET REPORT: COAL (1317 words) ENERGY MARKET REPORT: ELECTRICITY (1834 words) EDITOR'S EXAGGERATION (110 words) NEWS TURKEY TO INCREASE POWER GENERATING CAPACITY (60 words) NORWAY'S OIL OUTPUT HITS RECORD (43 words) CHINA'S HAINAN ISLAND GAS (79 words) SYRIA TO AMEND CURRENCY REGULATIONS (63 words) VIETNAM'S REFINERY PROJECT BACK ON TRACT (73 words) SOUTH AFRICA TO INTRODUCE UNLEADED PETROL (62 words) YEMEN APPROVES GAS DEAL WITH TOTAL (42 words) PANHANDLE EASTERN CHANGES NAME (73 words) SENSITIVE MATERIAL ABOUT THE KUWAITI OIL INDUSTRY (69 words) POLAND SEEKING POSTPONEMENT OF LIBERALISED FUEL IMPORTS (64 words) 90% OF LUKOIL'S SUBSIDIARY SHARES CONSOLIDATED (32 words) NIGERIA SIGNS MOU WITH CHINA (66 words) VENEZUELA'S PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICITY SECTOR (78 words) BP TO REDUCE REFINING CAPACITY (66 words) DABHOL DEAL AGREED (76 words) DR ROBERT MABRO AWARDED CBE (34 words) SURVEY OF UK CONSUMERS (36 words) ACCIDENT AT MONJU FAST BREEDER REACTOR (56 words) INTERSOLAR AWARDED CONTRACT BY WORLD BANK (55 words) G7 COUNTRIES SIGN MOU WITH THE UKRAINE (49 words) EXPLORATORY WELLS IN CHINA'S TARIM BASIN (62 words) CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WELCOME TO 1996The year has not exactly started well. Like the Spanish border guardwho reportedly played Russian roulette with four bullets in hisrevolver, last week, the world seems to have an unerring capacity forfoolish mistakes. Gone, for example are the happy days when anybodycould make cheerful assumptions about Russia and oil investment there.Christopher Warren, the US Secretary of State, may well warn BorisYeltsin that if any more Russian liberals are thrown out of government,the west will take its ball away and play elsewhere. However this isabout as effective as telling a hippopotamus that it has bad breath.Meanwhile, China throws a spanner in the rising prosperity of thePacific Rim by suggesting that it is not impossible that it will startto bombard Taiwan with rockets for 30 days if the Taiwan President LeeTeng-hui wins his election in March. Such warnings have to be takenseriously, but it is a tribute to the mentality of the Chineseleadership that they seem fully prepared to give the entire region sucha shock merely to assert their right to a "province" now infinitelymore prosperous than the mainland.In Japan, Shigeo Hishimura, the chief investigator into the accident atthe Monju fast breeder reactor, commits suicide by jumping out of hishotel window. Aside from the fear amongst the Japanese that this willtrigger off a sudden rash of suicides amongst middle management, hisreasons were interesting. He was apparently worried that his reportmight not be fair and that it would have a negative effect on hiscolleagues. The 280 MW reactor lost three tonnes of sodium coolant,management did not shut down the reactor for 15 minutes afterdiscovering the leak and then promptly covered up the seriousness ofthe accident. It seems there was rather a lot to be unfair about.Finally, in Europe, it has become so obvious that European monetaryunion is going to be postponed that even Chancellor Kohl will have tonotice it eventually. With characteristic fastidiousness, the centralbankers have made the conditions of entry so ferocious that no countryin Europe can afford to join! As it is, the French and Germans arediving so fast into recession the last thing they need is theludicrously named Euro. Just wait for all those banner headlines: Euro-Over!So what should the conscientious energy observer expect from this year,which is - incidentally - the 100th anniversary of the first fatal caraccident? (The judge apparently said that he hoped there would never beanother one.) First and foremost all the runes point to a deal withIraq and its re-entry to part of its market. The Kuwaitis, the Saudisand even the Syrians seem to feel that enough is enough and want theIraqis to be able to sell $2 billion-worth of oil under UN supervision.Secondly, there is likely to be more trouble in the Caucasus, withconsiderable implications for the future of the Caspian. The warbetween Russia and the Chechens is certainly not over. Equally therewas a certain symbolism about the suggestion that the Chechensupporters should blow up their Russian ferry in the Bosporus. Thethreat of a tanker accident there has been pre-occupying the Turks forsome time, not least if the output of the Caspian region throughNovorossiysk starts to grow substantially. A fault line between Russiaand Turkey has appeared since the Soviet Union collapsed. Theactivities of the Chechens can only make it bigger.Finally of course, neither of the above is really going to have muchimpact on energy prices, generally. Some Australian operators of aradio telescope, who scanned the stars for intelligent life in theuniverse, thought they had got lucky last month. Unhappily, the steadyrhythmic pulse, present every evening between 6 and 9 pm turned out tobe the microwave ovens in the nearest towns. Oh well.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GAS SECURITY AND GENERAL WINTEREnergy security conjures up images of war: petrol rationing in Britainduring the Suez Crisis; gas station queues in the US during the YomKipper War; American, British and French warships on tanker protectionduty in the Gulf to prevent Iran from literally or metaphoricallyclosing the strait of Hormuz. But as Tsar Nicholas the First indicated,perhaps the real issue is quite another power altogether, the might ofgenerals January and February.The International Energy Agency, in a massive new tome on natural gassecurity, certainly fears political disruptions with regard to naturalgas supplies to Europe -but shares the Tsar's views with regard tolikely causes of gas supply disruption in North America.In many ways, the IEA's analyses of Canada's experience during thebitter winter of 1992/3 and of the US' East Coast whiteouts a yearlater constitute one of the work's most interesting facets; anexperience which by all accounts is currently being repeated right now. There were production, transportation and contractual difficulties.Yet while prices soared, production also rose. But there were failuresof wells to produce at anticipated levels, "due to lack of systemictesting and cost saving measures taken during the preceding surplusperiod; there were "freeze-offs'' in which ice restricted gas flows atthe well head, prompting a six per cent cutback in natural gas outputin late December and early January compared to record output levelsreached at the start of December.But overall, the system responded well. Somehow the producers managedto extract an extra 10 Bcm to meet demand (which the IEA compares to atotal demand figure for the whole of 1992 of 110 Bcm), even thoughtightness in the supply/demand balance "was reflected in sharpincreases and volatility in short term gas prices, from a level ofaround $1 per gigajoule one year earlier, short term gas prices went ashigh as $4.50 per gigajoule during the winter of 1992-93." Whilst theresome problems with initial deliverability by producers, the IEA notedthat even the number of wellhead "freeze-offs" was not out of theordinary and, perhaps most important of all, "there were no significantoutages on the transmission system."Where the Canadians did suffer a problem was over the issue oflinepack, the amount of gas physically maintained in the in thepipeline system. Normally, the pipeline's customers balance theirdeliveries into the system and their extractions from it once a month.So long as the brief input or output shortfalls of the gas companiesare in rough balance, the system works fine. But during the winterfreeze, a number of shippers found they faced problems over theirdeliveries into the system -but continued to make withdrawals from thesystem. This practice, known as drafting, ran the risk of reducing thelinepack below acceptable levels.Pipeline operators, who needed to maintain linepack at safe levels,responded by requiring other shippers to increase their deliveries intothe system and by imposing pro rata cuts on the amount that allshippers could take out of it. One operator insisted that as fromDecember 1, each shipper should balance his input and output on a dailybasis, a move widely supported by the gas industry but which posedconsiderable difficulty for some individual shippers.Contractual problems, triggered by sudden changes in market prices andinadequate transportation arrangements were exacerbated by the factthat gas may change ownership five or six times between wellhead andfinal consumption. Naturally, there was a tendency for some producersto try to earn as much from booming spot market as they could,sometimes reallocating gas to the spot markets that was supposed to beearmarked for longer term contracts - a practice which became known asprice majeure.Perhaps it is because the IEA is headquartered in Paris that itsconclusion on this point was stated in the following terms: "The riskof price majeure underscores the importance of good contractingpractices, particularly if the contract includes a fixed price over anextended period when price volatility may be experienced. The fact thatprice majeure may occur illustrates the difference between contractingculture in North America and in Europe, where such a phenomenon hashardly been conceivable." (Or at least not yet: Ed)The way in which in Canada tackled its gas problems in the winter of1992/93 and the US experience in tackling the cold snap during the weekof January 16-22, 1994 are detailed, and thus reveal some interestingcomparisons. The IEA considered that "these systems perform very wellunder stress and that the entire gas industry works very well togetherespecially when the image of gas in the public opinion is at stake."Canada witnessed a curtailment of deliveries to some customers withseveral suppliers determining that "there was often no financialpenalty for failing to deliver nominated volumes under long-term,reserve-based contracts with supply aggregates." But most producers andmarketers sought out alternate supplies to maintain gas flows ratherthan curtail buyers. There was a common belief that failure to deliversupplies, even under force majeure, could jeopardise a seller'sreputation.The use of drafting was widespread before the system of daily balanceswas introduced and is still available option to buy time to resolverelatively small or isolated supply disruptions. But in the Canadianfreeze it was the spot market that was the most commonly used option tomaintain gas deliveries. Because there are four different options forspot gas purchases - in the field, upstream at storage sites, atregular delivery points and inventory transfers from shippers willingto put more gas into the system than they need to withdraw - the IEAconcludes that "spot gas is almost always available as an alternativesource of supply, but sometimes only at a very high price." It notesthat many producers and marketers incurred large financial losses bypurchasing higher priced spot gas to maintain deliveries under lowerpriced contracts. Gas swaps and loans, which suppliers in westernCanada used to import US gas to meet peak demand, also proved helpful.But the IEA notes that unless these have been arranged in advance "theycan take two or three days to organise and in a volatile market, pricescan swing widely, suddenly undermining the economics of sucharrangements."The following year, severe ice storms followed by bitter cold in NewEngland and down the Atlantic coast prompted disruption of natural gassupplies, along with transmission of electricity and distribution ofpropane, kerosene and fuel oil. Yet gas demand soared to record levels,with most suppliers witnessing demand levels that were around eight percent above any previous peak. The cold did not hamper production, whichalso reached new records. Imports also rose to record levels and allavailable storage was optimised. The Canadians helped considerably.Capacity on the Iroquois pipeline, normally maintained at 670 mcf/d wasupped by a further 140 mcf/d by the abnormal practice of operating allits compressors. At the same time, local distribution companies inEastern Canada funneled additional supplies into system. Algeriashipped an extra tanker load of LNG to Boston's Distrigas, which notonly helped to meet peak demand but also to maintain the systemintegrity of both the Iroquois and Tennessee Gas pipelines.But while the system generally worked well, there were still somelessons to be learned. The different parts of the gas industry mighthave communicated well with each other, but "information to the public,especially in the beginning, was deficient in both timing and content "Better cooperation with electric utilities was required to make themaware of the impact which rotating blackouts could have on crucial gasfacilities. The IEA cites the US Department of Energy's conclusion thatin some cases the industry should consider replacing electricallyoperated compressors with natural gas fuelled compressors.The IEA report argues that although US gas demand is set to growsteadily - from 17.4 Quads (614 Bcm) to 23.9 Quads (843 Bcm) in 2010according to a 1994 study by the Gas Research Institute - the manner inwhich the US gas industry has completed pipeline expansion projects andhas prepared plans for further such schemes and for increased storage"show the willingness of the industry to undertake the investment inthe new facilities needed to serve future load growth." Ultimately,however, it comes to no firm conclusion as to whether the NorthAmerican systems can truly cope with sustained disruptions. On the onehand it notes that the US and Canadian experiences have led the gascompanies to offer new services to reduce the strain during shortfallsand to reduce the possibility of shortfalls, whilst on the other itsays that "since both the United States and Canada have recently gonethrough a period of gas surplus, the performance of their gasdeliverability systems may not necessarily be representative of afuture situation." In this regard, the experiences of the US LDCsduring the January 1996 ice storms are awaited with great interest.What lessons can Europe, or Japan, learn from the IEA's great tome?Whilst Generals January and February may routinely focus theirattention on North America (with occasional glances at Scotland, wherethis piece is being written), their role in Russia, so great insecuring Napoleon's retreat, is currently seen by the IEA in Napoleon'scapital as quite definitely subordinate to old-fashioned politicaldisruptions.In OECD Europe, the IEA considers the potential consequences of adisruption of both Russian and Algerian supplies at the same time. Andalthough the report specifically declines to comment on "either thelikelihood or precise cause of incidents leading to an interruption ofsupplies" it does make the point that a political disruption representsthe risk with the greatest consequences." However, in a further effortto stress the theoretical nature of the exercise, the IEA report alsoincludes a summary of a separate IEA study which concluded that neitherRussia nor Algeria had an interest, whether economic or political, indisrupting gas supplies to Europe. But the IEA Natural Gas SecurityStudy does consider the possibility that such disruptions might occuras the result of a breakdown in relations between Russia and thetransit countries of the former Soviet Union or as a consequence of aworsening political climate within Algeria. It also considers that adisruption in Russia would provide an incentive for Algeria to maximiseoutput, and vice-versa.The IEA's approach with regard to Europe is to consider the impact ofsuch disruptions on a country-by-country basis since each countrydiffers from its neighbour in terms of both supply and demandflexibility. Thus Austria, which gains almost three quarters of its gasfrom Russia, is particularly vulnerable to supply disruptions, as isSpain, which gets 53 per cent of its gas from Algeria (and a further 28per cent from Libya). Turkey, however, is the most vulnerable OECDcountry, since it imports no less than 96 per cent of its gas fromRussia, although it intends to diversify substantially over the next 15years. Overall, simultaneous supply disruptions affecting both Algerianand Russian gas exports to Europe would affect 31 per cent of OECDEurope demand, though nine countries would suffer at least 50 per centsupply losses. That is one consequence of Europe's reliance "on acomparatively small number of large transportation facilities anddependence on a small number of outside suppliers."In producing its report, the IEA's gas team, which collaborated with avariety of other international institutions, plainly saw its role asbeing largely to collate and to summarise a host of data concerningboth the structure of international gas markets, the consequences ofspecific disruptions, and the approaches being taken in various partsof the world to adapt to changing conditions. It then buttressed thiswealth of information with a host of annexes detailing the specificissues confronting the 23 member countries of the IEA, a cluster offormer communist nations in eastern and central Europe and more than adozen of the world's major gas producers. For some of the 44 countriesstudied, the emphasis is on their vulnerability to specificdisruptions; with others, it is their role in contributing to suchdisruptions or in helping to resolve them that is tackled. It is thuson the basis of the collective experience of a host of disparatecountries that the IEA team are able to base their broader conclusions.In sum, for OECD Europe, the study considers that "most countries couldcontinue to supply their core customers for any months, in some casesindefinitely, in the event of a total disruption in deliveries fromtheir single largest non-OECD suppliers." There is spare importcapacity that can be utilised by other suppliers whilst use can be madeof fuel-switching, notably to heavy fuel oil. But countries withcomparatively new and small gas markets would fare badly in the eventof a sustained disruption. and therefore need to diversify supplysources and boost storage facilities. For Japan, the issue concernssecurity of its LNG imports. The IEA's conclusion is striking."Reliance is placed on long term contracts with several stablesuppliers" and these "arrangements have served Japan well and no short-term security problems have been encountered."But then there is North America, home to the most advanced anddiversified supply structure. In this era of reported global warming,is perhaps instructive to consider whether it is extremes of weather,rather than a single trend, that should be considered. Certainly the USDepartment of Energy, in a conclusion reiterated by the IEA, noted thatin the 1994 US crisis some local distribution companies found thattheir programmes for dealing with conditions on specific days - so-called design day capabilities - were exceeded more than once in thesame week. The IEA notes: "The fact that an LDC has exceeded its 25-year design day in more than one cold spell in the past few years mayindicate that weather norms have changed and that design-day criteriamay need to be re-examined." In layman's language, this means that theNorth American gas industry should think about revamping its emergencyplans since Generals January and February cannot be expected to playthe weather game by predictable rules. John Roberts.The IEA Natural Gas Security Study, pp. 564. IEA/OECD PublicationsService; 2 , rue Andre Pascal, 75775 PARIS CEDEX 16, France.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENTER THE MIDDLE KINGDOMThe fact of China's exponential economic growth cannot be denied. Thewires are simply too full of it. Apparently the Chinese are installing40,000 new telephones every day. There are 3.63 million mobiletelephone users already. Shanghai, according to Premier Li Peng, isgoing to be one of the world's business hubs for both aviation andshipping by 2010. By roughly the same time China's car-making industrywill apparently be a "pillar industry" according to the Ministry ofMachine Building Industry with an output worth over Yuan 1 trillion($120.5 billion). By 1997 China will have eight car-makers, which willbe encouraged to form into regional conglomerates and the Chinesegovernment will invest Yuan 100 billion to make sure this happens.Yet if you look underneath this barrage of apparently good news, thepicture is not quite so pretty. In relation to the telephones, thereare now 4.7 telephones for every hundred households. By 2000,sufficient progress should have been made to have one household in tenwired up for gossip, but naturally this is an average and the urbanareas will have 30-40 telephones per hundred households. The ruralareas will still require a pretty long walk to call the doctor. Thisinvestment level is now slowing down.It is easy enough to be critical but China is country with a great manypeople in it. Statistics tend to reflect the sheer size of the task inhand. Yet this is not the main point. The unhappy fact is that China'sexplosive economic growth has not yet solved its fundamental dilemma:How does it sustain such a level of modernisation and growth, whilestill wrapped up in the elderly and aging structures of Mao's greatrevolution?Take for example Li Peng's splendid ode in early January to the futureof Shanghai; a city now bursting at the seams with migrant workers andin the middle of building boom that is trashing rare local agriculturalland. (Losses of Chinese agricultural land to urban uses are expectedto be from 3-6 million hectares in this decade, by the Chinese Academyof Sciences. This is around 3-6 per cent of the total in 1990.)Shanghai's existing airport handled 11 million passengers in 1996 andsimply cannot take any more, so a new one is to be built in the Pudangarea by 2000. Equally, the new port facility will be at the deep-waterport at Beilun. The new Shanghai maritime and aviation will also be aworld-class insurance capital as well as a financial and trading one,with huge container networks.There is naturally nothing wrong with planning this expansion. Any cityfather would be a fool not to do so. Yet Li rather put the wholeexercise in doubt when he said during a visit there that "the centreshould not be profit-making, but should aim to supply high qualityservices and cut transport costs." That is the trouble with China. Theleadership does not seem to understand what is happening. After all,what other government would seek simultaneously to build Shanghai intoa world financial, insurance and trading centre, while abruptlyannouncing that it intends to censure all foreign sources of economicnews? There has to be screw lose somewhere in this machine!The ban on external economic information would be funny, if it did notso accurately reflect the paranoia in the Chinese leadership. Beijingcited "national security" and ordered all foreign information providersin China to submit their work to the Communist Party's Xinhua newsagency for distribution. What is so amusing about this is the Xinhuaagency has a well-deserved reputation for the chronic inaccuracy ineconomic matters. One broker, contacted by Reuters, responded to the -no doubt - excited reporter, by saying that the ban would be helpfulsince it would cut down the amount of garbled nonsense coming out ofChina anyway!This is just a little too cynical. In practice China is already full offax machines as the dissident movement, led from Hong Kong, alreadyknows. Attempts - Ayatollah style - to clamp down on satellite disheshave been a failure. Hong Kong is certainly no slouch on the internethaving at least 40 web sites accessible from China's increasingpopulation of computers. Two days after the announcement of thecrackdown, the Xinhua Agency at least clarified the rather ambiguousannouncement by saying that they would merely monitor the informationflow simultaneously with transmission. They would not slow downtransmission.However even so, the "crackdown" on foreign information will mean agreater ability for the Chinese government to prevent the Chinese fromhearing what is going on in China, while mutis mutandi reducing theflow outwards if news agency's utter a rude word about China. Thechosen offenses are "slander of China" and "jeopardising China'seconomic interests". Needless to say, the news of the news restrictionwent down rather badly in Hong Kong, where morale is already rather lowin preparation for 1997 and the return to China. And it is the attemptto control economic information that is so surprising.It is to some extent unsurprising, if regrettable, that stories ofdisastrous human rights, or ill-treatment of orphans might require tobe smuggled out of the country. The brother of the woman who revealedthe terrible state of Shanghai's so-called Children's Welfare Institute- where children die from starvation and lack of medical care - has nowapparently been arrested for the crime of being her brother. He couldface the death penalty since it seems he is charged with counter-revolution. It is an extremely risky proposition to be rude aboutsenior Chinese officials or reveal anything much about them toforeigners that sounds derogatory. The Middle Kingdom does not likelosing face and does not like foreigners much anyway.Yet in economic affairs and business matters things are obviouslydifferent. What precisely is "economic slander"? Should this categoryperhaps include the current World Bank report, produced late last yearin association with the China Securities Regulatory Commission. This iscertainly not very flattering on the subject of the Chinesegovernment's intervention, which it says is hampering the developmentof China's capital markets. The main burden of criticism is - guesswhat - the chronic lack of information!According to the study, Chinese capital markets have seen extensive andremarkable growth in the recent past but they are struggling "torealise their fundamental functions  of increasing the efficiency ofresource allocation, aiding the pricing of risks and returns andproviding a vehicle for risk management." In effect, the governmentstill has control over the commanding heights of the economy. This itmaintains by the government credit plan, interest rate controls and thecreation of a environment for state corporations that is entirely freeof any kind of risk. The latter have a cheerful disregard for payingoff loans, while the role of the capital markets generally is to fitinto the governmental credit squeeze.The government exercises this by amusingly abrupt interest ratechanges, which adds hugely to volatility. Equities are paid out throughthe credit quota plans and so are dividends, so the point aboutequities generally is that they are attractive primarily for capitalgains rather than investment income. This means that equities areprimarily a source of speculation, rather than investment. Unhappilythe level of financial disclosure about them is rather inadequate,making the market a dangerous place for speculators. The non-payment ofinterest on bonds, combined with high inflation does the same thing forthe bond market. The Chinese have certainly grasped the essentials ofcapitalism in this regard. The fledgling bond futures market had to beclosed down last year because one major broker tried to corner themarket and the whole sheebang was simply too volatile for comfort, dueto interest rate subsidies. Indeed the Bank suggests that China'ssecondary markets are remarkably sophisticated. However, "the closerone gets to primary markets, the more apparent are the conflicts due tothe controls imposed by the government."If one did not know that the World Bank was always entirely serious andoperating with the best of intentions, it might be suggested that itseems to think it is talking about a communist country! Sure thesecondary markets are a whizzing along, made volatile by the existenceof a credit control system that is decided at the highest reaches ofthe state. Perish the thought, but what an opportunity these marketsgive for a bit of skillful insider dealing. The Chinese are certainlyinventive, but there really would be something truly original about afutures bond market tied neatly to the actions of the Communist Party!Needless to say, the report suggests that the the government shouldreduce the role of credit and investment plans in capital allocation.They want nothing less than the reform of the banks so that they lendon the basis of creditworthiness. And, heaven forfend, they want thestate enterprises to pay their debts.The trouble with this kind of advice is that it hacks at the roots ofthe entire power base of the state, not to mention the local bosses whocontrol the provincial governments and who also control the stateenterprises.To give the Chinese authorities their due, the Ministry of Finance haspromised to improve the liquidity of their bonds in 1996. There hasalso been a significant crackdown on the exchange and futures crime inShanghai, were known fraud has amounted to Yuan 530 million since 1993.Significantly however, insiders on the market wonder whether Shanghai'snew breed of brokers really know when they are breaking the law, notleast because of the rather foggy nature of the regulations.The secondary markets are really a sideshow. China fundamentally hasthree basic problems in its struggle to become a cornerstone of the newworld order. It is short of water. It is short of food and it is shortof oil. In relation to water, the China Meteorological Administrationnow predicts a severe drought for Spring 1996, which has already harmedwinter crops along the lower reaches of Yangtze and elsewhere. Thisneed not necessarily harm agricultural prospects in the immediate term.Last year saw drought also, but the grain harvest grew to a record466.4 million tonnes. The Ministry of Agriculture believe that riceoutput can be increased by 2.5 million tonnes a year for the next fiveyears to give each person in China 150 kg of rice a year. The troubleis that the more affluent the coastal markets become the greater theper capita consumption becomes. The ministry may be optimistic, but inmid-January 23 out of 41 state ministries were told that theirofficials must stop drinking the traditional corn spirits at banquetsto save grain.In relation to oil, the International Energy Agency expect China'simports to increase from 248,044 bd in 1994 to 2.8 mbd by 2010, orroughly the amount produced domestically at present. Supplies willtherefore need to double. Currently the policy debate is split betweeninvesting for domestic self-sufficiency or increasing imports,predominantly from the middle-east. It is too early to say whether thesudden restructuring of UNIPEC, the joint venture between the state oiltrader China National Chemicals Import and Export Corporation(SINOCHEM) and the state refiner China Petroleum Corporation (SINOPEC)is a victory for the domestic path or a victory for import reliance.UNIPEC, responsible for buying 60 per cent of China's imports haddeveloped an impressive array of offices and contracts, which will betrimmed to two - London and "Asia". This could mean nothing more thanan attempt to rationalise the alphabet soup that constitutes Chinesepurchasing companies abroad. Either way, the import route will requireat least $5 billion in oil, port facilities and refinery upgrading forsulphur.On the home front, the Chinese admit to difficulties. Theft of oil fromdomestic production is now regarded as an increasing crime andaccording to SINOPEC cost $120.5 million last year. Output did increasein 1995, but only by a 1.5 per cent. The offshore has been adisappointment and that is where the hard currency oil resides.Onshore, potential improvement is not aided by the slow pace of pricereform. The jewel in the crown may just be the Tarim Basin fields, butunhappily the jewel is rather a long way from the crown; roughly 2,500kilometres. A line would cost a minimum of $10 billion.Mention of oil naturally brings in the geopolitics. While the IEA et alnow regard China's monstrously rapid growth as a key indicator of thefuture of oil prices, China has never really been a player in theinternational oil diplomacy game. If it does not find significant newquantities of oil and gas at home, this has to change. Suddenly Chinaceases to be merely an arms dealer in the Gulf and becomes a player.Whatever happens in this regard, China is most unlikely to regard thewest and Japan as guardian of its interests. It is also unlikely totake much notice of western style worries about human rights. Splitneatly between the twin polls of its domestic development versusimports policy, is the unfortunate problem of the Spratley Islands.The Chinese boundary claim in this regard seems a reassertion of itsancient maritime empire. It includes the Vietnamese field of ThanhLong, the Natuna Sea area of Indonesia and the Saderi fields ofMalaysia as well as the pivotal Spratleys. (At least the Vietnamese hadthe decency to exclude from their ambitions the newly producing Yachengfield off Hainan Island.) It was only as recently as April 1992 thatChina's naval deputy commander, General Zhang Xusan, demand a re-assertion of China's rights in the South China Sea, while China now hasthe third biggest navy in the world and the world's largest submarinefleet of 181 vessels. This may not mean very much, but nobody caneasily dismiss the view that as China gets richer she could not try toassert herself.There is a tendency in the west to think that "the collapse ofcommunism" is inevitable as the Chinese get a great deal richer and theold men die off. Democracy will eventually open up as the economy"makes the transition". Yet the Communist Party did not collapse inChina as it did in the old USSR. Indeed, there is something to be saidfor the view that the attitudes to human rights now apparent in theChinese elite are being strengthened by the huge rate of economicgrowth. If it carries on growing economically at its current rate, thenChina may have to face the dangerous consequences of an imbalancebetween an affluent coastline and chronic rural poverty, with furthermass migration and rapidly increasing imbalances of resourcedistribution. Yet it was Deng and the Communist Party who has broughtabout this new found dynamism and Li Peng has never renounced thecontrol of the Party. Why should he? He is in charge of it.There is consequently a need for caution when talking about China'shuge success and its future, plus the "model" it offers. Capitalismcannot be sustained for long without free information flow; marketsdepend on it. Yet free information flow is not easily compatible withpolitical authoritarianism. Hong Kong will be a huge test. If Chinafails that test and the economy of the ex-colony starts to rapidlydecline, it will not just be Hong Kong and its investors that suffer.It will have a really profound impact on geopolitics. Taiwan is alreadymilitarily fearful of a growing Chinese power. Japan would need torearm and the Vietnamese would be none-to-happy either. What happens toyour very wonderful Asia-Pacific century then?Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BOOM NPS GOES BOOMThe nuclear industry has a problem with accident and emergency planningexercises. In relation to the recent problem of a sodium coolant leakat Monju, the Japanese fast breeder, the Japanese Land Agency announcedthat it would now include nuclear disasters within its planning.Observers widely took this to mean that the official Japanese positionwas that there was no need for the agency to come up with a plan,because there was unlikely to be a serious accident. This was unfair.The Japanese have emergency planning and emergency planning exercisesjust like everybody else with nuclear plant. The problem is that beingopen and overt about such exercises has a tendency to undermine theofficial public relations stance that scale 3 to scale 7 nuclearincidents are very unlikely. If, runs the argument, such disasters areso unlikely, why plan for them at all? Consequently, nuclear agenciestend to keep quiet about their game playing.It is thus refreshing that the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD hasrecently published a report on the results of the first internationalnuclear emergency exercise ever carried out, with participation fromAustria, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan,Luxembourg, Norway, Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, Ukraine and USA.This was not, it has to be said, a simultaneous and real time scenario,carried out utilising all the players in one gigantic nuclear powerstation armageddon. The notion that all these players could be involvedin one multilateral incident simply does not make any sense. A nucleardisaster in the USA is most unlikely to affect Switzerland with anykind of immediacy, or at least at a level likely to make much of anemergency.Such accidents may be multilateral, but only if a number ofneighbouring small countries are involved. They are much more likely tobe bilateral, where radioactive fallout crosses the nearest border andthis was the scenario chosen. The real key to the international natureof the exercise, known as INEX 1, was that each of the emergencyplanning groups of all countries were playing to an identical scenario,either as the countries with the disaster or as their near neighbour;and sometimes as both. The intention, beautifully achieved by theNuclear Energy Agency (NEA), was to get a fairly complete picture as tothe differences in approach adopted by the different countries as ameans to start the difficult process of creating a common agenda andemergency response system.War-gaming, or table-top emergency response simulations are extremelyeasy to laugh at. Frequently, the game planners help create cynicalreactions by the simple means of creating places and scenarios thatsound straight out of Ruritania. Such flights of fantasy are not aidedby the problem of communicating the same scenario to an internationalaudience and INEX 1 was no exception. The nuclear power station inquestion was the Boom NPS, situated in Acciland. (Any power stationwith a name like this would have had it changed by deedpoll immediatelyon initial fuel-loading!) Equally, the NEA's wonderful multilingualconnections allow the determined traveller to go by train throughNeighbourland, from Hallcity to Rechstadt or Seahafen, before crossingthe border to Blueport and Capitalia. Tourists seeking Italian foodshould try Locagri, before eating wild-boar, shot in the Jager Forestin Huntsdorf. The participants themselves believed that differentlinguistic names for each country might have been more sensible.Leaving such matters aside however, the crucial point is that all thecountries were playing the same game. "All participating countrieswere... required to superimpose their normal emergency procedures andprovisions on the scenario." The game was played in three 2-3 hourphases in a single day by all participating country teams, each phaserepresenting a different day of the initial three days of the crisis.(As noted, each country could chose a different day to simulate, theymerely followed the same scenario over the same time frame.) Theresults were then collated and a subsequent conference held to discussbetter co-ordination.Before noting the results, it has to be said that the exercise startedat T plus four hours (T+4), where T represented the time when a firestarted in a switchboard at Boom NPS leading to an emergency shut-downof the reactor. T+2 was the time when the authorities were informed andT+4 was initial loss of primary coolant. This lead to the predictionthat at T+9 a major fuel uncovering would be inevitable and thegeneration of a radioactive cloud would occur. Phase 1 of thesimulation was thus about a period prior to the development of seriousradiological problem, known as the "threat" phase, the remaining phasesbeing "release" and "post-release". (There are a number of flaws inthis as a scenario, of which more below.)In terms of notification to the International Atomic Energy Agency(IAEA) and neighbouring countries, eg Neighbourland, the variations areconsiderable, ranging from 15 minutes to two hours and 13 minutes inrelation to neighbours. The longest time the scenario players took tocall the IAEA was the case of the Swiss team and amounted to fourhours. Given the structure of the exercise this meant that the IAEA wasinformed - at the latest- at T+8, or roughly one hour before thereactor produced ambient radionuclides.Under a scenario that gave the disaster country nine hours warning of apotential leak both the neighbouring country and the IAEA were warnedprior to the actual disaster. However the crucial matter is thedifference in time of warning between countries. This needs to beaddressed, even in games playing, and the INEX 1 analysis points thisout. For a start, utilising standard diplomatic procedures clearlyspells out the nature of the problem to the bordering state, but takestime. Straightforward warning, as in the case of Romania as aneighbour, ended up being in free text english as an IAEA EMERCONnotification. With the EU and the IAEA Convention the notificationworked adequately, although there was some confusion as to the correctINES code rating for the scale of the disaster, eg, whether it wasscale 3 or 5 or 7 in the information transmitted.In relation to cross border traffic, the "threat" phase of the incidentproduced only three restrictions, within Italy, Japan and Switzerland.In the "release" phase, matters became much more diverse. Switzerlandas the scene of the disaster expected all its neighbours to close itsborders, but did not close them itself. Germany as Accilanddecontaminated vehicles exceeding a 1 microSv/hr dosage and limitedfood exports. Canada closed its borders and embargoed all foodstuffs.The UK, with characteristic sang froid decided to "monitor"  all goodsfrom its neighbour, even through the accident was it's own. Japan didnot bother with border controls of any kind, even after phase 3,although it had ordered travel restrictions within Japan. Norway as"victim" was demanding the end of harvesting for all vegetables. TheUkraine issued something called Temporary Permissable Limits (TPLs) forfood consumption.It is perhaps in the population protection countermeasures where thevariety of different measures began to diverge excessively. The basicsplit is in the concept of shelter as against evacuation and to alesser degree the provision of stable iodine. In relation to thelatter, in Acciland the provision of KI (potassium iodine) ranged fromthose between none at all, and those within 64 kilometres. The US doesnot use it and the Japanese decide to use it on an ad hoc basis. OnlySwitzerland, Romania and Sweden have a distribution capacity before theaccident happens, and even this is questionable. (For those who do notknow about KI, its function is to fill the thyroid gland with stableiodine so that the body rejects the ingestion of radioactive iodine-131. It is particularly important in the prevention of thyroid cancerin pregnant women and young children. It cease to function around 10hours after being taken, so prompt action is necessary.) The shelterversus evacuation argument is rather more complex, but no less varied.Countries involved in the scenario posited evacuation of populationsbetween 1.5 km and 15 km of the disaster plant, with Japan being thesmallest area and the Ukraine the biggest, at least during phase 1 ofthe exercise. Beyond this evacuation zone and sometimes including it,the range of those forced to seek shelter is put between 5 kilometresand, in the case of the Ukraine, 64 kilometres. (What is it about theseUkrainians? Anyone would think they have done this before.)In relation to the whole business of shelter and evacuation, detailedanalysis of the available data at the US Nuclear Regulatory Commissionsuggests that sheltering produces little by way of reduction wheredoses exceed 200 rems within 1 or 2 miles of the plant, so the bestsolution is to high-tail it out of this radius. Above 3 miles, shelterin large buildings is as good as evacuation, although oddly enough,sheltering in basements is no more effective than an ordinarysheltering. The odd thing about the reactions of Neighbourlandcountries is that, on the whole, they use the same terminology todiscuss the shelter and evacuation scenario as those of Acciland,namely distance from the plant. The French, being more knowledgeable,give a distance ratio when it is French plant and a mSv dosage rate ifit is somebody elses'. The entire population is moved out when the dosegets to 300 mSv and everybody takes cover on a 50 mSv (thyroid dose).Evacuation versus shelter presents significant logistical difficulties.However it is also true that the shelter option is not withoutlogistical difficulties. For a start, people need to be fed. To somedegree shelter predicates future evacuation anyway. (This Swiss, blessthem, seem at one point to have decided to evacuate the entirecountry.)The same spread of opinions can be found in the phase 3 clean-up. Thisproduces some amusing questions. Romania, for example, does not mentionthe idea of relocating any of its people after the event, although itdoes end the restrictions. As an alternative it engages in "massivedecontamination". By contrast, the US does not end the restrictions andmoves the population away, while failing to mention anything aboutdecontamination. (The explanation is presumably that the US is a verybig country!) The other countries varied between these two positions.The agriculture countermeasures involved in the accident scenario andexamined by all participants are extremely varied and - on the whole -characterised by good sense. However the rapporteur involved, MonsieurGinot, of the French Institut de Protection et de Surete Nucleaire, didproduce one or two pure pieces of delight in his post-operationaldebriefing. While most countries spent a considerable amount of timemonitoring of the condition of the crops and animals in thecontaminated zone, most forgot to protect their teams fromcontamination. Meanwhile "the consumption of fresh vegetables goods wasunevenly treated and sometimes ignored." And - wonderfully - "Water:Drinking water and water for irrigation were considered by all players.Only two countries thought to inform the public that the water suppliedby the public network remained drinkable". (!)So much for the results. They reveal a considerable diversity in theway countries have planned their responses to a major nuclear incidentand suggest that there is a need for continuing discussion on theground rules of nuclear disaster planning. It is also to be devoutlywished that INEX 1 is followed up by INEX 2 to 100, with ever growingsophistication. A great deal of what follows is written in this spiritand comes from a veteran of emergency response simulations. For, as thereport itself suggests, the nuclear industry has a great deal to learnfrom the oil industry in games of this kind. The oil industry does notregard disaster as a rare event, but as an ever present likelihood andtreats it as such.First and foremost, it is virtually impossible to create a disastersimulation that reflects real life without including some component ofthe media, as everybody involved in INEX 1 agreed. The simple fact isthat media involvement can destroy a table top emergency response teamwith remarkably despatch and efficiency. The continuous requests forinformation, combined with the addition of misleading and oftenerroneous knowledge can be an extremely destructive force, if notseparated from the decision-makers examining the issues.It is suggested in the debriefing of INEX 1 that emergency decision-makers cannot allow the media to dictate the decisions, but must actbefore they are forced to react. This is easier said than done,particularly by government information officers, whose normal role isto react, rather then act. Handling the news media in the event of anuclear accident is going to be very difficult indeed and Chernobylgives no guide. INEX decision-makers cannot be expected to do itwithout an extra layer of protective support. This is the numero unorule of emergency response: Defend the decision maker from extraneouspressure, but keep that defence fully informed at all times. The mediawill, if allowed to do so, destroy the ability to communicate. This isnot deliberate. It is merely an accident of too many enquiries. Besidesof all industries worldwide the nuclear one probably has the worstreputation for covering things up.Equally, the media will not be alone. Not for nothing do many emergencyscenarios include the general public. Relatives of those perceived tobe in danger will rarely stop at anything to find out what is happeningto their loved ones. This area is fraught with dangers. For a start,not all those making enquiries will fit neatly into any limitedcategory, such as wife or son. Some will be secret lovers and many willbe hysterical. Any command and control exercise that ignores thepressure placed on it by extraneous demands is doomed to seem unreal.There will, for example, be many messages from the completely crazy,either admitting that they caused the accident, or alternatively sayingthat they can solve the problem by prayer, volunteering or for asuitable sum of money. This is why emergency response trainers use outof work actors and actresses for a stiff dose of the actualite.Equally, real time response is vital for the value of INEX 2. Theunhappy fact is that a few hours around a table creates no guide as towhat an accident is going to feel like. To look like reality,gameplaying should leave those involved exhausted. It should also showthe need for a second string of players, to take-over. In the event ofa major nuclear emergency it is most unlikely that the initial teamwill still be in control within 24 hours of the incident. Back-up ofpersonnel is likely to be vital.Another factor is that an emergency that gives the emergency responseteam a five hour notice warning period is a remarkable and probablyunique event. Admittedly the accident at Boom NPS was about the slowfailure of containment, but true reality would not assume that theplant operators would calmly inform the central authorities ofimpending disaster two hours before loss of coolant and two hours aftera switchboard fire. Experience of nuclear faults almost universallysuggests that plant operators keep as quiet as possible untilsignificant problems occur. Consequently the phase 1 or "threat phase"of INEX 1 is unlikely to happen in reality. It may be less comforting,but it might be good to start the simulation when disaster actuallystrikes, rather than several hours before it. Any NPS operator who saton his hands for two hours in the case of a power failure leading topotential loss of coolant, would have to be insane, so the premise ofthe story is just false.All this said, the INEX 1 simulation is an excellent start. It revealshow much individual countries can learn from each other. Emergencyexercises may be expensive, but so are nuclear disasters. They are avaluable exercise in understanding the dynamics of disaster control.Defined by the Swiss monitor, the best principle for emergency planningis "as normal as possible and as extraordinary as necessary." This kindof decision-making cannot be done without practice.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONFUCIUS, HE SAY...The bookshelves and filing cabinets of businesses throughout the worldare stuffed with reports, analyses, studies, and treatises on Topics OfImportance, usually dubbed "must-read" for a week or so, then consignedto the archives as newer, supposedly more informative successorsappear. Rarely - all too rarely - there appears an assessment that iscogent, well-written, includes new information based on informed andinformative sources, does it all with candour, humour, and some well-placed trenchant (if obscure) quotations, and leaves the reader wantingmore.The latest in this elite group of reports likely to wind up remainingclose at hand on the desks or credenzas of those with more than apassing interest in the current and future state of the US electricutility business is the fifth annual edition of the outlook for theelectric industry compiled by the Washington International Energy Group(WIEG). With exhaustive detail based on a survey of a universe of morethan 3,200 principal executives in US and Canadian electric businesses,the WIEG report presents specific survey results, but also quantifiesthem, draws conclusions based on them, and boldly providesprescriptions for palliatives to ease the industry's heartburn at theupheavals of the transition to a completely open marketplace.The irreverent style characteristic of the previous four annual WIEGprognostications for the utilities is hardly missing from the 1996outlook. For an "authoritative" work by a respected consulting firm,the new report if refreshingly open and honest, even going so far as toconcede that "nobody knows what the future [utility] industry structure(or structures) will ultimately look like." That said, however, WIEG'sauthors note that "even if someone did know, this information would beworthless unless it was used to stay ahead of the competition." Thissets the stage for the firm's "agenda for 1996," or what it terms "theten things every utility needs to do".First on WIEG's "top ten" list, which it uses shamelessly without evenpassing credit to comedian David Letterman, is "know your competitorsand stay ahead of them". Hardly a novel idea, and one calculated tomake the novice reader wonder if this study is all it's cracked up tobe. But the second recommendation changes the pace quickly: "bewareyour new friend, the state regulator". What? Is the regulatory compactshattered forever? Well, no, says WIEG, but regulators have a vestedinterest in slowing the pace of change, and protecting the status quo.The utility world is moving past the era of state domination, warnsWIEG, and utilities that exercise too much caution will miss the boatto new markets.The third WIEG imperative is also heresy to utility traditionalists:"stop protecting dividends". Since many, indeed most, utilities will beforced to cut dividends whether they like it or not, they should ceasepast promises never to drop dividends, and confess honestly toshareholders that times have changed and that overall yieldappreciation may have to come from rising stock prices at sharplycompetitive firms rather than form any guaranteed dividend. WIEG thinksshareholders will appreciate this and credit honest companies withforward-looking management. For institutional investors, this is quiteprobably true, but some utilities may be quite reluctant to "betray"their dividend-sensitive "mom and pop" shareholders.WIEG's next "need" is for utilities to get ahead of impendingregulation by starting their own "retail choice" programmes, on thepremise that seizing the initiative may preclude rules that don'texactly fit a specific company's real needs. In a similar vein, theconsultants urge utilities to "go beyond FERC's functional unbundling"proposal, dump unprofitable ventures, and move as much debt as possibleinto the regulated side of the business to enhance the value of newernon-regulated entities.The sixth recommendation seems a trifle late for many of the foremostelectric companies: "merge if you are too small." WIEG's yardstick forwhat constitutes "too small?" "If your neighbours are bigger, then youare." But the report goes beyond just consolidations of electricutilities themselves, calling for "gas-electric combinations andtelecommunications deals."Next on the list of musts is the need to act, not react - and whileyou're at it, act quickly. WIEG suggests eliminating committees, taskforces, consultants (and this suggestion from a consultant!), and other"action blockers" to demonstrate the ability to make a "big decision"happen in record time through creative efforts and "excitingincentives" to relevant staffers."Zap your surplus," says the WIEG analysis, "(even though new ones willkeep emerging.)" Again, the study makes recommendations that wouldn'thave had a chance a few years ago, such as selling off generation todirect end-use customers, selling capacity in wholesale markets, andabandoning outright or scrapping obsolete generation.The penultimate WIEG suggestion is perhaps the most wrenching of allfor utility troglodytes: "stop selling electricity, invest intechnology and new products, and start selling entertainment, comfort,security, safety, and reliability". In other words, sell those simpleelectrons as part of "a larger package" offering convenience and easyaccess. WIEG says utility executives will have to accept the "endemicreality of low core growth," and depend instead on newer non-traditional businesses for profit enhancement.Finally, in what seems almost an anticlimax, WIEG says the savviestutilities will move the head of marketing into the executive suite andrecruit more outside talent to give marketing a shot in the arm. "Nomatter what you have already done to improve your marketing department,it's only a start."Roger W Gale, president of WIEG, warned in releasing the report that"the industry is being divided into winners and losers." He added thatthe fundamental changes affecting North American electric utilitiesoffer both dangers and opportunities for investors, as the universe ofcompanies with substantially similar low-risk, steady-return profileshas become a smorgasbord of companies with dramatically varyingpotential for future profit."For those utilities that so far have taken a wait-and-see attitude, itmay already be too late," Gale said. But, while some utility executivemay be dragging their feet, the WIEG survey indicated that only 42 percent of the senior executives responding to the survey expect theircompany to survive the next decade without seminal changes. Fully 40per cent are convinced that their own company will look substantiallydifferent a decade hence.For instance, nearly two-thirds of the respondents, 62 per cent, expect"hostile" takeovers to increase in the electric utility business,despite the fact that virtually all the marriages announced to datehave not required a shotgun. Just under half of the survey answersindicate a belief that their company will either acquire anotherutility or be acquired by another within ten years. By contrast, fewerthan a third of the responses indicated that their companies werecurrently involved in any merger and acquisition activities.Seven of every ten utility executives responding to the WIEG surveyidentified "loss of industrial customers" as their number one concernin 1996, and fully 80 per cent believe that will remain a principalproblem for utilities at least through the rest of this decade. Halfthe respondents believe that most of their customers, in all categoriesof service, would take advantage of direct access if it were offered tothem.Half the executives responding also said their utilities have alreadyoffered to provide service to customers of other utilities. With thatanswer in mind, the fact that only half the responses indicated abelief that protected monopoly utility service areas will continue isperhaps more credible, despite the implied collapse of the traditionalutility "bargain" with regulators.Interest among utility executives in maintaining transmission assets iffull-scale "unbundling" is mandated has waned dramatically, with only15 per cent of the respondents picking transmission as the field ofchoice if forced to pick among generation, transmission, anddistribution. Some 28 per cent would pick generation, while a majorityof 57 per cent would opt to stay in the distribution arena.The WIEG survey found that nearly three-quarters of the companiespolled expect to expand their activities to provide services for "theother side of the meter," with those services including both energy-related services and non-traditional areas such as telecommunicationsand other services. Also, the responses indicate that nearly two-thirds- 62 per cent - are pursuing customers outside their franchised serviceareas.One startling result of the survey is that 76 per cent of the responsesconcede that not all utility costs have been prudently incurred.However, 73 per cent believe "stranded costs" should be fullyrecovered, while only 44 per cent think they will be allowed to do soby regulators. Of the respondents, 62 per cent say their companies are"taking action" in a variety of ways to reduce their exposure tostranded costs.Earnings, long a "hot button" for utility officers, remain in theforefront of executive concerns, but just under half - 49 per cent - ofthe replies express a belief that earnings will decline. A virtuallyidentical number, 48 per cent, believe revenues will fall as well.However, a huge majority, 76 per cent, remain convinced their companieswill not have to slash dividends, a belief that may be wishful thinkingto avoid scaring investors, and one that runs counter to one of WIEG'sten priorities.In the single most lopsided response to WIEG's inquiries, fully 92 percent of respondents say their companies will be engaging in dramaticcost-cutting initiatives in the near future. Nearly 90 per cent of theinvestor-owned utilities in the survey have already undergonedownsizing, as have 81 per cent of municipal utilities and 65 per centof independent power producers.Not surprisingly, a scant 8 per cent of those polled believe there willbe anything approaching a resurgence in nuclear power, and nearly 90per cent concur that no new nuclear plants will be ordered. As toexisting nuclear generating facilities, just under 40 per cent believetheir power can still be priced competitively, while an equal numberhold the opposite view.WIEG concludes from its conversations with utility middle managementand executive personnel that the constant pressure to downsize so manyutilities has made for severe morale problems. The analysts believethat the "winners" as the utility industry sorts itself out will beprincipally those companies that "get past" the layoffs andrestructurings inherent in downsizing and get on quickly to the processof renewed expansion, albeit in new and different directions.The most successful utilities in the coming decades will be those whoview their customer base as an asset (despite the fact that it appearsnowhere on the balance sheet). Those "captive audiences" will be key tomarketing new services as they are developed. WIEG suggests that newutility investments in technology keyed to consumer demands and needsthat can be readily marketed to a pre-existing clientele will be a"primary differentiator" between winners and losers."Utilities that are investing in technology and new product developmenttoday may be building an insurmountable advantage over their lessvisionary competitors," according to WIEG. "The visionary utilities areforming alliances and partnerships with firms that bring expertise andcapabilities that these utilities would otherwise take years to build."The "losers" will be those companies that WIEG identifies as "primefailure candidates." Their principal failings will be adopting a "justsay no" approach to competition, "fine-tuning" operations in preferenceto radical change, a lack of a sense of urgency, a "follow-the-leader"business strategy, a reluctance to bring in new talent, and a continuedtreatment of customers as captive ratepayers."Our conclusion," says the WIEG report, "is that it is quickly becomingtoo late for some passive utilities to position themselves for thefuture. Their plight will be aggravated as it becomes more visible,making them even less able to deal with their problems. This also willmake them more vulnerable to the threats of others, includingcompetitors or those interested in a takeover. Once the spiral begins,it will be increasingly difficult to escape. Utilities at the wrong endof the widening gap need to act quickly and decisively to get into therace." Paul Feine.The 65-page WIEG report is available at $48 a copy from WashingtonInternational Energy Group, Suite 202, 1155 21st Street, NW,Washington, D.C. 20036; phone (202) 331-9820; e-mail wieg.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HUNGARY'S MOL SUFFERS A DOWNGRADE FROM DEBTSHungary is a small and mature hydrocarbon province but privatisationand access to western seismic technology has given the energy sector anew lease of life. MOL is currently the only company producing oil andgas in Hungary but western companies are active in exploration bids.Domestic output has been falling gently in recent years and importdependence on Russia particularly is on the ascendancy. Hungary islinked to Russia by both oil and gas pipelines. Hungary's refininginfrastructure, notably the Danube Refinery is superior to the rest ofEastern Europe. The retail end of the market is sophisticated andcompetitive. The gas sector has now been privatised so it consistsessentially of a clutch of regional privatised monopolies, which havebeen stripped to their privatisation essentials and the thorny questionof gas pricing has received government attention but is still a drag onprofitability.Hungary's primary energy consumption in 1994 comprised gas (34 percent), oil (33 per cent), solid fuels (17 per cent), nuclear (15 percent), and electricity (1 per cent). Most of Hungary's proven oil andgas reserves are in the Pannonian Basin in the south-east of thecountry which is in close proximity to Romania and Serbia. (Romania hasthe greatest Eastern European oil reserve base (1.6 billion barrels/220million tonnes). Its production is six to seven million tonnes a yearwith the Czech Republic, Albania and Hungary in the second tranche ofimportance and Poland, Slovakia, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia havingnegligible oil reserves. Amoco, Shell and Enterprise are definitelylooking for oil in Romania.)At the end of 1992 Hungary's estimated oil reserves were about 92million barrels and the country was replacing less of its reserves thanit was consuming in 1993 and 1994. The Hungarian reserves to productionratio is currently in the seven year ball park but reflecting thedependence on imports the reserves to consumption ratio for oil isbelow two years. By comparison the United Kingdom has a currentproduction to reserve ratio of six years and a consumption to reservesratio of seven years.Hungarian gas reserves stood at 60 billion cubic metres at the end of1994 and the reserves to production ratio at about 12 years while thereserves to consumption was six years, indicative of the dependence onimports. Hungarian gas reserves may not be of striking internationalsignificance but in a regional context they are the third largestholder of gas reserves in Eastern Europe after Romania and Poland. In1994 Hungarian production of oil was 12.5 million barrels and 4.8 bcmof gas. MOL discovered 2 million barrels of crude and 1.8 bcm of gas atan average finding cost of $2 a barrel.The latest 1994 statistics indicate that there were about 1,100 oilproducing wells and 300 gas wells in Hungary. Some of the fields areageing and oil production is therefore into the secondary recoveryphase. Carbon dioxide injection and a variety of other methods arebeing used to boost production. Secondary recovery methods are beingapplied to about 20 per cent of Hungary's crude oil production. Most ofthe Hungarian crude oil is of a relatively high quality with an API of40 degrees and a sulphur content of less than 0.5 per cent. Thiscompares well with many crudes in the North Sea and is superior inquality to what is currently being imported from Russia. A small amountof heavier fractions of crude is being produced in the far west ofHungary near Austria, which is supplied to the Zala refinery for makingbitumen. However Hungarian oil production peaked in the latter part ofthe 1970s and after a brief plateau to 1982 has continued to fall.Imports accounted for 75 per cent of Hungarian crude oil use in 1994and M C Securities believe it will rise to 83 per cent of Hungary'srequirement by 2000. Hungary has an existing oil transport system inthe region and is therefore able to diversify its crude oil sourcesmore easily and without capital investment. This is not the case inPoland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.There are three important pipelines conveying crude to Hungary. WithinHungary the pipelines are owned by MOL, Eastern Europe's and Hungary'sonly integrated oil company. Outside Hungary (ie in the Ukraine,Croatia and Slovakia) they are owned by those countries. Two of thethree pipelines are linked to the CIS. Until recently only the main CISexport pipeline, Friendship II has been routinely utilised by Hungary.The pipeline now converges on a hub at Szazhalombatta refinery outsideBudapest.Friendship II has a capacity of 10 million tonnes a year. It conveysCIS (mainly Russian) crude oil across the Ukraine and into Hungary fromthe east where it supplies refineries at Szazhalombatta and Tisza.Friendship I is the CIS export pipeline to the refineries of the formerCzechoslovakia and East Germany. The latter has only been usedinfrequently and given that Friendship II is currently underutilised,Friendship I provides a back-up of 5 million tonnes a year. The Adriapipeline from the Croatian Adriatic port of Omisalj enters Hungary fromthe south-west and joins the Friendship I/Friendship II system atSzazhalombatta, outside Budapest. The Adria has a capacity of 10 mtpabut has been closed since 1991 because of the Serbian occupation of theCroatian Krajina region. It was reopened recently and MOL was able torecover its oil which had been trapped for four years.Oil price and pipeline tariff considerations may lead Hungary tocontinue to buy crude from the CIS. The Adria line is essential forsupply security and as a bargaining chip with the Russians. Adria is adual system pipeline having been the conduit for CIS crude to theformer Yugoslavia but it was built with pumping stations with reverseflow capability and has been used to supply Hungary with crude from theMiddle East. There is also a very limited domestic crude oil pipelinenetwork which connects the southern Hungarian oil fields at Szeged andthe pipeline hub at Szazhalombatta.Hungary has three refineries and a lubricants plant whereas Romania has16 refineries of which five are large modern complexes. Hungary andRomania currently both have a refining surplus. MOL has title of allknown Hungarian reserves and the government has a royalty interest inthese reserves. It is estimated that excluding the concessions alreadyoperated by MOL, the remaining Hungarian discoverable reserves are only20 per cent of the country's hydrocarbon base. Potential success inthese areas is therefore much reduced.Despite these odds the first licensing round took place in 1993/94 andattracted bids from four companies. The first exploration periods werefor four years with the possible extension of 50 per cent if necessary.If commercially exploitable reserves were found, the production licencewas for 35 years with a possible extension to 52.5 years. Mobil Erdgas,Occidental Corporation, Coastal Corporation and Blue Star, a Hungariancompany submitted bids. Mobil was awarded eight blocks, five as soleoperator and three in joint venture with Occidental. Coastal and BlueStar formed a joint venture to operate a block on which they bothsubmitted bids. Concessions totalling 9,000 square km were awarded.Mobil have been exploring onshore Europe for some time particularly inGermany and are reported to be looking for additional natural gasreserves. Coastal has considered Romania as a target for explorationmainly for natural gas. Occidental has long standing connections withformer Soviet-bloc countries. This licensing round is likely to be thelast and no further opportunities will be available for onshoreexploration in Hungary by foreign companies.MOL is at present the only company producing oil and gas in Hungary andhas 59 concession areas covering almost 20,000 square km. Prior to thislicensing round only MOL and OKGT its predecessor company had exploredfor oil and gas in Hungary. The privatisation of MOL took place in late1995 in two parts. The international offering was oversubscribed but atthe lower end of the pricing range and it represented 19 per cent ofMOL's equity. The issue was primarily sold to investors in the US (whogot 45 per cent ), the UK(45 per cent) and Europe (10 per cent) .Thedomestic tranche was sold in Hungary.MOL's third quarter results, its first as a privatised concern werebelow expectations. Its earnings for 1995 have been downgraded from HUF10.2 billion forecast at the time of the international offering to HUF6.9 billion now by M C Securities. The downgrading can be ascribed tofirstly a HUF 3 billion provision for bad debts and secondly to MOL'snatural gas business which is the biggest turnover component but hashistorically been a loss maker. According to Stephen O'Sullivan, oilanalyst at MC Securities: '' The downgrading is primarily related to arecent change in accounting provisions but also to changes in theoperation of MOL's natural gas business particularly in respect of gasstorage.''Gas consumption has switched away from industrial usage to domestic.Unlike other countries, the Hungarian government has typically keptdomestic prices below industrial prices and by so doing exaggerated thefinancial losses. Changes in accounting treatment leading to a profitsdowngrade so soon after privatisation is hardly the way to win friendsand influence international investors. A strengthening of the company'smanagement muscle seems appropriate because with the embracing ofprivatisation has also come the responsibility of shareholderaccountability.Nevertheless the company has a number of interesting futuredevelopments which if correctly managed could bolster profits. MOL isthe operator of a number of underground gas storage facilities indepleted gas fields and will soon be commissioning the first phase ofthe new Zsana facility, which has partly been financed by the EBRD. Thenormalising of the Bosnian situation is likely to lead to increasedtransit volumes of natural gas for MOL. Historically traffic has passedthrough Hungary to Bosnia, Croatia and then Serbia. The lifting of UNsanctions against Serbia and the rebuilding of the Bosnian economyshould have beneficial effects on MOL's earnings.Western companies were present in Hungary long before the Berlin Wallcame down but Hungary has been tardy in its embracing of theprivatisation process in the oil and gas sector. Investors are right tobe concerned about the 1995 profits downgrade barely a month after theinternational offering of MOL. The issue of gas pricing is critical tothe company. Although the Hungarian government has made its intentionsclear on this issue, it needs to ensure that the actions which it takesassist it to implement its intention of achieving market-related gasprices by 1997. MOL needs to look at its financial management urgentlyin order to maintain the goodwill of foreign investors.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BRITISH GAS AND A HOTEL IN ROTHERHITHEAs many readers will undoubtedly recall (FTEE 166), British Gas hassince the summer found itself to be in a rather desperate situation asregards its long term agreements with gas suppliers in the North Sea,and has continued since then to do its utmost to get itself out ofthem, backed rather ferociously it appears by the government. Theproblem that British Gas faces is twofold. Firstly the current beachprices for gas are so low as to be under half the price British Gas nowfinds itself paying to producers under the terms of take-or-payagreements, some of which it has had for nigh on twenty-five years. Andsecondly, despite knowing that some of its market would have to besurrendered to new competition introduced onto the gas market with thewithering of regulation, British Gas nevertheless continued to buy gaswhich it should have known it was never going to be able to sell. Thusit is that British Gas is left with a mountain of gas that nobody wantsas well as numerous and very expensive gas contracts with an estimatedvalue of #40 billion for gas it neither needs nor wants and that itcan't free itself from.British Gas finally managed to off load some of its gas glut over theChristmas/New Year period when temperatures in the UK hit an all timelow. Temperatures fell to minus 20 degrees Celsius in Glasgow, wheredemand for gas rose by 10 per cent, indeed, sales of gas werereportedly 50 per cent higher than the same time last year. AlthoughBritish Gas was able to maintain supply in England and Wales, manycustomers in Scotland, where British Gas was even reduced to haltingsupply to businesses in favour of homes, were without central heatingover the Christmas period and the company now faces compensationpayments to thousands of customers for failing to respond quickly whencentral heating systems broke down.Following the appointment of a new negotiator to deal with BritishGas's long-term gas agreements, producers have been told that the firstto agree to renegotiation of the take-or-pay terms with British Gaswill get the best deals. Unsurprisingly, producers remain unwilling toreopen supposedly legally binding contracts with British Gas and so farnot one has agreed to renegotiations. However British Gas has indicatedthat pressure on producers will be stepped up after February 1st whenall supply contracts will be moved to a new subsidiary company.Since the appointment of the new negotiator to handle the take-or-payagreements problem faced by British Gas in the North Sea, the big newsof the month was revealed on Saturday, 6th January, in a meeting heldin a pub in Rotherhithe between the Department of Trade and Industry,Ofgas, the gas watchdog, British Gas and the Shippers Forum after itwas announced on Friday that the set date for the release of the newNetwork Code was to be put back from 1st February to 1st March. Thepurpose of the meeting was to discuss the new Network Code, which willlay out the conditions by which new competing companies on the UKdomestic gas market will be allowed to use existing pipelines currentlyowned by British Gas. Without it, new competition will be impossible.However with the present government keen to cover any furtherconsequences of the 1986 privatisation of British Gas with roses inlight of the coming general election, it was reported that the DTIraised two new issues that could have serious implications on the UKgas market. Firstly the department raised the possibility of thegovernment taking powers to impose a levy (probably about 1p/therm) onthe marketing of gas, to be payable to British Gas Transco, which wouldpresent one possible way of forcing gas producers to absorb more cost,thus relieving the problem of costly write-downs currently faced byBritish Gas. Exactly how this levy would work remains unclear, yet thepoint is that whether or not the levy is imposed is not the issue. Whatis important is that the government would have the power to impose itat any given time, rendering producers with take-or-pay contracts withBritish Gas on rather shaky ground.The second issue reportedly raised by the DTI is even more serious.This is the idea that British Gas may be allowed to move all its longterm agreements, both buying and selling contracts, into a subsidiaryof very little substance, without a British Gas backup guarantee thatgas will be paid for. This will remove British Gas's (the signature onthese contracts) responsibility to take or pay and placing it in thehands of the new company. Moving all long-term contracts in this waywill give British Gas the power to pressurise producers intorenegotiation of the take-or-pay clause in their agreements. Althoughuntil now this has remained mere speculation, it now appears that thiscourse of action will be taken.At the Saturday meeting, only thirty of the gas suppliers were present,yet over 200 more such companies exist who sell or transport gas toBritish Gas. What is not yet evident is whether the government intendsto consult the remaining shippers as to whether or not this move is anacceptable one. Indeed by the following Tuesday, one of the majorindependents spoken to still had not heard that these proposals hadeven been tabled and it remains to be seen exactly how and if thegovernment intends to consult these companies. Furthermore, eyebrowshave been raised by some gas experts as to the legality of the wholeproposal itself and one major international oil company has been heardto comment that the whole thing is a smokescreen and entirely illegal.However, there remains the possibility that such a move by British Gasis not illegal, but is in fact provided for under the new 1995 Gas Act.Although the creation of a new subsidiary company was going to benecessary anyway, it now appears that British Gas could possibly getaway without providing it with a backup guarantee.Moreover it is clear that if such action is taken, British Gas's longterm sales contracts - all of which are interruptible agreements withpower stations, over half of which are independent power projects - arelikely to be affected as well. Every one of the independent powerprojects has been financed by banks who lent money on a contract basisinvolving long term power agreements backed by long term gas supplyagreements. The banks lent money because British Gas was meant to besupplying the gas - indeed so confident were the banks under such termsthat the commitment to lend was happily described by one lender as a"no brain decision". If the contracts are moved, there will be nofurther support from British Gas, and if the new subsidiary companytaking on British Gas's long-term agreements does go bust under thestrain of the North Sea take-or-pay agreements, then the banks facehigh potential losses. Just how comfortable are the lending banks goingto be if British Gas makes this move without a guarantee?At issue will be the perceived security of the supply of gas to powerstations. At the moment it may be that nobody is particularly worriedabout this with UK beach prices so low at this time. However, one gasexpert has warned that this perception of the gas market is adistortion - the supply of enough gas to run a base load power stationrepresents a wholly different kettle of fish. The quoted spot andforward prices for gas at the beach represent small quantities only. Tobe certain that gas can be obtained on a scale large enough to assumethe availability of CCGT capacity, buyers need to be looking atdifferent gas prices entirely - most likely ones much higher than thecurrent beach prices. The value of stranded capacity in a power plantwith no fuel is nothing more than nil.When asked for comment on this state of affairs, both Ofgas and the DTIdeclined to say anything at all - indeed Ofgas declined even to confirmthat a meeting had taken place, while the DTI admitted that it had andsaid that discussions about a levy were continuing, although refused tooutline any details. The DTI confirmed that British Gas would beallowed to set up one subsidiary company (and one only) although it didnot wish to talk about the holding of long term contracts, preferringinstead to describe the holdings of such a company as "considerableassets" and declining to comment on whether or not this company wouldbe provided with a back up guarantee by British Gas.All this takes place against the background of the rush to greatercompetition in April, when competition goes down to the householdsector, initially to 500,000 homes in the south-west. The regulatorrefuses to see any reason for delay, in spite of British Gas moans thatthe whole process cannot yet be done. The producers anticipateundercutting BG's domestic market by around 20 per cent, therebyproducing yet more bad news for the company.It has to be said that neither the new subsidiary company nor the levyare established facts. They are just "ideas" to quote a governmentofficial. Their aim is however pretty obvious, namely to scareproducers with high priced gas contracts with British Gas to agree tochange them. This approach is dangerous. It simply removesresponsibility for its actions from BG's management and involvesreturning government back to the centre of the UK market. Such actionsare also random and are likely to destabilise the marketplace. Why keepthe levy at only one pence per therm; why not ten? Mind you, if BG doesset up a new subsidiary to hold all BG's bad contracts with noguarantees, what will they call it? Going Bust Gas Company, perhaps?Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  CRUDE OIL & PRODUCTSInitially, crude oil prices firmed by more than a dollar per barrel inrecent weeks, continuing the rise that has added more than $3 perbarrel to Brent Blend prices since the end of October. The grade closedon 8th January at a review period high of $19.17. This was the highestclosing price since early last May and was some $2.40 up on the levelsattained just after the last Opec meeting.More recently, prices have retreated and Brent for March was priced at$16.92 on 12th January, as the vicious winter weather in parts of theUnited States relented and as the view that prices had over-reacted toincreasing demand and tight supply gained ground. There was some profittaking and prices were also influenced by a more relaxed view on eventsin Saudi Arabia, where King Fahd has handed power, at leasttemporarily, to the Crown Prince. (See FTEE December 1995).Prices are now just under a dollar per barrel below the levels recordedat the same time last year and, although political and other factors,such as the resumption of bad weather in the key oil-consuming areascould still intrude, the best hope for cynical bulls must be that theconsensus view, that prices will continue to ease, will be wrong.One of the more intriguing factors exercising the oil market is what,if anything, will happen in Saudi Arabia?Succession-temporary or permanent?In April 1976, when UK prime minister Harold Wilson retired at the ageof 60, he gave way to James Callaghan, who was four years his senior.There is not, of course, any similarity to what has happened in SaudiArabia. King Fahd, who apparently suffered a minor stroke in November,has handed over power, at least temporarily, to Crown Prince Abdullah,a half brother who is supposedly up to two years younger than theunhealthy king. King Fahd is quoted as saying that the crown princewould take over whilst he, the king, enjoyed rest and recuperation.The oil market, previously fretting over the possible succession, mayfeel, possibly correctly, that any permanent succession problems havebeen solved and that normal business may now be resumed, if, indeed, itwas ever disrupted. However, some analysts feel that the king'srecovery must be slower than anticipated, otherwise there would nothave been a formal transition. Perhaps this tactic is to demonstratethat the formal and permanent succession, when it comes, will beuncontested.Short-term changes in Saudi's foreign or oil policies are unlikely, notleast because the king could return to power and, to misquote the thenMrs Thatcher, there is little real alternative.Nevertheless, the oil market may remain potentially nervous until thereare clearer indications on Saudi's attitude to the west and to oilproduction. Traders will have heard the rumours, circulating for someweeks before the transition, that Saudi was considering a voluntary cutof up to 200,000 barrels a day in the coveted quota of 8 mbd, withwhich King Fahd is personally identified.The kingdom is making progress towards financial balance, after yearsof deficits on the budget and on the current account, caused in part bylow oil prices and the enormous cost of the Gulf war. Any violentchange in strategy would be politically, as well as economically,dangerous. Furthermore, it must be assumed that King Fahd, for as longas he retains ultimate power, would oppose any significant changes instance. The most recent Saudi budget reflects continued reductions ingovernment spending and efforts to encourage the non oil sector, whichstill only provides about a fifth of total export earnings and twothirds of gross domestic product. The budget deficit for 1996 is about$5 billion, surprisingly up by some 20 per cent on the likely outturnfor last year, and official subsidies are maintained.In the oil sector, any attempt to increase prices by reducing outputwould be welcomed by non Opec, whose burgeoning production will beseeking markets this year. Equally, some Opec members might welcome theopportunity to add much-needed revenue by raising output. Conversely,any increases in production, to force discipline on miscreants withinand outside Opec would prove as painful to Saudi as to others and wouldgive governments in the main oil-consuming countries anotheropportunity to increase taxes, and their own income, whilst denying theproducers a bigger market.Additionally, of course, there is a clear link between Saudi Arabia,the world's largest oil producer, and the United States, the leadingconsumer. Saudi, heavily reliant on the US for its defencerequirements, both in terms of equipment and personnel, would beunlikely, under any regime, to deliberately upset the United States ina presidential election year.Although the United States is becoming less dependent on oil importsfrom the Persian Gulf area, and is relying more on regional supplies,the Gulf remains one of its key export markets for armaments. SaudiArabia spends about a third of its total budget, some $9 billion, onarms and, reportedly, the US has at least a third of this lucrativemarket. To complicate matters further, some newspaper speculation,anticipating the fifth anniversary of the Gulf war, suggests that Iraq,against all logic, may be preparing to launch a new attack on Kuwait.Most analysts, although acknowledging Saddam's seeming delight in doingthe illogical and unexpected, would doubtless be surprised to see newconflict.The relationship between Saudi Arabia and the United States at onceposes an advantage and a problem for Fahd's successor. There is agrowing challenge, from both within and outside Saudi to the continuedpreservation of the status quo, as the bombing of the National GuardCommunications Centre, in Riyadh, shows. Crown prince Abdullah is headof the 57,000 strong National Guard.The fact that the crown prince is deputising for the king is noguarantee that he will eventually change his job title, although itdoes, of course, give him a significant advantage over othercandidates. Many commentators have argued that the crown prince is moreconservative and less inclined to favour the west than the king butFahd remains in ultimate control. Consequently, until a more permanentsuccession is established, the longer-term implications will not beapparent.Indeed, as discussed in FTEE previously, the age of most of theaspirants, and the family's mortality record, suggests that Saudi willbe embarking on a period which could be characterised by sudden andfrequent leadership changes, creating continued uncertainty. Asrecently as last March Donald Hodel, formerly the US energy secretary,opined that instability could come with the death of King Fahd. "Thelevel of civil unrest in Saudi Arabia is such that some close observersfear that Fahd's demise could spark the onset of civil war." The worldcould be "on the brink of another oil shock".Although the details of the discussions remain confused, the apparentSaudi "request" that the UK should expel a Saudi dissident from London,thus seemingly removing one impediment to the implementation of an armscontract, indicates a basic sense of profound insecurity within theclosed kingdom. Oil traders may wonder just how stable a country is ifit fears the actions of a dissident group overseas armed with a faxmachine.The affair also says something about the UK, not least as a governmentminister observed that the dissident's activities had been"complicating" UK relationships with the Saudis, to whom the UK exportsgoods worth some $4 billion each year, but that is not for FTEE todiscuss. Mohammed al Massaari, the leader of the London-based and nowinternationally publicised Committee for the Defence of LegitimateRights in Saudi Arabia, who had bombarded Saudi with faxes complaininglustily about alleged corruption and anti-Islamic practices in Saudi,is probably to be removed to Dominica on 19th January. Do fax machineswork from Dominica?The weatherApart from the continuing concern on what might happen in Saudi Arabia,there were other weather-related and political issues exercising themarket. The arrival of low temperatures in some of the key oil-consuming areas, now seldom expected in the winter, inspired thoughtsthat, contrary to recent experience, the next few months could be cold.The east coast of the United States saw its most severe blizzards forabout 50 years and large parts of Washington were brought to a completehalt.Although different statistics paint different pictures, the generalimpression was, and is, that stocks, especially of the crucial middledistillates, in the United States and in north west Europe, arerelatively low. Overall demand in some OECD countries may haveincreased faster than expected, even allowing for the bad weather.Between October and November, according to the IEA, global oilproduction rose by 1.04 mbd but some commentators think that demandrose even faster, at 2 mbd, implying a big reduction in inventories.Recent thinking argues that fast-increasing supplies of non Opec oildid not justify holding expensive stocks and this was borne out by thepattern of prices on the futures exchanges. The perceived wisdom nowseems to be to imitate manufacturing industry by receiving stocks "justin time". Clearly, this concept must be linked to a given level ofdemand, so, if demand proves higher than expected, prices for crude orproducts will prove more volatile than in earlier years.The overall supply-demand balance was also disrupted by the weather inRussia, which caused exports of fuel oil to come to a virtual halt, andcrude production was hampered elsewhere.It might have been cold in the last few weeks but the abiding memory of1995, in many countries, will be the high average temperatures. Indeed,for the world as a whole, 1995 was the warmest since reliable recordswere first maintained, about 140 years ago. Since 1860, the ten warmestyears have occurred in the last 13 years and the four leading yearshave all been in the nineties, according to the Meteorological Officeand the University of East Anglia. Global temperatures were about 0.41degrees Celsius above the long-term averages for the 1961-1990 period,inducing further thoughts about the potential of global warming and theprospect of an increasing pace of change.Opec, embargoes etc.Apparent Opec production discipline also helped to firm prices: therewas little evidence that members took advantage of higher prices andraised output levels further.A few years ago most analysts expected crude oil prices to rise, yearon year and one senior oilman, long since departed, was forecasting alevel of around $100 before the end of the century. How bizarre it mustseem to those commentators now, that with Iraq removed from theinternational market and Opec forced to implement allocations, thatprices have been sustained, in part, by boycotts imposed not by theproducers, but by consumers.Unless Iraq suddenly accepts the UN Security Council conditions forlimited sales, which remains unlikely, despite the UN secretarygeneral's hints on a possible compromise, Iraqi oil exports areunlikely until after the US presidential elections. Iraq stillmaintains that it should be allowed to influence the way in which theoil was exported and it remains opposed to the proposed distribution ofthe resulting income inside Iraq.General Prince Khaled Bin Sultan, the Saudi who was joint commander ofthe Gulf war allied forces, has claimed that the sanctions against Iraqare ineffective, so the UN should seek alternatives. He claimed thatthe embargo had strengthened, not weakened, the Saddam regime.The US has already banned the importation of Iranian oil and is now oncourse to adopt controversial measures to discourage other countriesfrom providing any support to Iran which allows it to develop its oilsector. A bill passed by the Senate would treat overseas companiesinvesting in Iran's oil sector less severely than implied in earlierversions and that still favoured by the House of Representatives. Suchcompanies could be ineligible for US-backed financial aid or creditsworldwide. The avowed intention of the current bill is "to deny Iranthe ability to support international terrorism and to fund thedevelopment and acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and themeans to deliver them by limiting the development of petroleumresources".The European Union condemns extra-territorial applications of USjurisdiction, as was apparent when the US introduced measures againstIran last May. Irrespective of the final shape of the legislation, somefinancial institutions and oil-related service companies are alreadypondering the wisdom of participating in Iran if such action alienatesthe US administration. This is of more than passing interest becausethe US government has indicated that, in the absence of allied support,as happened with the initial anti-Iran measures, more action would betaken.The US remains keen to tighten sanctions against Libya and although theinternational community remains ambivalent on sanctions to prevent thesale of Nigerian oil, the United States, which imports about 600,000bd, might still impose a unilateral ban. The German parliament and theFrench government favour a ban on Nigeria's international oil sales, asdo sundry groups in Europe and Africa, but the real momentum for asignificant international embargo seems to have evaporated.Indeed, at a meeting of the Southern African Development Community,where only five of the 12 member nations were represented by theirheads of state, the group declined to take any initiatives of its own,whilst simultaneously supporting international efforts to persuadeNigeria to move towards the restoration of democracy. President NelsonMandela of South Africa had convened the group to garner regionalsupport for his efforts to boycott Nigerian oil. Another apparentdefeat for Mandela's policy came from the secretary general of theOrganisation of African Unity who reportedly opposed a policy whichisolated Nigeria.The Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, set up after theCommonwealth suspended Nigeria from membership, is to send a seniordelegation to Nigeria, to stress the need for reform. However, it isclear that a ban on oil exports would only be considered if the missionfailed and failed conspicuously. Of course, the pressure could soonreturn if Nigeria chooses to execute some of those still facing trialor if it jails the FT journalist now released on bail, who was arrestedand charged with possession of seditious material when visitingOgoniland.Presumably seeking to create the impression that it was moving towardsthe restoration of democracy, General Abecha and his colleagues set upthree supervisory bodies to oversee the transition, which is scheduledfor October 1998. Four political aides of Moshood Abiola, widelybelieved to have won the presidential election 30 months ago, have beenreleased from detention but Abiola himself continues to languish inprison.Opec and non-OpecOpec remains confident that non-Opec supplies will be curtailed,voluntarily, to help firm prices. The latest edition of OPEC Bulletin,discussing the need for Opec's sacrifice to be shared, claims that"there are signs that the message is getting through". "OPEC soundingshave revealed that some non-OPEC countries now admit that it might besensible to share out future growth in oil demand between OPEC and non-OPEC. In addition, economists in at least one major western oil companyhave said much the same. Specific quotas might not be acceptable: theexercise of quiet restraint might be."The editorial suggests that "a better response from non-OPEC isexpected in the next six months". FTEE, admitting to just a soupcon ofcynicism and a dash of deja-vu, will believe that some form of genuine,sustained restraint has occurred only when it is apparent in the marketplace. Corporate breath will not be bated.ForecastsThe arrival of January inevitably induces a flurry of forecasts, which,doubtless, in some cases, the authors regret by March. Analysts WoodMackenzie, widely respected, citing NatWest Markets, suggest that inthe world excluding the former Soviet Union, economic expansion thisyear and next could be 3.2 and 3.3 per cent, respectively, compared to2.7 per cent in 1995. The implication is that oil demand might go up by2.6 and 2.7 per cent: this, in turn, suggests an increase of 1.7 mbdthis year and a further rise of 1.9 mbd in 1997. Wood Mackenzie notethat in 1996-97, many non-Opec countries will be extracting at peakrates: "between 1997 and 2000, non-Opec production outside the formerSoviet Union is estimated to rise by less than 1.0 per cent annually,in contrast to an average annual rate of 2.8 per cent sustained in 1990-95".NatWest Markets expect the price of Brent this year to average $19,compared to the likely final figure for 1995 of $17.5. However, pricescould dip to $18 in 1997, because of the return of Iraqi oil to themarket, before climbing to $20 in 1998 and $21 the following year. "Ifthe 1996-97 period is to be characterised by relatively strong world-wide economic growth, and non-Opec supplies begin to reach their upperlimits, the likelihood of recovery in crude oil pricing is high." Theanalysts contend that the risks to the oil market are now shiftingtowards higher, not lower, prices. Wood Mackenzie, using researchundertaken by colleagues in NatWest Securities, opt for a "Brent oilprice working assumption" of $17 this year, remaining constantthereafter in real terms.The Independent Petroleum Association of America, publishing its short-term forecasts, predicts that total US crude and products imports willrise this year to 9.123 mbd, from the expected 1995 average of 8.948mbd. Crude production will continue to fade, falling by 2.3 per centfrom 6.456 mbd to 6.395 mbd, which would be the lowest level since1954. Unsurprisingly, oil import dependence will exceed 50 per cent forthe fourth consecutive year. However, separately, the AmericanPetroleum Institute suggests that the 1995 cost of US oil imports wasabout $50 billion and that this figure, which was only marginallyhigher than the cost of imported clothing, probably represented aboutsix per cent of the cost of all imports.According to the IPAA, US oil demand may advance this year by 1.3 percent, or 238,000 bd, to 17.969 mbd. The consumption of distillate fuelcould go up by 1.7 per cent, from 3.193 mbd to 3.246 mbd. Gasolinedemand might increase by 1.3 per cent, to 7.881 mbd.Having fallen year on year for eight years, Russian production couldrise again in 1996, according to the Moscow-based World Energy Analysisand Forecasting Group, which also thinks that consumption couldincrease marginally. Wood Mackenzie expect total FSU production couldslip by another 100,000 bd this year but would then stabilise beforerising again. The Russian communist party secured 22 per cent of therecent vote in parliamentary elections and the ultra-nationalist groupwon 15 per cent, but western investors in the oil sector do not seemdismayed: the Duma has little influence in determining oil policy andthe forthcoming presidential elections in June could will be moresignificant for western investors.Crude oil production this year could go up in Mexico and Angola. PEMEXsuggest that 1996 output could average 2.860 mbd, up from last year's2.620 mbd, which was depressed by the October hurricanes. 1996 exportsmight be 1.50 mbd, up from 1.318 mbd. Angolan output this year couldclimb by 70,000 bd, to average 720,000 bd and, according to Sonangol,production could be close to 1 mbd by the end of 2001. The Departmentof Trade and Industry expected 1995 full year UK crude oil productionto exceed one billion barrels, for the first time. Output in both 1996and 1997 could be 140 million tonnes, compared to the 130 milliontonnes probably attained in 1995.According to Ida Bagus Sujana, the minister of mines and energy,Indonesia will sustain production at 1.5 mbd to 1999 but could become anet importer thereafter unless new oil reserves are found and broughton stream. In his Indonesia-The political economy of energy, PhilipBarnes argues that between 400 and 500 million barrels would berequired to be proved up each year, to sustain production close tocurrent levels. Such a level has not been attained of late andsustaining current output will not suffice if exports are to bemaintained. "Even in conjunction with modest economic growth, it islikely that demand for commercial energy will at least have doubled bythe year 2010."Supply and demandAccording to the International Energy Agency, world crude oilproduction rose from 71.13 mbd in November to 71.54 mbd in December butthe increase was less than expected. Temporary weather and technicalproblems that closed existing fields and delayed the start-up orexpansion of others were cited as reasons. Opec production went up from25.65 mbd to 25.76, with higher output being recorded by seven membersand declines being registered by two. Iran added 40,000 bd and the UAEand Venezuela each increased production by 30,000 bd. Neutral Zoneextraction eased by 30,000 bd. Opec aggregate output exceeded the quotalevel by 1.24 mbd, although direct comparisons ignore differentdefinitions.Outside Opec, UK production fell back by 120,000 bd, to 2.86 mbd, asbad weather offshore and onshore reduced effective capacity, especiallyfor the Forties systems crude. Norway, in contrast, thanks to theswifter pace of Heidrun output, added 80,000 bd to average a record3.26 mbd, and Russian yields, possibly significantly, rose from 6.16mbd to 6.22 mbd. Mexican production in December, still recovering fromthe previous hurricanes, averaged 3.25 mbd, up from 3.01 mbd.PricesDespite the recent and relatively high prices enjoyed by both productsand crudes, prices will probably weaken as the new year unfolds and aswinter recedes. Supply will increase and demand, for seasonal andeconomic reasons, could falter. Economic activity in Germany isexpected to slow and this could influence regional oil demand.The strong demand for heating oil, which has helped to push up crudeprices, will weaken and the refinery problems, which always occur atthis time of the year, will either vanish or will become lesssignificant.Whilst a new low trend in inventory levels suggests more short-termvolatility, the underlying trend in prices is expected to be downwards,not least as more non-Opec oil reaches the market.The Centre for Global Energy Studies, in its mid December report,offered a stark warning to Opec. Opec will have to reduce productionfrom the current level of around 25.4 mbd if current prices, (as at midDecember), are to be maintained. "Failure to do so will bring about adramatic weakening of prices in the second half of 1996. Unusually,four new fields are due to be brought on stream in the UKCS during thefirst quarter of 1996...This could reduce the normal second quarter dipin non-Opec output and shift the year's price peak into the firstquarter. If Opec continues to produce at a rate of 25.4 mbd throughout1996, the price of their basket of crudes could average less than $12in the fourth quarter of 1996 and little more than $14.5 for the yearas a whole."The CGES report contends that "even if Opec does reduce its outputafter its meeting in June, it may be a case of too little, too late, asstocks will have been built up to 88 days' worth of forward consumptionby the start of the third quarter, two days more than at the same pointin 1995." Even a long, cold winter in the major oil-consuming countrieswould only delay the onset of price weaknesses. The price of the Opecbasket of crudes in 1995 averaged $16.86 per barrel, in comparison withthe previous year's average of $15.53. The December 1995 figure was$17.74, up from $16.49 in the previous month.The price of Brent, which closed at $17.69 per barrel on 8th December,reacted to the pressures of demand and reached a high of $19.17 on 8thJanuary. As noted before, this was the highest closing price since lastMay. February Brent dropped to $17.41 on the IPE at the close on 12thJanuary and the Brent Blend contract for March finished on the spotmarket at $16.92. Backwardation is firmly based on the InternationalPetroleum Exchange, with July crude oil futures contracts available at$15.98. West Texas Intermediate moved from $18.86 on 8th December tofinish on 12th January at $17.96, having peaked on 5th January at$20.19, the highest level since last May. Dubai moved up sharply duringthe review period from $16.91, $1.08 behind Brent and $1.95 adrift ofWTI, to $17.67, before falling back on 12th January, to finish at$16.04.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  NATURAL GASIn Europe, the big news is that the Danish state owned Dansk Olie ogNaturgas (Dong) and Amerada Hess have embarked on a joint investigationof a new gas transportation system in the Danish North Sea which couldpossibly tap UK and Norwegian as well as Danish reserves, following asharp rise in demand for natural gas in Denmark.Norwegian gas appears to be in high demand elsewhere as well;deliveries of gas from Norway to Continental Europe hit a new high inDecember following the sharp decline in temperatures over Christmas.The Italians have joined the bandwagon as well with negotiations goingahead which could establish Norway as a major source of natural gas inItaly. It was reported that the agreement likely to be made in the verynear future between Italy and Norway will provide for annual import of10-12 Bcm from the Norwegian North Sea over a period of twenty years.Polish oil and gas company Polskie Gornictwo Naftowe i Gazownictwo(PGNiG) is viewing the new 292 km Netra pipeline, built by a consortiumof BEB, Norsk Hydro, Ruhrgas and Statoil, as good news and as a goodway of diversifying its gas imports away from Russia. The company hopesto begin negotiations with Norwegian field owners over the next fewmonths with a view to starting supply in two or three years time.Talking of Russia and Ruhrgas, the joint venture company Wingas, set upbetween Russian company Gazprom and German Wintershall has managed tomake the first step to breaking Ruhrgas's traditional domination of theRuhr when it signed a deal with Stadtwerke Wuppertal in December underwhich it is now the proud new owner of a connecting pipe from the Wedelline to Wuppertal. Ruhrgas ally, Thyssengas has pointed out that it hasexclusive rights to contracts with Wuppertal, but the new pipe has beenpassed off as being "for emergencies only".Further west, in Austria, the introduction of a CO2 levy has beenfurther delayed by the resignation of finance minister AndreasStaribacher, who has argued in favour of the levy as part of a generalenvironmental initiative to encourage reduced consumption of energyrather than simply shifting from one energy source to another. Hisreplacement, Viktor Klima, as previous finance chief at OMV which has amonopoly on Austria's gas imports, is expected to be more sympatheticto the demands of the energy industry. This coupled with the recentcabinet reshuffle following an indecisive election last month couldspell short term trouble for the introduction of the levy.The UK-Zeebrugge Interconnector gas pipeline project is to go aheadwith companies soon to be invited by Belgian Distrigaz to apply fortransit pipeline capacity. Jean Vermeire, Distrigaz gas supply andsales director, made assurances that all studies and preparatory workto put the required transit capacity in place by October 1998 were onschedule. He added that shippers willing to enter into long-termagreements by the end of the first half of 1996 would be assured ofavailability of the requested transit service.However, problems such as potential exposure to the disequilibrium onthe UK market caused by continued regulation following privatisation ofBritish Gas remain. It is felt that the current UK spot prices are theresult of a supply overhang, one of the consequences of anunsatisfactory privatisation structure of British Gas followingprivatisation in 1986. Ruhrgas, however, remain confident that even ifthe spot market would not disappear completely, it would neverthelessbe contained as the disequilibrium could be reduced via theInterconnector.On a more intercontinental level, British Gas has joined a consortiumwith Shell International, Malaysian company Calgary and Gaz de France,fresh with new president Pierre Gadonneix, to bid opposite AustralianBHP for construction of a Pakistan-Iran pipeline, planned by thePakistani government to stretch 1,700 km and importing 1.6 Bcfd of gasfrom Iran. The successful bidder will be expected to begin on thepipeline by June 1996 and would be responsible for the operation andmaintenance of the project on a build-own-operate (BOO) basis as wellas for the purchase of gas from Iran and its delivery to Pakistan.The long awaited Nigerian LNG Bonny project is now finally on trackdespite repeated international calls for reprisals against the Nigerianmilitary regime for its execution of Ogoni activists. In partnership onthe project for engineering, construction and procurement of aliquefaction plant with Nigeria LNG Ltd. are Shell, the majorinternational component, the Nigerian National Petroleum Corp., Elf andItalian company Agip. Transmission and collection of gas will also formpart of the project, presenting the first ever available way ofdisposing of large quantities of gas produced in the Delta region. Thetrouble with Bonny LNG however is that has been said to be back ontrack so many times that it produces cynicism.The Nigerian government seems to have an almost infinite capacity forgetting in the way. Killing Ken Sara-Wiwa and eight other Ogoniactivists was just one action in a long line that has threatened thisproject. Now however it does seem as if progress will be made. Out ofthe $3.8 billion total cost some $500 million has been spent in groundclearance and on ships, while a further $2 billion is in escrowaccounts. Contrary to the general impression that Shell, Elf, Agip andthe rest are doing General Sani Abacha one big favour, the project isnot due to start making money for the government until 2007, when allthe construction costs are paid off. Ships can move of course and theNigerian government does not have a reputation for a hands off attitudeto money, but if Bonny does not finally get off the ground now, Nigeriawill have zero credibility for foreign investment.Meanwhile pity the poor Ukrainians. The Kiev government has increasedcoal and gas prices by 24 and 34 per cent respectively in line with itspromise to the International Monetary Fund that it would introduceprice reform. Currently rents and communal services are charged atroughly 60 per cent of cost. Further increases in prices are due inApril. However help is at hand. The government has raised pensions by192 per cent as a means to soften the blow. This perhaps explains whyinflation is at 4.6 per cent per monthFinally a quick cheer for the US winter. Philadelphia provides thenumbers with the National Weather Service reporting that December 1995had an average temperature of 32oF or 10oF colder than December 1994.Using a heating degree day index December came out as nearly twice ascold as December 1994 and 37 per cent colder than in November. Localelectricity sales from PECO Energy were 8 per cent up on the previousDecember, but local gas sales increased by 44 per cent. All of whichexplains why US gas prices went above $3 per MMBtu for the first timefor ages and ages.Unhappily many consumers particularly in the north-east reacted fastenough to switch to heating oil. This reduced the price spike, but didat least mean that there was no supply crisis. Yet it does explain thestrange truth that although US gas consumption is rising at roughlythree times normal energy demand growth - according to the American GasAssociation - it requires the worst winter weather since Washington wasin Valley Forge to get the gas price to go up. Don't spend all yourprofits at the same time, you lucky people!Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  COALAnybody who knows anything about the Japanese energy scene knows thatthe Institute of Energy Economics (IEE) is an important part ofJapanese decision making. It is not a group of academics, sitting in anivory tower, waiting to be let out for the occasional cucumber sandwichand an opportunity to bore people silly. On the contrary the IEE hasclout across the country's energy institutions and uses it. That is whyit is stuffed full of utility salarimen on secondment.It is thus interesting to discover that it is advocating that theJapanese power utilities start buying more coal on the spot marketinstead of being so dependent on contract purchases. The IEE studypoints out that the Japanese utilities buy virtually no coal on thespot market, whereas the Europeans, Taiwanese and Korean generatingcompanies take 28-44 per cent, 10-30 per cent and 10 per centrespectively from spot sales. Given that Japanese coal power stationutilisation is coming more into line with practices elsewhere, namelyfalling, IEE points out with some straight talking that current buyingpractices bring no benefit at all in terms of lower prices. It makesless and less sense to buy on contract for stations that are likely tobe only 59 per cent in utilisation.A big shift of this kind, perhaps towards a 1.8 million ton minimumspot purchase, could have an interesting impact on the market. TheJapanese utilities are, after all, the primary setters of world marketprices. There is something comforting in a difficult world about thesteady old Japanese, who buy in neat and predictable chunks, withoption tonnages sitting on top. However the shift towards a 10 per centspot purchase arrangement, as advocated by the IEE would not be quiteas simple as it looks. The Japanese utilities buy high quality coals,whose purchase is rather predictable. To enter the spot market on thisbasis would probably require closed tenders for specific brands. Yetthis method would not impose much downward pricing pressure on theproducers. To really get towards lower prices, the process wouldrequire open tender spot procurement and this might mean buyingmaterial of unknown origin; a process that is distinctly un-Japanese.The utilisation of the spot market is also perhaps something the Germancoal buyers will have to learn, assuming that is that they really wishto save money. According to the German Coal Importers Federation(GCIF), the border price of steam coal into Germany averaged DM76 perton, or $53.10 per ton. Before however looking shocked and astonishedat this apparently absurdly high price, it should never be forgottenthat the average price of the home-produced material is a cool DM291per ton of hard coal before subsidies kick in. Given that the importedproduct is consequently only a quarter of the price of German producedmaterial, it seems odd that German imports only rose by 3 per cent in1995.This said, the importer's association are not expecting bigger thingsin 1996. While import prices are expected to be stable, the irony isthat the GCIF are expecting imports to fall by 10 per cent. Theregrettable fact is that the large consumer utilities have a serioushangover of stocks, following the last days of the infamous Jahrhundertarrangement. The last year of this forced the utilities to buy morecoal from local mines than they could actually use. Having tested thewater in 1995, the utilities are now looking to put a hold on importsuntil the stockpiles shrink, hence the importers pessimism.The day of the German importer must surely come eventually however,even if Bayernwerk - the utility - managed to do a five year deal withSaarberg just days before the Jahrhundert blew off into history. Itbought 2.3 million tons from Germany's second largest coal producer onDecember 21 1995, just days before its workforce departed to thefestivities. This deal lines up with the one signed in July for 4million tons from Ruhrkohle over five years. Bayernwerk consequentlywill burn around 1.26 million tons of German coal for the next fiveyears. Imports in 1996 are but at a lowly 300,000 tons. Old habitsclearly die hard, but Bayernwerk at least has the excuse that it haslimited access to unloading facilities using imports by water, which isthe reason why one of Germany's largest power utilities likes to buyforeign coal in ludicrously small 15,000 ton part cargoes.If the German utilities are being less than enthusiastic about leapinginto the exciting new world of foreign coal purchasing, at leastRuhrkohle is game for foreign travel. Ruhrkohle International, asubsidiary of Ruhrkohle's trading arm Ruhrkohle Handel wants toincrease its stake in Australia's German Creek from around 12 per centto 20 per cent. Maybe the name makes them feel at home. Either way,Ruhrkohle is on the scout for foreign talent, but pretends not to havemuch money, in spite of the extraordinary resources of the Germanstate. There is a PhD to be written about the political economy ofGerman energy. While the Brits liberalise everything to the point ofself-destruction and the French are blatantly proud of their state-owned centralisation, the Germans seem to muddle along with a cartel-like structure and the highest electricity prices in Western Europe.The oddness of their "model" of "the market" can only be fullyappreciated when it is understood that the German consumer is stillshelling out numerous pfennigs per MWh as a contribution to a fund to"decommission" the Kalkar fast breeder reactor! Since the reactor wasnever commissioned and consequently does not need a fund to"decommission" it, the money presumably goes towards the Germanelectricity industry's annual Christmas Party, or some such worthycause. Kalkar, of course, is being turned into a fun fair by the Dutch.Either way, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the Germanconsumers are so dumb that they are being taken for a serious ride.While it is possible on rare occasions to meet a poor German farmer, itis extremely rare to meet a poor German energy utility or producer. Thelocal distributor may be poor, but not the supplier. After all, whatcould possibly be more anti-competitive than the late lamentedJahrhundert, which sold coal at approximately five times the worldmarket price! Given that the British and the French seem to grab mostof the attention in the European Union's ever continuing liberalisationdebate, perhaps it might be valuable if a closer look was taken at the"German model".Talking of amusing differentials between world prices and local ones,the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board has suddenly got cold feetabout importing coal into India. After requesting tenders for 500,000tons in September in a moment of bravado, the board opened all theenvelopes and realised that, at Rs2,900 per ton, the lowest offer wasthree times the cost of the local Andhra Pradesh mines. What appearedpossible in September had become impossible in December following thespectacular collapse of the value of the Rupee against the dollar.By contrast Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) has finalised its 1996contracts, settling for $59.45 per ton (CIF). The total volume amountsto 2.4 million tons. Alagendran exports got the biggest slice with amixed bag of coal from Indonesia, South Africa and Australia, while PTSarita Prima offered the lowest price at $49 per ton. Other Indianbuyers include Karnataka Power Corporation (KPC) which is looking for250,000 tons on the international market. KPC has a problem with stocksfollowing the strikes in Andhra Pradesh mines. Its previous attempt topurchase coal abroad failed in 1993 on both technical and commercialgrounds. However, this time KPC are asking for sellers to quote inIndian rupees.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGY MARKET REPORT:  ELECTRICITYFollowing the collapse of the European Commission's latest attempts toestablish an internal market for electricity (FTEE 170/26), EnergyCommissioner Christos Papoutsis has warned new constitutional powersmay be necessary to push through the reforms.Unveiling the Commission's first white paper on energy, which targetsoverall competitiveness, supply security and environmental protection,Papoutsis said; "if we are to achieve all these objectives, theCommission must raise the question of whether a modification of theTreaty of Rome is necessary, as Community action I believe is nowlimited by the absence of clear provisions."A key area of concern identified by Papoutsis is that of public serviceobligation, France's all-serving system security excuse for rebuffingforeign distribution company entry into its power market. Moretransparency is needed in the pricing and taxing of all forms ofenergy, including fossil and nuclear fuels, says the Commission:"Energy prices, especially electricity prices, should not be used asparafiscal instruments to support specific forms of energy, since thiswill form distortions of competition unless such measures reflectexternal factors". Allowances, however, are to be made for renewablesources.An odd response issued from France. "We need to have a directive assoon as possible", cried industry minister Franck Borotra. Hang on,France (along with Greece and Ireland) has been the IEM's fiercestcritic in the last five years; why the volte face? But wait. Borotrahas a tiny condition - "there is no way we will step back from ourposition which is based on the single buyer . . . the monopoly oftransport and distribution belongs to the state". Such a directivehardly constitutes an open market and would probably be unacceptable tothe UK, Germany or the Commission. France is safe in adopting pro-EUouter garments in calling for a directive while declining to play on alevel field.There has been a ripple of dissent, however, from the country's 180-strong grouping of independent power distributors. They are lobbying tobecome "eligible consumers", able to pick and choose a supplier, andhave challenged the government line excluding non-nationaliseddistributors from the right to choice. Countering the government/unionargument that such a policy would lead to serious price differencesbetween communities, depending on whether they had their own utility,the independents suggested an equalisation fund could resolve theproblem.Never mind differing prices of supply, any supply at all would do forindustrial customers in India who are suffering the worst spate ofpower shortages in lining memory. Industry officials say the problemsstem from the country's failure to reach power project installationtargets, inadequate rainfall hampering hydropower generation, continuedcoal shortages for a number of reasons and what is being described as"inter-grid indiscipline".Andhra Pradesh's government has had to increase power cuts to hightension industrial customers to between 40-60 per cent of theirsanctioned loads above 70 kVa. Restrictions on peak hour consumptionfor industrial consumers and five-hour supply cuts daily for householdsare common. Street lighting is being restricted to alternate poles; useof neon signs in shops and on billboards is banned.Maharashtra, meanwhile, will suffer shortages until a new 500 MW unitat Chandrapur goes on line in mid-1997. With peak demand at 8,300 MWand availability at 7,700 MW, the state is at present operating with asignificant shortfall. Perpetual overdraw by Madhya Pradesh state by200-500 MW from central power stations at Korba and Vindhyachal hasworsened shortages in Maharashtra.The news, then, that the state had finally approved Enron's 2,184 MWDabhol project as well as two other long-pending IPPs at Bhadrawati andPatalganga was hardly surprising. The politicisation and subsequentrenegotiations on Dabhol, however, has inspired emulation from stateselsewhere. Seven other fast track power projects, offered centralgovernment payment guarantees, have come under similar pressure toreduce project and tariff cost.Perhaps the worst example is the case of AES Transpower, a US energygroup, which is into the fourth renegotiation of its power contractwith the state of Orissa. AES has had to reconfigure its three-year-oldproject to meet cost-cutting demands; another government review is inprogress. No one foresees a post-Enron glut of projects - just two orthree deals closed this year, two or three next year and maybe three orfour in 1998, a UK power group director said. AES' last expatriatemanager left India for China at the beginning of the year; "we cannotafford to lock up resources here," he said.For the record, Dabhol's approval was dependent on Enron cutting theproject's power tariff to Rs1.86/kWh (3.4p/kWh) from an original Rs2.4and a reduction in the initial #1.8 billion cost of the plant. Enronfelt the tariff was "achievable" and that it had proposed the capitalcost cut last November. The new deal would see the two-phase plant'snet output of 2,015 MW rise to 2,184 MW but capital costs fall by atleast $335 million.Japan's long-term fast-breeder reactor (FBR) programme has suffered amajor setback following an accident at the 280 MW Monju experimentalplant located in Fukui prefecture. The accident itself was severe,involving the leakage of sodium-based coolant. Just as serious,however, were delays in dealing with the problem and attempts to playit down. Both have damaged the overall image of the country's ambitiousBWR/PWR programme.Leakage of about three tonnes of sodium-compound coolant on December 8seems to have resulted from a faulty pipe weld. The leakage wasdetected at 7:47pm but shutdown did not start until 8:00pm. It hadtaken the head operator eight minutes to get in contact with hisdivision chief to ask permission to shut down the plant, a delay whichHiroshi Oishi, head of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel DevelopmentCorp (PNC), admitted was a contributory factor in the delay inreporting the accident to the local authorities.PNC's initial version of the incident had meanwhile been found tocontain falsified data bringing forward the time of inspection of theaccident site. It has come to light that sections of video footageshowing extensive damage to pipe structures caused by the leakage hadbeen withheld. PNC has now dismissed four officials associated withMonju, including one of the directors in charge of operations - theywill remain in PNC employment, however, at other sites.Not surprisingly, Fukui prefectural government has expressed dismay atthe way the national government is handling the nuclear programme.Governor Yukio Kurita said the citizens of Fukui felt "betrayed byPNC's deceptions". The prefecture has a total of 15 reactors, mostlyoperated by Osaka-based Kansai Electric Power Co; it now wants to delayany decision to allow Japan Atomic Power Co to build two more reactorsin the Tsuruga region. Monju itself is slated to serve as the technicalfoundation for a pre-commercial FBR, leading to commercial technologyin 20-30 years time. The accident could have a wider impact than on theFBR schedule, however. Monju is fuelled by plutonium, and thefalsifying of details, slow response rate and general maladroitness ofits safety operations may result in a serious re-examination of thecountry's plutonium policy.Japan has planned to use some plutonium in the form of mixed-oxidefuel, MOX, in as many as 10 BWRs and PWRs by 2000-2002. The Instituteof Energy Economics predicts Japan should have 75-90 GW of nuclearcapacity by 2020 and 90-110 GW by 2030. These plans, overseen by theMinistry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), could be delayedconsiderably. Demands for improved safety provision and training willhave cost implications for utilities as well as for the reprocessingfacility being built at Rokkasho-mura in Aomori prefecture. Thefacility will be subject to greater scrutiny from local authoritiesafter Monju. Aomori has sent officials to Fukui to investigate firsthand the accident and the subsequent cover up.The future destination of the constituent parts of Siemens' MOX"nuclear village" at Hanau remains open as the facility prepares toclose. Now it is clear the German government has no intention ofdisposing Russian weapons-grade plutonium at the plant, preparations todecommission all facilities have been speeding up. These comprise theold MOX plant, closed in 1992 for safety reasons, a uranium fuelelement plant, shut down last September, and the new virtuallycompleted MOX facility, costing $765 million (half of which wasshouldered by German utilities), and never brought into operation dueto political opposition. Germany's nuclear operators are now having toturn exclusively to foreign MOX plants - Belgo-Nucleaire's 30t facilityat Dessel, the 25-30t Cadarache unit at Marcoule in France and the 5-8tplant at Sellafield in the UK. The 100-120t Thorp MOX plant atSellafield should provide additional capacity it comes into operationin 1997 - although this date is considered optimistic in Germany.Siemens hopes to sell the whole Hanau system or at least parts of it toa foreign producer of fuel elements. France's Cogema is said to haveshown an interest in certain components; Belgium, the UK and Japan arealso in talks with the German company. For security reasons, Siemensdoes not feel exporting the plant to Russia is an option.Siemens will no doubt get a poor return on its investment, as will theUK taxpayer if and when the country's viable nuclear industry isprivatised in the summer. The government is still considering how topresent the assets to the market. Analysts generally agree that theright price for a merged AGR/PWR business is obtained by prudentlydiscounting a number of factors - liabilities first, political andregulatory instability next, perhaps public antipathy last. What isleft is, by one assessment, worth just over #800 million- not a goodreturn considering the Sizewell B PWR alone cost #2.5 billion. GordonMacKerron of Sussex University suggests the government will be temptedto retain the #3 billion ($4.658 billion) cost of reprocessing spentAGR fuel presently residing in the cooling ponds of Sellafield toensure the AGR/PWR business fetches something like the #2.6 billionvalue it has placed on it.While superficially attractive, MacKerron feels this would beunsatisfactory and possibly illegal under European Commission state aidrules. The argument that the reprocessing costs constitute a historicallegacy and have nothing to do with the operation of a new company isfallacious, he says; "There are provisions in the accounts of NuclearElectric and Scottish Nuclear of some #3.5 billion to cover theseliabilities for reprocessing AGR fuel irradiated to 1995, and theseprovisions have in principle been invested in the assets which BritishEnergy will acquire. In other words the assets contain the provisionsfor paying for the inherited spent fuel. To exempt BE from the need topay for them would be to allow the company to enjoy the future incomesfrom the assets while escaping a major liability which those assets aredesigned to pay for."Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EDITOR'S EXAGGERATIONKeen eyed readers may have noticed two alarming failures in FTEE'sDecember coverage. According to a recent version of Nostrodamus'sfamous prophecy's, namely December's editorial, the world may havedifficulty living with 142 billion people on it, even if global warmingdoes not happen. While not denying that the world will indeed haveproblems with feeding, clothing and above all paying 142 billionpeople, FTEE would like to point out that this level of populationgrowth is unlikely in the near term. The figure should have read 14-12billion people.The other chronic failure was to omit to wish all our subscribers avery happy and prosperous new year.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TURKEY TO INCREASE POWER GENERATING CAPACITYTurkey is to increase its power generating capacity by 37% to 29,000 MWby 2000, according to its energy minister, Sinasi Altiner. The targetis to increase output from 78.3 TWh to 1,300 TWh by the end of thecentury. The new stations will have an average capacity of  500 MW. Thetarget for 2010 is 59,500 MW of capacity.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NORWAY'S OIL OUTPUT HITS RECORDNorway's oil output hit a record 3.07 million barrels a day inDecember, in an increase of 54,000 bd over the November figure. Thisoutput confirms Norway's position as the second largest oil exporterafter Saudi Arabia, exporting 2.87 mbd in the period.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHINA'S HAINAN ISLAND GASChina's Hainan Island gas will shortly be reaching the mainland. TheYancheng 13-1 offshore gas field will start pumping gas to the Nanshanpower station and a commercial fertiliser venture in Hainan province onMarch 1. The field is a joint venture between the China NationalOffshore Corporation, Arco and the Kuwait Foreign Petroleum ExplorationCompany. It will produce 3.4 Bcm a year and has already startedsupplying Hong Kong's Black Point station. It cost $1.13 billion todevelop.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SYRIA TO AMEND CURRENCY REGULATIONSSyria is to amend currency regulations used to calculate the cost ofoil operations in the country. These previously kept the dollar peggedto the very low rate of 11.2 Syrian pounds, whereas the official rateis SrP 42 to the dollar. Now the value of oil revenues will be peggedto SrP 23, effectively making oil activities less expensive for foreigncompanies.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VIETNAM'S REFINERY PROJECT BACK ON TRACTVietnam's new and first refinery project is now back on track, with newpartners replacing France's Total, which had pulled out. Vietnam hasinvited South Korea's LG Group, Malaysia's Petronas and Conoco to join.PetroVietnam and LG Group will now have 30% each, with Petronas andConoco sharing 30% and Taiwan's China Petroleum and InvestmentCorporations taking the rest. The 130,000 bd refinery will be built atDung Quat Bay, south of Danang.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SOUTH AFRICA TO INTRODUCE UNLEADED PETROLSouth Africa will introduce unleaded petrol in February, initially at a4 cents per litre discount. Members of the South African PetroleumIndustry Association (SAPIA) have so far spent R270 million in refineryupgrading to meet the change. Sasol has invested R300 million since1993 to produce the new fuel. SAPIA are looking for a 20-25 marketshare as rapidly as possible.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996YEMEN APPROVES GAS DEAL WITH TOTALYemen's parliament has approved a $3 billion gas deal with Total. Thisclears the way for a deal struck in May for the development of Maribfield, with a pipeline to an LNG plant and terminal at Balhaf on theArabian Sea.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PANHANDLE EASTERN CHANGES NAMEPanhandle Eastern is dead, long live PanEnergy Corporation. The US gasgroup clearly has a mission for expansion into other areas than gas,having changed its name on January 2nd "to more accurately reflect ourcurrent focus." This is just a little sad. Panhandler is a wonderfulword. Having started out meaning gold digger, it has ended up meaningbeggar. Pan, by contrast was merely the Greek god in charge of drunkenorgies!Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SENSITIVE MATERIAL ABOUT THE KUWAITI OIL INDUSTRYAn unnamed British businessman bought a set of second hand officefurniture and found highly sensitive material about the Kuwaiti oilindustry in a drawer. The Kuwait Petroleum Corporation paper containedoil reserve figures and details of oil accords with other countries.The Briton is demanding a large sum of money to return the papers. Isit any wonder that the Brits always play the villains in Hollywoodmovies!Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POLAND SEEKING POSTPONEMENT OF LIBERALISED FUEL IMPORTSPoland is seeking a postponement of its deadline for liberalising fuelimports, from 1997 to 1999. Under a treaty with the EU, Poland issupposed to be liberalising imports from the end of 1996. However thePolish government now feels that this will damage its refineries.Poland plans to rationalise and privatise its refining capacity at acost of $3 billion in new investment.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199690% OF LUKOIL'S SUBSIDIARY SHARES CONSOLIDATEDLUKoil, the Russian integrated oil company is succeeding in its attemptto consolidated the shares of its subsidiaries into the main company.By January 1st 90% of subsidiary shares had been consolidated.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NIGERIA SIGNS MOU WITH CHINANigeria has signed a memorandum of understanding with China, which willbuild two new power stations in the country. The North China ElectricPower Company and the North China Electric Design Institute will buildplants located at Abuja and Geregu. The Chinese will provide thefinance. China is getting closer to the Nigerian regime, having agreedto modernise its railway system for $500 million in December.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VENEZUELA'S PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICITY SECTORVenezuela's government hopes to raise $400 million from theprivatisation of its electricity sector. Sistema Isla de Margarita,Enelven-Enelco and Enelbar companies will be sold this year, althoughthe sale of 2000 MW Planto Centro plant is to be delayed. The WorldBank's International Finance Corporation is helping with theprivatisation. The capacity for sale amounts to 1,700 MW out of a totalcapacity of 18,000 MW. However 10,000 MW on the system comes from theGuri dam.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BP TO REDUCE REFINING CAPACITYBP is to reduce its refining capacity from 3 mbd to 1.4 mbd by the saleor closure of its Lima,. Ohio complex in the US; its Lavera refinery insouthern France and the Pernis section of the Nerefco complex inRotterdam. This still leaves BP with 11 refineries worldwide and theaim is to bring its refining to marketing ratio more in line withcompetitors.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DABHOL DEAL AGREEDEnron has finally got its Dabhol deal. Maharashtra state government hasagreed to the project, providing that Enron reduce both the capitalcosts and the power tariff. Ms Rebecca Mark, chief executive officer ofEnron Development is now confident that work will start again in thenext three months. The tariff is to be cut from Rs 2.40 (6.7 cents) toRs 1.86 per unit and capital costs from Rs 90.6 billion to Rs 64.2billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DR ROBERT MABRO AWARDED CBEDr Robert Mabro, head of the Oxford Institute of Energy Studies,England and noted expert on oil economics and the politics of Opec wasawarded a CBE in the British new year's honour's list.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SURVEY OF UK CONSUMERSA British survey by the Consumer's Association has revealed that two-thirds of UK consumers will not switch to a foreign electricityproducer when allowed to do so with full competition in 1998. We shallsee.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCIDENT AT MONJU FAST BREEDER REACTORJapan's Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation has beencriticised for attempting to cover up the accident at its Monju fastbreeder reactor. The company deliberately withheld video footage of thesodium leak because it should more extensive damage than expected. Thecompany also failed to report the accident to local authoritiesimmediately it happened.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INTERSOLAR AWARDED CONTRACT BY WORLD BANKThe Intersolar Group of the UK has been awarded a contract by the WorldBank to produce prototypes for small solar-lighting units for use inthe developing world. Fifty units will be produced of two designs andtested in Kenya during 1996. The units are based on 2W thin film solarcell produced by Intersolar.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996G7 COUNTRIES SIGN MOU WITH THE UKRAINEThe G7 countries have signed a memorandum of understanding with theUkraine. The two remaining reactors in operation at Chernobyl will beshut by 2000. The deal is underpinned by $500 million in grantassistance and $1.8 billion in projected investments. Two unfinishedSoviet-designed reactors will also be completed.Back to Headline List CopyrightENERGY ECONOMIST via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EXPLORATORY WELLS IN CHINA'S TARIM BASINFour exploratory wells in China's Tarim basin suggest that the area mayhave a large oil and gas field. One of the wells produced 218 tonnes ofcrude and 177,000 cubic metres of gas per day. The Xinhua news agencysuggested that the structure extend over 50 km. The agency claims thatnine fields have been discovered in the Tarim so far.Back to Headline List WT03-B34-18IA059-000325-B003-191http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey50.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231300 text/html 109114HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:10:54 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:02 GMTContent-length: 108926Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey50.html Sample Issue Copyright THE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES California board wants 10% sales of zero- emission autos in 2003 (1305 words) N.J. first state to sign on to 49-state LEV (269 words) Nickel-hydride battery to double range of GM's electronic vehicle (418 words) SCEcorp to lease, sell, install charge systems for EVs in California (176 words) DOE considers an executive order to implement federal AFV purchases (672 words) NYMEX panel selects coal specifications and delivery points for coal futures (915 words) Utilities link two-way communications with customers on interactive systems (1307 words) Senate, House energy leaders disagree on need for full deregulation bill (726 words) FERC should get tougher on mergers; municipals and co-op groups say (358 words) Southern tries to block TVA's move to sell power well outside its service area (472 words) Pa. utility pushes for competition (234 words) Coal industry study says EPA's NOx plan could cost utilities billions (208 words) Oil's share of energy market drops to 30- year low; 1995 imports decline (1148 words) Exxon reaches partial settlement with underwriters in Valdez costs (292 words) Wildlife group produces oil and gas at more than one wilderness preserve (275 words) WTO makes it official: Clean Air Act RFG requirements ruled 'protectionist' (886 words) Federal appeals court upholds right of New York to adopt Calif. LEV rules (458 words) O'Leary names Grumbly to under secretary spot (110 words) Enron gets official offer from India to revive Dabhol Power project (178 words) IPPs accuse NiMo of trying to slip out of contracts with tax proposal (372 words) Independents argue for case-by-case determination in FERC's OCS inquiry (569 words) Nuclear industry pushes for economies as new polls slam/praise its future (701 words) Dueling polls reach opposite results for pro-nuke, anti-nuke agendas (507 words) Oil crisis likely within 10 years, Energy Dept. officials predict (1067 words) Exploration and production spending will jump, worldwide survey shows (375 words) Environmentalists applaud SDG&E (122 words) WEP wants 6.2% rate increase (87 words) Gasoline prices increase (68 words) Nuclear plants shut (158 words) Westinghouse scores fuel cells (138 words) Calendar (207 words) Joint venture formed in Shanghai (57 words) CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996California board wants 10% sales of zero-emission autos in 2003     The controversial California 2% zero-emission vehicle (ZEV) sales mandate for 1998 was officially scrapped late last month by the California Air Resources Board (CARB) in favor of an alternative plan that would instead require that 10% of new car sales be ZEVs by 2003.     This latest development adds a bit of clarity to California's ZEV plans, but clouds an already murky picture for the immediate future of ZEVs in states that have adopted the California Low-Emission Vehicle (LEV) plan -- including ZEV mandates -- under authority of the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA), with New York and Massachusetts being the largest.     Yet the move was hardly a surprise, since CARB had told its staff in November to develop an alternative, "market-based" plan that did not include the 1998 mandate for ZEVs that the board concluded are not "technologically competitive with gasoline-powered vehicles at this time."     Right now, electric vehicles (EVs) are the only ones that qualify as ZEVs.     The CARB staff is charged with submitting a final plan for board approval no later than March.     Environmentalists, who initially offered faint support for the mandate roll-back in November when CARB Chairman John Dunlap said emissions reductions would not lessen and a 5% sales mandate due in 2001 would go forth, are now charging the board with caving in to political pressure from Gov. Pete Wilson and the estimated $24 million media campaign and legislative lobbying launched by the Big Three automakers and oil companies against the plan.     "We have seen no scientific or technical reason to delay [the mandate]," said Tim Carmichael of the Coalition for Clean Air. "The agency responsible for worldwide adoption of catalytic converters, unleaded gasoline and reformulated gasoline has never before buckled to political pressure."     But CARB staff reviewing the technological feasibility of introducing EVs on such a large scale in 1998 found that the driving range before recharging would be too low and the cost too high to attract the needed consumers for the amount of cars that had to be sold.     By abandoning the mandate, CARB officials said, they would avoid poisoning the market for the next generation of EVs that would meet consumer expectations at a reasonable cost.     "This plan provides for a [future] successful launch of commercially viable electric cars," said Dunlap.     Automobile experts called the proposal a practical move.Carmakers still not happy     In its preliminary assessment, the board found that by 2010, when technology is more advanced and mass production reduces cost, automakers would be able to successfully sell 10% of their fleet as EVs.     Environmentalists think that could happen sooner.     "This is inconsistent with the conclusions of the independent battery panel that called for strong requirements beginning with the year 2000 in order to maintain research and investment," said Roland Hwang of the Union of Concerned Scientists.     Under the original proposal, there would have been around 60,000 ZEVs on the road by 2000. CARB's preliminary proposal now only calls for two demonstration projects in Sacramento and Los Angeles that require only 3,750 ZEVs between 1998 and 2000.     The original plan also called for the 10% mandate to go into effect in 2004, not 2003 as now proposed.     Although seemingly the victors in what has been a contentious fight among automakers, regulators and environmentalists, the automotive industry issued hesitant praise for the plan.     Said Chrysler, "the pull ahead of the 10% mandate timing from 2004 to 2003 ... will risk the launch of EV technology."     And Ford called CARB's acknowledgement that the 1998 mandate will not work "positive," but that CARB's new proposal "leaves many important questions unanswered and lacks needed details. There is still much to be clarified before we can endorse this proposal."     The preliminary proposal presented by CARB -- and still subject to revision -- is to drop the 2% requirement in 1998 and to "ramp up" to 10% ZEVs by 2003, when all car companies that sell more than 3,000 vehicles per year statewide must comply (GM, Ford, Chrysler, Toyota, Nissan, Honda and Mazda).     Manufacturers will also receive ZEV credit through 2003 for EVs sold before 1998 and through 2010 and those equipped with advanced battery types, including lithium and nickel-based designs, which are expected to be available commercially by 2001.     Right now, the lead-acid batteries are the only ones available commercially but provide limited ranges, around 60 miles.CARB asks carmakers to promote ZEVs      Other proposals call for manufacturers to agree to a "Cal/Big 7" Technology Development Partnership through a memorandum of agreement that includes the following stipulations:     ** All vehicle manufacturer-supported media, publicity and legislative initiatives against the ZEV program would be converted to media, publicity and legislative initiatives in support of the ZEV program.     ** Voluntary introduction of ZEVs on a graduated scale until 1998.     ** From 1998 through 2002, manufacturers would achieve the loss in emissions reductions as a result of the mandate roll-back by the production of cleaner gasoline-powered cars.     ** ZEVs should be placed in the Los Angeles and Sacramento basins in the following numbers: 750 in 1998, 1500 in 1999 and 1500 in 2000 (without credits applied).      ** Extra ZEV credits would be provided for longer-range vehicles and pre-1998 vehicles.     ** Manufacturers would commit to continue ZEV research and development.     ** The state would purchase some advanced battery vehicles each year.     ** Ongoing review process with annual reports.     Northeast states in legal limbo     The California LEV program, including the 2% sales mandate for EVs, was adopted in 1990 prior to enactment of the CAAA.     Congress included the California LEV as an alternative for states to adopt in their State Implementation Plans (SIPs) under the CAAA in lieu of the federal vehicle emissions reduction plan.     New York and Massachusetts chose the California LEV plan as part of their state SIPs as has Vermont and Maine, including 1998 EV mandates. The Northeast Ozone Transport Commission (OTC), comprising the 12 states of the Northeast and the District of Columbia, also opted for the California LEV with a modified EV provision allowing individual states to elect whether to impose an EV mandate or not.     Now that California is altering its plan as to ZEV mandates, the legal issue of whether those states must make similar changes is being debated.     A Massachusetts air policy official said that Gov. William Weld was "very disappointed" by CARB's action but would not let it affect his state's intent on continuing forward with its mandate.     New York Gov. George Pataki has also dismissed the possibility of changes in the California program affecting New York's mandate.     However, attorneys general in both states are researching whether a change in the California plan automatically changes their plan under the CAAA. Under federal law, the California plan was meant to be the strictest of the two choices for states: California LEV and a federal LEV. With changes in that plan, Massachusetts and New York would have the strictest of three possible plans and officials worry whether they could maintain such a standard since the CAAA forbids a "third vehicle" standard.     Also adding confusion to the dilemma is the ongoing, but now on-hold, talks among the OTC states, including New York and Massachusetts, automakers and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to develop a so-called "49-State," or National LEV (NLEV), vehicle plan for all states outside of California. A major obstacle to an agreement in those talks is automakers' steadfast refusal to accept individual state adoption of EV mandates.     The CARB proposal, sources say, definitely will complicate those talks further, or at least until after March, when the CARB plan is finalized, and the tangled legal issues can be resolved.      However, the deadline for the states to submit their implementation plans for the OTC LEV is February 15. The automotive industry will more than likely file lawsuits to stop such plans once the California LEV is completed.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996N.J. first state to sign  on to 49-state LEV     New Jersey is the first state to officially sign on to the National Low-Emission Vehicle (NLEV), or 49-State, plan proposed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the automotive industry as a replacement for the Northeast Ozone Transport Commission (OTC) LEV.     OTC officials have been negotiating with EPA and automakers to develop the NLEV program for almost a year to replace the OTC LEV, a slightly modified version of California's strict LEV plan, approved last year.     However, those talks have been stalled over carmakers' objections to a provision advocated by several OTC members that individual states could implement electric vehicle (EV), or zero-emission vehicle (ZEV), sales mandates.     New York and Massachusetts, along with Vermont and Maine, have adopted 2% ZEV sales mandates.     The NLEV plan would affect all states outside of California, not just the 12 Northeast states, including the District of Columbia, of the OTC. EPA has endorsed the program as a way of achieving emissions reductions nationwide, not just in the Northeast.     However, the plan would call for cleaner gasoline-powered vehicles gradually introduced through the next decade and would not dictate the introduction of advanced-technology vehicle mandates in set years as the OTC LEV plan calls for.     States that have already adopted plans that include mandates for introducing EVs have argued to keep them. Automakers have been steadfast in refusing any technological mandates, especially for EVs.     OTC has already adopted, and EPA has approved, the modified California LEV as a backstop should NLEV talks break down.     New Jersey, in endorsing the NLEV, also retained the right to implement the OTC LEV should NLEV fail to succeed.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Nickel-hydride battery to double range of GM's electronic vehicle      Nickel-hydride batteries will soon power General Motors Corp.'s electronic vehicles (EV) and more than double the mileage of the initial line of cars that will be introduced in California and Arizona this fall, said the president of the company that developed the battery.      Earlier this month GM announced it will introduce the EV-1 "Impact" this fall with a lead-acid battery giving the car a range of 60 to 70 miles (TER 1/8, p. 2).     However, GM plans to install a nickel-hydride battery in the EV-1 as soon as the battery is available in production quantities, said Fubhash Dhar, head of Ovonic Battery Co. of Troy, Mich. "The range of the car will be more than double to well over 200 miles," with the nickel-hydride battery, Dhar said.     Ovonic has a joint venture with GM to produce the nickel-hydride battery.      Dhar said the nickel-hydride battery will be installed in the EV-1 "immediately after the initial introduction [of the EV-1] is done," but he declined to give a date, because he said GM has not made that public.     The nickel-hydride battery will be installed in the electronic version of the S-10 Chevrolet pickup truck as well, Dhar said. This vehicle is scheduled to be built in a Shreveport, La., plant beginning in 1997, according to GM's prior announcement.     Chrysler officials had no comment on the deployment date  for the nickel-hydride battery, but a spokesman for GM's EV program referred to remarks Robert Purcell Jr., executive director of GM Electric Vehicles, made earlier this month at the Los Angeles and Detroit auto shows.     "We are continuing aggressive development work on the advanced nickel-metal hydride battery through our GM Ovonic venture, and we are encouraged by the progress we are making," Purcell said. "We hope to have these batteries available as an option for both vehicles (the EV-1 and S-10) when the technology is ready. The battery technologies will be interchangeable, allowing the customer to select the battery that will best meet their driving requirements."     The nickel-hydride battery will cost more than the lead-acid battery, the GM spokesman said, but would not give a price range.     The California Air Resources Board (CARB) has extensively reviewed vehicle technologies to set air quality regulations. A CARB spokesperson said the board's battery panel assessed battery technologies and estimated the introduction of the nickel-hydride battery as early as next year on GM vehicles is plausible.     Initially, the cars will be sold through 25 Saturn dealerships in Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix and Tucson, Ariz.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996SCEcorp to lease, sell, install charge systems for EVs in California     SCEcorp has announced a partnership with General Motors Corp. to lease, sell and service charging systems and provide installation services for GM EV customers starting next fall in Los Angeles.     SCEcorp created a new company, Edison EV, to distribute vehicle chargers that can be installed in home garages and businesses. GM's Delco Electronics unit makes the chargers. SCEcorp is the parent company of electric utility company Southern California Edison.     Edison EV will install chargers for EV customers throughout California, working with other utilities that have fleets of electronic vehicles. Edison EV also plans to arrange with other automobile makers to sell chargers for vehicles too, when Ford, Chrysler and other makers put their EVs on the market.     SCE Corp. is promoting the EV market because it expects an additional demand on its system of 5 billion kilowatt-hours a year by 2010 to charge EVs.     Other utilities also are getting into the business of distributing GM's charging systems, including Virginia Power Co., but so far fleets of electric vehicles belonging to the utility companies are the recipients.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996DOE considers an executive order to implement federal AFV purchases     Alternative fuel vehicle (AFV) proponents are supporting an Energy Dept. proposed executive order directing federal agencies to adhere to Energy Policy Act (EPACT) AFV mandates by paying for them out of their own budgets.     EPACT directs that 25% of 1996 federal fleet purchases be AFVs. But Congress stripped DOE of the $20 million it requested this year to help federal agencies meet that requirement. And AFV supporters believe that many agencies will not purchase the vehicles without DOE funding.     Following the budget blow at DOE for AFVs, and hits other departments and agencies took, officials have been in limbo over how to meet the EPACT requirements.     DOE officials believe the executive order, if approved by the White House, would be the only way to satisfy the law.Private fleets still waiting on rule     On another AFV front, private fuel-provider fleet purchasers are still awaiting a DOE rule on their responsibility to buy AFVs under EPACT after the department let lapse the Sept. 1, 1995, deadline for issuing the fleet purchase rule.     A "delayed implementation" was expected sometime before Christmas. The rule has apparently been held up at the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), the administrative agency that looks at federal rulemakings with an eye to their costs.     Some sources, though, doubt the White House will release anything at this point and instead sit on the rule for as long as possible.      Doing so would accomplish two things -- it would effectively delay the rule, while at the same time allowing DOE to avoid taking a position that would upset either industry or environmentalists.      "There is a rumor going around that the political trouble [Energy Secretary] Hazel O'Leary is in has played a part in the delay," one source said. "While she is under a lot of heat, it's going to be harder for her to take on a politically unpopular issue."     The fleet-provider rule is a loser for DOE whatever O'Leary decides, the source noted.     One of the stickier points in the proposed rule is how far DOE will stretch the definition of "fuel provider." Will it go all the way to companies that extract the crude product from the ground? Or will it be tightly defined to include only those companies that are directly related to the final product?     "If Secretary O'Leary comes out with something that is a little more pro-industry, the environmentalists are going to scream," he said. "But the oil patch would go berserk if producers got defined as fuel providers -- there would be this huge hue and cry in Dallas and Houston and that's not what they need."     Another source suggested that by not filing a lawsuit and calling DOE's hand, the AFV industry is not forcing the issue. That makes it easier for DOE to delay things indefinitely.     "There hasn't been a lawsuit yet that I've seen, and that sort of plays into DOE's hands," said a source in the AFV industry. "If this gets taken to court, that at least forces DOE to deal with us."     Jeff Clarke, counsel to the American Gas Assn., said he still expects DOE to come out shortly with a delayed rule, with the implementation date pushed back to Sept. 1, 1996.            "I understand there are people at DOE who are pushing it and want it out as soon as possible," Clarke said.     "Our only disappointment is that it's going to be delayed," Clarke added. "I'm sure with the budget talks they have higher priorities."      Many in the industry are "very frustrated" with DOE's failure to release a rule in a more timely fashion.     "We already know there's going to be a delay," said an industry official. "The biggest issue is can you supplant a medium- or heavy-duty vehicle for a light vehicle" and get a credit.      "It's really distressing to see what's been happening in that arena," said Jason Smitherman, state alternative fuels director in Oklahoma. "I know I would be in trouble if I had a rule to implement and it took me three years."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996NYMEX panel selects coal specifications and delivery points for coal futures     An advisory subcommittee assembled by the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) has tentatively selected initial coal  specifications and delivery points for its first ever coal futures contract. This one would cover Central Appalachian coal.     NYMEX has futures in crude oil, heating oil, gasoline, natural gas, propane and even electricity in its energy trading activity, and is now seeking to establish coal futures. Setting standards for commodity trading of this fossil fuel is a challenge because of the varying types and qualities of coal.     Emphasizing that the specs and points selections are tentative, sources said NYMEX's Coal Delivery Subcommittee decided to recommend a contract for a steam coal containing 12,000 Btu/lb, -1% sulfur and no more than 14% ash.      The delivery point would be in a region that includes 10 coal terminals on the Big Sandy River and five or six terminals on the Ohio River between the mouth of the Big Sandy and Huntington, W.Va. The advantage offered by this region is the abundance of the above-specified coal and the multiple modes of getting coal to the river (truck, CSX Transportation and Norfolk Southern Railway).      These tentative recommendations were made at a December meeting of the subcommittee, which convenes again this month.     The panel of about 40 coal and utility executives did not have time to discuss initial parameters for a contract for sub-bituminous coal from the Powder River Basin (PRB), but that discussion is planned.     A NYMEX spokesperson emphasized the preliminary nature of the recommendations and the many layers of approval required for developing a contract. Further discussions could alter early decisions, the spokesperson stressed.     In a 15-page, Dec. 7 memo to subcommittee members, NYMEX officials Karen Klitzman, Brian Johnson and Jay Gottlieb outlined what they saw as the key questions which must be settled in order to write effective PRB and Central Appalachian coal futures contracts. Aside from primary quality specs and delivery points, these included whether pricing should be expressed in dollars per ton or cents per million Btus. Apparently the subcommittee recommended a cents/mmBtu formula.Definitions of coal quality also mulled     In addition, according to one source, the subcommittee decided to drop secondary coal specs, including moisture, grind, volatile matter, ash softening temperature, fixed carbon and size. There was also a recommendation that premiums and penalties not be associated with the contract. Apparently the subcommittee is urging NYMEX to adopt a generic coal with as few specs as possible, thereby avoiding the inherent limitations associated with coal's numerous quality parameters.       In the memo NYMEX underlined several points for understanding delivery of a physical commodity in satisfaction of a futures contract. For example, "only a small percentage of contracts traded for each delivery month actually result in delivery, typically less than 1%. All other contractual obligations are offset by opposite trades which close out the original position ... It is precisely this ability to easily enter into a position and then liquidate it without having to return to one's original counterpart in the transaction that is one of the great advantages of future contracts as risk management tools."Delivery ensures accuracy     While most people use futures as financial instruments for "price discovery" and risk management, the memo states, "the actuality of deliveries for each contract month helps insure what is called convergence of cash and futures markets. In other words, delivery ensures that the futures market is an accurate reflection of prices for the physical commodity ... The futures contract must accurately model typical cash market transactions."     The standardized formal futures contract specifies quality, delivery mode, destination and all other terms except price and quantity (number of contracts). "This is what makes possible the provision of price transparency and risk management tools."     While "there has never been a delivery performance failure on NYMEX contracts," the Exchange nevertheless has rules to be applied in the event of a failure. Futures contracts for particular commodities define what constitutes late performance, failure to perform and force majeure.Benchmark provides many benefits      Coal is the only energy commodity which has not developed "a specific grade of product that is designated as the par value grade and is used as a benchmark to gauge spot market value," the NYMEX memo observed.     A benchmark grade of coal could be used in several ways, such as adjusting a supply contract price that is related to a market sensitive number, NYMEX argues.     While some critics have said futures will not work in coal because coal is not an homogenous commodity, NYMEX believes coal can be subjected to the same benchmark criteria applied to oil and pork bellies. According to NYMEX, these include:     ** The commodity should be readily available.     ** There should be significant proven reserves.     ** There should be a diversity of buyers and sellers.     ** Wide acceptability by consumers.     ** Transportation access is readily available.     ** The willingness of the trade press to survey the market on the value of the benchmark.     ** Ability to standardize.     "Consistency of transportation costs for a buyer receiving coal from any possible delivery facility within the designated delivery area is critical," the NYMEX memo continues. "This requirement sets the upper limit to the size of the delivery area. The objective is to find a delivery area that is easily accessible to adequate supplies of coal, with consistent transportation costs and sufficient transportation facility flexibility to prevent bottlenecks."     At least tentatively, the advisory subcommittee seems to believe that the Huntington/Big Sandy region satisfies this latter requirement.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Utilities link two-way communications with customers on interactive systems      The trend toward smart homes and businesses is accelerating rapidly.     Several utilities announced deals with telecom, cable, data service and electronic marketing companies last week to establish electronic communications links with electric and gas customers.     First there are the big commercial customer ventures of telecom giant AT&T in New York and Newark. But while that could become the biggest marketing effort, Enova Corp. in Southern California is reaching out to touch customers in their homes and integrate utility choice into the daily lives of thousands of people via home computer.      AT&T announced a partnership with Consolidated Edison Jan. 16 to develop a two-way communications system for customers in New York City where Con Ed is headquartered.     AT&T also started similar ventures with two other utilities in Newark, N.J., and Louisville, Ky., and more utility partnerships are expected as AT&T plans to market the interactive products to utilities worldwide. The company has organized the AT&T Utility Solutions division in Whippany, N.J., to push the deals.     Con Ed and AT&T will install the first of the "Integrated Broadband Utility Solution" systems in about 100 businesses beginning in April. The term "broadband" refers to the large amount of information that will be sent through coaxial cable.     With the communication system the utility will be able to inform customers of special time-of-day pricing, new rate plans, special conditions because of cold or hot weather and other information and get customer responses to the offerings and conditions, an AT&T spokesperson said.     Devices will be placed on each appliance or piece of electricity-using equipment. A box called an "interface unit" will gather the information from each device via telephone lines in the building and route it to the utility offices.     Services will include power-quality monitoring, real-time pricing, load profiling, customer-controlled load management and other interactive services. Advanced networks will be customized for hospitals, banks, hotels, office buildings and other large customers. However, smaller commercial buildings, such as restaurants and supermarkets, will be offered an array of new services.     AT&T said its system provides utilities and their customers automated meter reading, remote outage detection, remote control to turn power on and off, real-time load management, tamper detection and distribution automation.     Services that also can be included are condition monitoring reports on equipment or appliances, power quality monitoring, energy pricing, electronic billing, home security, medical alert systems, and "what if" calculations of power supply and use alternatives.     AT&T said residential and commercial customers will be able to program their appliances to run at times which minimize energy costs.     Last November AT&T announced it was teaming with Louisville Gas & Electric Co. (LG&E) to introduce two-way communications between utilities and customers. LG&E's goal is to build interactive customer communications systems for its 345,000 electric and 270,000 natural gas customers in Louisville and 16 Kentucky counties. Last fall LG&E began working with TKR Cable of Greater Louisville to build a fiber optic network for a two-way system and signed similar agreements with other access providers for communications links.      A year ago AT&T announced an agreement with Public Service Electric and Gas (PSEG) of New Jersey (PSE&G) to eventually deploy the two-way system to 500,000 customers. The partners have nearly connected the first 1,000 PSE&G customers.Contacting utilities through home computer     While AT&T has bitten into the Big Apple market, on the Pacific Coast, Enova Corp. is making it possible for customers to select utility options on home computers in addition to home shopping, and other computer services.     Enova, parent company of San Diego Gas and Electric, announced Jan. 17 a joint venture between its subsidiary, Enova Technologies and Philips Home Services of Burlington, Mass., to provide a consumer-based electronic commerce network that integrates utility management along with electronic banking, home shopping and other computer services.     Customers will be able to pay their utility bills, check real-time prices of electricity (assuming a competitive market develops), automate electrical appliances and screen phone calls.     "This venture brings the utility and consumer electronics industries together for the first time," said Gerrit Schipper, president of Philips, in a prepared statement.     Initially 30,000 phones will be hooked up in San Diego. Philips already provides systems for customer access to banks, phone companies and other businesses.     The companies envision the system will reach 500,000 customers in San Diego and Orange counties and from there national marketing will be launched.Wisconsin Energy hits mid-U.S. market      In the Midwest, Ameritech Corp. and Wisconsin Energy Corp. announced Jan. 15 they formed a company called Energy Oasys to market a new utility automation system for homes and businesses in Wisconsin Electric Power Co.'s (WEP) Milwaukee service area and to other utilities. WEP is a subsidiary of Wisconsin Energy, a holding company. WEP has tested the Oasys system in 15 prototype homes and is installing it in 200 homes in Milwaukee. Installations will be made in 5,000 homes this year. Oasys costs the utility company between $1,000 and $1,500 a home.     The system has modular open architecture that will allow other utility companies to assemble and expand the systems as they see fit.     The system allows meters to be read automatically, provides remote power connection and disconnection, and has security features for meter tampering and power outage detection.     In the future, Oasys will provide utility companies with the capability to offer customers programmed control of security systems, lighting, irrigation systems, indoor air quality, pool heating and other features, the utility promises.     The system is designed to be networked over power lines and used in telephone networks, fiber optics, coaxial and other media.     Ameritech is a communications company with more than 13 million telephone, cellular, paging, data and video service customers in the United States and overseas.     Meanwhile, in a business link between companies from opposite ends of the United States, Duquesne Light Co. of Pittsburgh announced its "Customer Advanced Reliability System" will be installed during the next two years to provide real-time information about the status of power delivery to individual homes and businesses in Pennsylvania.     Itron Inc. of Spokane, Wash., a supplier of energy communications systems to the utility industry, will begin installing the network in February or March for Duquesne to provide the communications link with 580,000 customers in Allegheny and Beaver counties. Itron will have the installation completed next year and has a contract to service the system for 15 years.     Customers' use of the system will be sent electronically to a utility control center so customer service personnel know the status of power delivery across the system for individual customers. The system will automatically report the time and location of power outages to speed restoration.       Customers in turn will be able to request electric service to start or stop around the clock. Meters will be read from the control center without the need to have meter readers enter homes.     Customers will choose which day of the month to pay their bills. And the system will enable the utility to define a daily profile of electricity usage of each customer.      This will provide the utility with the ability to track more effectively electric power load growth so that higher capacity distribution equipment can be provided.     Customers eventually will be able to signal their choice of power supplier.     At Con Ed, John Arceri, vice president of energy services, summed up some of the reasons for all of this. "We'll make available to our customers the tools they need to manage more efficiently and to reduce their energy and operating costs. In turn Con Edison will be able to avoid costly system upgrades."     However, an even more important motive is profit. As utilities are driven to cut costs in a commodity-driven market for low-priced power, they are looking for ways to provide services so they can charge more money. Value added services will help the more innovative utilities survive and prosper in a cut-rate energy market.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Senate, House energy leaders disagree on need for full deregulation bill     Sen. Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, said congressional action to require states to open the electricity market to retail wheeling isn't appropriate.     "I am a strong advocate of states' rights, and states' responsibilities," Murkowski said in a recent speech before the Edison Electric Institute (EEI). "States should take the lead on restructuring issues. Traditionally they have regulated the bulk of electric utility activities, and it should remain that way. For example, retail wheeling has been and should continue to be a state issue, not a federal matter."     That puts key members of the House and Senate on opposing sides on the need for prompt congressional action in opening the electricity industry to full-scale competition.     Rep. Dan Schaefer, R-Colo., chairman of the House Commerce Committee's subcommittee on energy and power, plans quick action on a comprehensive deregulation bill that he is still putting together.     Schaefer told EEI that he will "resume hearings immediately and move legislation early this year.     "I have one goal and only one goal in putting together the legislation that I assure you I will move out of my subcommittee this year," he said. "I want all the benefits of competition to go to all customers -- not just the largest users -- as soon as possible."     However, he still has not decided what the bill should contain and is "open-minded" about "how best to achieve that goal."     Schaefer disputed EEI claims that "the states are doing a fine job and there is no need for federal action."     "If EEI is being honest about leaving this to the states to decide, then you must agree with me that -- at the very minimum -- federal legislation is needed this year to remove federal barriers to competition and to give the states the tools they need to pursue competition," he said.     But Murkowski framed the debate in terms of restructuring and reducing the role of the federal government. "The result will determine whether Washington will continue to tax more, spend more, regulate more and control more ... or whether we will begin to reduce the size, scope and power of Washington."     "Electricity is far too important to consumers, industry and our economy to toy with," Murkowski said. "In 1992 Congress [through the Energy Policy Act] made major legislative changes to promote competition," he continued.      "So far those changes appear to be working and working relatively well," Murkowski said. "There are some who are unhappy at the pace of change; they think it too slow. But the pace of change is not as important as the results of change."     Murkowski said the marketplace, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the states should be given an opportunity to move the industry toward competition. "Neither you nor I could stop the rush to competition even if we wanted to," he said.     One industry source noted Schaefer has more jurisdiction over electricity issues than Murkowski. Schaefer's committee has jurisdiction over the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA), while Murkowski's committee does not.      But Murkowski said he is on the side of the majority of Republicans who want to reduce the size and scope of the federal government.     "I have heard there may be some in the House -- even the Republican side of the House -- that are interested in expanding FERC's authority over electric utilities. They seem to be interested in preempting state public utility commissions and moving that authority to FERC. ... Given the ongoing efforts of the FERC and the states, it is premature to initiate a major legislative overhaul."     Schaefer told the Rocky Mountain Oil & Gas Assn. that "the days of the electric monopoly -- the last great monopoly of our times -- seem to be numbered."     In that speech, Schaefer acknowledged the stranded cost issue is the trickiest Congress will have to deal with in coming months.     "Fairness dictates that utilities be given an opportunity to recover appropriate costs that cannot be mitigated," Schaefer said.     "Because we are in the middle of the hearing process, I am not yet prepared to talk about what approach to competition or stranded costs I prefer," he said. "I can tell you, however, that my subcommittee will be moving legislation this year and that legislation will seek to bring the benefits of competition to all customers in a reasonable time frame."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996FERC should get tougher on mergers; municipals and co-op groups say      Associations representing 1,750 community owned electric utilities and 1,000 cooperatives filed a petition with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission last week urging the regulators to apply stricter standards before approving mergers so utility combinations don't result in anti-competitive monopolies.     Antitrust criteria must be applied to guard against market power, the National Rural Electric Cooperative Assn. and the American Public Power Assn. said in a joint petition to FERC.     "Current regulatory standards for private power company mergers are obsolete and need to be rewritten to make competition the primary factor in a public interest review," the associations said in prepared remarks on the petition.     The associations of community-owned electric utilities and non-profit, consumer-owned cooperatives proposed a multi-part rule and a series of questions to evaluate proposed mergers of investor-owned utilities.Conditions for mergers proposed     The merger can be approved if anti-competitive effects are outweighed by efficiencies resulting from the merger in the form of savings and benefits, or if conditions can be imposed to mitigate anti-competition, the associations contended.     But FERC should examine whether the claimed efficiencies can be achieved by means other than a merger.     The regulators should codify that the merged companies must offer single-system transmission pricing unless there is a public interest reason for making an exception.     FERC should evaluate whether functional unbundling is sufficient or whether operational or corporate unbundling as a standard condition for merger approval is necessary.     The regulators also should consider standards to govern affiliate transactions.     "FERC should reinterpret its standards in light of procompetitive legislation that has been passed by Congress ...," the associations said. "Mergers are a natural and frequently harmful method of forestalling competition."     The filing expresses alarm at the accelerating pace of utility mergers, noting there have been 14 mergers proposed since the Energy Policy Act was enacted in 1992, including six proposed mergers in 1995.     "Commission merger policy will determine whether its open access initiatives result in effective competition," the petition stated, "or whether these initiatives will be frustrated by utility combinations that echo domination by a few giant companies that prevailed during the holding company era of the late 1920s and early 1930s."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Southern tries to block TVA's move to sell power well outside its service area     One of the nation's biggest investor-owned utilities holding companies has filed suit against the nation's largest government-owned utility in an attempt to block it as a power marketing competitor.     The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) has entered into power sales agreements with LG&E Power Marketing to illegally sell power outside of the authority's service area, claims a complaint filed by The Southern Co. in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Alabama.     Atlanta-based Southern has filed a complaint on behalf of affiliates Alabama Power, Georgia Power and Mississippi Power charging TVA with violations of U.S. law that prohibit it from entering into contracts to sell, or deliver, power outside its statutorily limited service area. The three utilities claim TVA has made such deals with LG&E Power Marketing, which was hired by TVA last fall to procure power for the federal agency. LG&E is one of the top five power marketers in the nation.     "In 1959, H.R. 3460 was introduced in Congress. As offered, the bill proposed to limit TVA's service area to 'counties lying in whole or in part within either the Tennessee River drainage basin or the service area in which power generated by the corporation is being used on July 1, 1957,'" the Southern affiliates claim. "After Senate and House committee deliberation, the legislation was amended to prohibit TVA's sale or delivery of power outside its service are as it exists as of July 1, 1957."     The utilities contend the legislation, passed as the TVA Bond Act, included a provision that allowed TVA to swap power with neighboring utilities to meet temporary needs. But the U.S. Senate later amended the legislation to "prohibit TVA from being a source of power supply, either 'directly or indirectly,' outside its statutorily defined service area" because it was abusing that provision by selling power to unauthorized users via other utility systems, the holding company claims.        Southern's affiliates are asking the court to declare that TVA has violated the TVA Act by entering into an interchange agreement with LG&E Power Marketing, that the transactions contemplated under the agreement are unlawful and that TVA is prohibited from directly or indirectly selling or delivering power to any marketer or broker of power.      TVA said that "due to the pending litigation" it has no comment.     LG&E Power contends it has the right to market TVA's power because it is affiliated with Louisville Gas & Electric and the 1959 law created an exception for TVA energy exchanges to some neighboring utilities including LG&E.     Southern counters that this power market deal is an attempt to circumvent statutory limits on TVA power sales and would allow sales far beyond the bounds intended by that 1959 exemption.     Southern would like to sell its own wholesale power and has asked FERC to allow affiliate, Southern Electric Marketing Inc., to do that.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Pa. utility pushes for competition     Pennsylvania Power & Light executives called for giving all Pennsylvania consumers the opportunity to choose their electricity supplier.      Society demands choice and the electric utility industry in Pennsylvania must move forward to meet the expectations of consumers, Bill Hecht, the company's chairmantold the state Public Utilities Commission (PUC). The dramatic difference in rates among utilities has created a perception that the current structure is unfair, Hecht said.     State regulators are conducting an investigation into electric utility competition in Pennsylvania.     Hecht said there are some principal issues that must be addressed in the transition to full customer choice:      ** The opportunity for all customers to be able to choose their electricity supplier.     ** The ability for utilities to recover costs incurred because of the requirements of federal or state regulation.     ** The development of a system to ensure the continuation of reliable electricity service.     Fred Hafer, president of Metropolitan Edison and Pennsylvania Electric, has his own plan for competition that includes the creation of a power pool. However, utilities with high rates would be on their own and would not be permitted to sell or buy in the pool under his plan.     William Mowatt, president of the Pennsylvania Rural Electric Assn., urged the commission to consider allowing utilities 100% recovery of their stranded costs, possibly by charging customers an exit fee for leaving a utility system. The PUC earlier considered such a fee illegal.    Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Coal industry study says EPA's NOx plan could cost utilities billions     The National Mining Assn. (NMA) released last week a new study that represents the coal industry's latest assault on some NOx-control rules being contemplated for utility power plants in 37 states.     The study was done by the consulting firm Energy Ventures Analysis (EVA), and looks at what it would cost to extend the rules already adopted in the 12-state Northeast Ozone Transport area to 25 other states extending west to the Rockies. Mandated NOx reductions under the proposal would be up to 75% below current emissions levels, the study claims.     The EVA study says utilities would have to spend up to $27 billion in capital equipment costs to meet the new rules, and up to $5.5 billion per year in operating costs. Higher electricity prices that would result from those costs would hamper economic development in much of the country, the study points out. A lot of coal-fired capacity could be prematurely retired in order to meet these standards.     "The bottom line of the EVA study is higher electric rates, reduced economic development, fewer jobs and an expanded environmental bureaucracy," said NMA President Richard Lawson.     For a copy of the study, EPA Ozone Proposal to Cost Consumers $5 billion Annually, contact the National Mining Assn. at 202-463-2625.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Oil's share of energy market drops to 30-year low; 1995 imports decline     Oil's share of the overall 1995 domestic energy market slipped under 40% for the first time in almost three decades with natural gas and nuclear power primarily claiming the loss.     And for the first time in four years, total U.S. petroleum imports declined, though they still account for more than 50% of the country's demand, according to the American Petroleum Institute's (API) 1995 statistical report.     While oil is still the largest source of energy used in the country at 39.7%, a drastic 17.1% drop in residual fuel -- heavy oil used to power utility boilers -- as a result of power suppliers switching to cheaper natural gas, erased any demand gains in other major oil products like gasoline, kerosene jet fuel, home heating oil and diesel fuel.     Of that 17.1% drop in resid, the lowest since 1938, natural gas took a 40% share and nuclear power 25%, accounting for the greatest increases in energy use for the year. The highest share oil has ever claimed of total energy use was 48.7% in 1977.     "It reflects a combination of reduced use of resid-fired peaking units and the availability of cheaper natural gas leading to a dramatic reduction in the use of this fuel in the electric utility and industrial sectors," said API's Ed Murphy.     Domestic energy use reached a record high in 1995 at 87.6 quadrillion Btus (quads), 2.2 quads BTU higher than it was in 1994, a 2.3% increase that is consistent with growth annually since 1992.Natural Gas     Natural gas accounted for just over one quarter of all energy used at 22.2 quads, according to API. Since its deregulation in 1986, natural gas has grown by 5.5 quads, or 33%. Of that amount, nearly 2 quadrillion BTU has been supplied by new imports, primarily from Canada.     Over one-half of the growth in natural gas consumption since deregulation has been in the industrial sector. But consumption of natural gas has yet to exceed 1972's 22.5 quads, which claimed over 30% of domestic energy use that year.Nuclear Power     Nuclear power production is estimated to have reached a record high in 1995 of 7.2 quads claiming an 8.3% share of total U.S. energy consumption. API said that higher utilization  of nuclear generating capacity pushed output since the number of operating plants has remained unchanged. Plants operated at 78% capacity last year compared to 70.5% in 1993.Gasoline     Despite slower growth in highway travel, gasoline deliveries were up 2.5% in 1995. But as states and localities opted out of the reformulated gasoline (RFG) program, RFG demand fell 20% below anticipated levels. API said that total gasoline demand for 1995 appears to have increased to about 7.8 million b/d, nearly twice previous years amounts. But the industry association attributes this to enhanced reporting as a result of the RFG program.Oil Production     Domestic crude production declined at a significantly smaller rate than in recent years, API reported, but was still the lowest domestic production for any year since 1954. The reason for the modest decline is improved drilling efficiency and the lack of a significant jump in oil prices, which average between $16.50 and $20.00/barrel all year.     Crude fell by 2.2%, or 140 thousand b/d, to less than 6.52 million b/d for the year. The decline was evenly split between Alaska and the lower 48 states. Lower 48 production fell by 72 thousand b/d, or 1.4%. For each of the previous three years, lower 48 production has fallen by 3%. Increased offshore activity in the Gulf of Mexico was partially responsible for the reduced rate of decline since it grew by 80 to 100 thousand b/d over 1994 levels.     Alaska production declined by 4.7%, to 1.49 million b/d, which is comparable to yearly decreases since 1991.Drilling     Oil, gas and dry hole well completions in 1995 declined 9.3% compared to 1994. A total of 19,756 wells were completed last year. In 1994, there were 21,793 completions.      The largest drop in completions occurred in natural gas wells. The 8,114 gas wells completed in 1995 was 14% less than the 9,439 in 1994.     Oil well completions fell 1.6% -- from 7,032 in 1994 to 6,917 in 1995. Dry hole completions dropped 11.2% to 4,725 in 1995.     Footage drilled decreased by 11.8% in 1995 to 113 million feet drilled in search of oil and gas.     In 1995, 20.3% fewer exploratory wells were completed with gas wells declining the most at 32%, oil wells were down 20%Hydropower     API said that hydro-electrical power was the driving force behind increases in the "other" category. Hydro was up nearly 9% in 1995 over 1994 levels. API attributes the growth to higher levels of precipitation.Imports     Imported oil still claims more than 50% of the country's demand but fell for the first time in four years in 1995 by 1.3% because of weak demand and the more moderate decline in domestic crude production. Total imports of crude and oil products in 1995 averaged 8.8 million b/d. But the decline came entirely in oil product imports, which fell 18%. Crude oil imports actually rose 3.2%.Refinery     Refinery utilization was 91.7% in 1995, compared with 92.6% in 1994.Stocks     Total stocks (crude oil plus petroleum products) ended 1995 at their lowest level since 1972, falling almost 9% compared to 1994. Total stocks at the end of December stood at 968 million barrels.Oil and Natural Gas     While the percentage of the nation's energy supplied by liquid petroleum has fallen, the share of energy provided by oil and gas together has stayed roughly constant since 1985 at around 65%     In 1973, oil and gas peaked at 57.3 quads -- more than three quarters of the energy consumer in the country. Consumption fell with the Arab oil embargo, recovered in the late 1970s, and fell again with higher oil prices in the early 1980s and the supply-limiting effects of price controls on natural gas.     The recent-year low for oil and natural gas consumption was 1983 at 47.3 quads. In 1995, it was 57 quads. In the last 12 years, natural gas consumption has grown by 4.9 quads, slightly outpacing the 4.8 quads growth in oil consumption.Coal     API furnished no details on coal consumption. The U.S. doesn't import coal.Energy Consumption by Fuel Group (Quadrillion Btus)            Consumption            Market Share             1994     1995     Change     1994     1995     ChangeCoal         19.5     19.8     1.4%     22.8%     22.6%     -0.2Natural Gas  21.3     22.2     4.1%     24.9%     25.4%     0.5Petroleum    34.7     34.8     0.2%     40.6%     39.7%     -0.9Nuclear       6.8     7.2     5.8%     8.0%     8.3%     0.3Other         3.2     3.5     9.6%     3.7%     4.0%     0.3Totals       85.5     87.6     2.3%     100%     100%Chart does not include smaller energy categories such as wood, waste, wind, geothermal and solar, which are for the most part not measured with the timeliness and accuracy of the major energy sources. Source: APIBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Exxon reaches partial settlement with underwriters in Valdez costs     Exxon Corp. has reached a partial settlement of $300 million with Lloyds of London and other underwriters in what was originally a $1 billion claim to recover cleanup expenses from the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil tanker spill in Prince William Sound, Alaska.     The insurance companies had contested the claim and refused to pay, saying the 11-million gallon spill was a result of Exxon's reckless negligence by "knowingly placing a known alcoholic in command" of the supertanker. Joseph Hazelwood was acquitted in 1990 of operating the tanker while drunk.     The settlement concludes only one of the several lawsuits between Exxon and underwriters over contested hundreds of millions of dollars of the nearly $3 billion the corporation has paid out to date in cleanup and liability costs.     Exxon claims the underwriters are liable because of the catastrophic accident insurance it bought to protect it against a major accident.     Another trial is scheduled to begin April 8 in a Texas state court to resolve a $250 million claim against the insurers.     In a parallel lawsuit in New York, a federal appeals court last week ruled that Lloyds' action seeking a declaratory judgement denying coverage to Exxon under the "global corporate excess policy" is a "novel issue of federal admiralty law" that should be heard.     None of these lawsuits are related to the civil case verdict that awarded $5 billion in punitive damages to commercial fishermen, Alaskan natives, property owners and others affected by the spill.     But Exxon last week also settled the last in a series of civil suits, this one for $3.5 million. That will clear the way for the corporation to appeal the $5 billion award, which the courts said couldn't be appealed until all the other civil suits cleared the court dockets.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Wildlife group produces oil and gas at more than one wilderness preserve     The National Audubon Society or its state affiliates are opposing oil and gas exploration and production in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) at the same time it's producing minerals from three of its wilderness reserves.     The Washington-based Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI) reported the ironic situation is taking place in sanctuaries in Michigan and Florida as well as in the Paul J. Rainey Sanctuary in Louisiana.      The drilling activities are going on without harm to the wildlife or surroundings, CEI says.     The Rainey story came to light last year as a complicated arrangement in which the society acquired rights to 37 wells, which operate under Audubon restrictions.     The other two cases were revealed by Jonathan Adler, CEI director of environmental studies, in the institute's monthly newsletter. Adler wrote the drilling has not harmed nesting areas of the osprey and sandhill crane in the Bernard Baker Sanctuary in Calhoun County, Mich., managed by the Michigan Audubon Society. And he noted minimal environmental impact is reported from oil and gas exploration allowed by the national society in the Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary near Naples, Fla.     A spokeswoman at the society's headquarters in New York couldn't comment immediately about the Michigan affiliate's involvement but doubted the claims about the Florida sanctuary. She dismissed the comparison between Rainey and ANWR because of the natural "regenerative" advantages in Louisiana.     But CEI's Adler views it differently, saying the Audubon experience suggests balancing environmental concerns and fossil fuel development is possible.     "Indeed," he concluded, "Audubon accepted oil development on its own lands before the most advanced state-of-the-art technologies were available. Industry representatives claim that with these technologies ANWR oil development is ecologically sound."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996WTO makes it official: Clean Air Act RFG requirements ruled 'protectionist'      The World Trade Organization (WTO) has officially ruled that a U.S. Clean Air Act provision requiring foreign gasoline refiners to meet a different emissions standard than domestic refiners is discriminatory and therefore in violation of international trade agreements.     The rule was challenged by Venezuela and Brazil and is the first ruling by the nascent WTO, which took the place of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) last January (TER 12/25/95, p. 1009).     The ruling from the WTO drew sharp criticism from political wings that had fought bitterly against the United States signing on to the global trade treaty. And environmentalists were quick to denounce it as a threat to America's environmental policy.     The WTO's judgement, while probably having little effect on the reformulated gasoline (RFG) market, is already promising to generate considerable political fallout during the coming months leading up to the Republican presidential primaries.     However, the timing of the decision renders the practical terms of the decision moot since by the time the appeals process is finished, foreign and domestic refiners will be only months from having to meet identical standards.     The administration, which earlier had supported a change in the law that would have satisfied Venezuela, said it would definitely appeal the ruling.     In a statement just after the ruling, Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said the administration was "carefully reviewing" the legal options available. But after opponents to the WTO loudly and publicly criticized the ruling as a threat to domestic sovereignty and environmental protection, the administration said it would definitely appeal.     "Obviously, we are disappointed that the panel did not accept our view," Kantor said. "At the same time, the results of this dispute cannot and will not compromise this administration's commitment to our environmental laws."Administration will appeal     If the United States appeals the ruling, it must then accept an appeals verdict as final, according to stipulations in the global trade accord. That process could take up to 18 months. If the United States does not appeal, the rule will be adopted within 60 days. Administration officials said the prospects for a successful appeal do not look good.     If the United States loses the appeal, it would have to modify the rule or face WTO-imposed penalties. The process can only be stopped by a consensus of WTO members (120 nations), or if the disputing parties settle their differences.     Also, a deal cut during the congressional debates over the WTO between lawmakers and the administration allows Congress to review all cases the United States loses. And the verdict will likely not sit well with GOP leaders. Kantor said he would consult with Congress on the issue soon.     Venezuela, one of the largest exporters of gasoline through its Citgo Petroleum Corp. and state-owned oil company, Petroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), complained that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) rule on RFG applied different baseline standards for foreign and domestic refiners as dictated by the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA).     The act defined two sets of requirements to be met by refiners: One set (benzene and oxygenate content and vapor pressure) was accompanied by strict measures to be met by all refiners, foreign or domestic; the second set (governing criteria for sulfur, aromatics and olefin content) allows domestic refiners of RFG to meet their own individual 1990 baseline average for 1995-1997.     After 1997, the whole issue becomes moot. Then, domestic refiners must meet the 1990 domestic industry average for non-attainment areas, the same set for foreign refiners last year that caused Venezuela to seek the WTO ruling.     EPA proposed a rule change in 1994 that would have allowed foreign refiners to use their individual baselines to produce RFG after Venezuela threatened action under GATT. Some lawmakers then accused the White House of catering to Venezuela to avoid a potentially embarrassing GATT challenge at a time when the administration was pressing the Uruguay round of talks in Congress. In August of 1994, Congress denied EPA funds to implement the rule (TER 8/8/94, p. 528).     Venezuela filed a complaint with GATT then, and transferred the complaint to the WTO in January 1995 claiming the law set a double standard and cost it $150 million per year. Brazil joined the petition and Norway and the European Union were listed as interested third parties (TER 4/17, p. 315).Political fallout expected     The consequences of the ruling will reverberate loudly during this election year especially with presidential aspirants who have been critical of the enhanced power of the WTO. Patrick Buchanan and Sen. Majority Leader Bob Dole of the Republican party have both been critical of the WTO's far-reaching power over trade and tariffs.     And pro-environmental as well as petroleum industry groups will raise a hue and cry over the ruling since it could set a precedent for undercutting other environmental legislation and would allow an unfair competitive advantage to foreign refiners that did not have to invest the billions of dollars in upgrading plants to meet the stricter CAAA standards.     Some economists are worried that it might cause protectionist and isolationist sentiments in the country to intensify and threaten freer international trade.     Said one, "It's not good that this is an early issue for WTO. I think it is an isolated incident, but that's not the way it will be portrayed."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Federal appeals court upholds right of New York to adopt Calif. LEV rules     A much anticipated federal appeals court ruling has affirmed New York state's right to adopt the California Low-Emission Vehicle (LEV) program without also imposing California's lower-sulfur reformulated gasoline (RFG) plan.     The verdict concludes three years of litigation and likely exhausts an important avenue automakers sought to overturn Northeast states' adoption of the strict California LEV. A similar appeal in Massachusetts will probably be abandoned, industry sources predict.     New York and Massachusetts adopted the California LEV in 1992. Last year, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approved a modified version of the California LEV for all the states of the Northeast Ozone Transport Commission (OTC) made up of the 12 states of the Northeast and the District of Columbia.     Automakers sued, arguing that by imposing the California LEV in New York without the special RFG, they would be required to build yet a "third vehicle" to meet New York standards along with two other vehicles: one to meet a national standard and one for a California standard.     The industry claimed the move was illegal under the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA), which forbids a "third vehicle," and that it could not guarantee a car built for use outside California could meet New York's higher standards because of the higher-sulfur levels in Northeast RFG.     Yet the Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a trial court's decision that the "third vehicle claim is not viable if it is based on a difference between California and federal fuels."     Only alterations stemming from differences in emission standards, not fuel standards, can amount to a third vehicle, said the court, making plain that there is no linkage between the regulation of fuels and vehicles.     "A state can never violate the third vehicle prohibition so long as it satisfies the identical requirement and does not administer or enforce the California emission standard in a more burdensome manner than what occurs in California," Judge Richard Cardamon said in his ruling.     Automakers claim the higher-sulfur contents of Northeast RFG contaminate catalytic converters and decrease efficiency while increasing emissions.     Under the CAAA, automakers must build a special California car that would operate on a modified, lower-sulfur content RFG.     The case, Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Assn. v. New York, settles one of the disputes between the automotive industry and Northeast states. But since talks are continuing between the two -- moderated by the EPA -- to reach agreement on a National LEVthat would replace the OTC LEV, states and industry have squared off over another issue: electric vehicle mandates, also part of the California LEV.     Now that it appears California regulators will alter the original program adopted by the Northeast states, the industry is expected to file more lawsuits against member states (see related story p. 36).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996O'Leary names Grumbly to under secretary spot     Thomas Grumbly would become the third ranking official at the Energy Dept. upon Senate confirmation after Secretary Hazel O'Leary named him acting under secretary of the department last week.     Grumbly, formerly assistant secretary of environmental management, would then oversee the civilian radioactive waste program and nuclear weapons and the weapons cleanup programs. Grumbly would replace Charles Curtis, who was appointed deputy secretary of Energy after Bill White resigned.     Grumbly will continue as assistant secretary until confirmed. Alvin Alm has been nominated for that position. Alm is director and senior vice president for Science Application International Corp.'s (SAIC) Environmental business area. He also is co-chairman of DOE's Environmental Management Advisory Board.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Enron gets official offer from India to revive Dabhol Power project     Dabhol Power Co. obtained a formal offer last week from the Indian state of Maharashtra to revive the largest power project  backed by U.S. corporations in India.     Enron, a Houston-based gas supplier that holds 80% in Dabhol Power said the company will reply to the state's formal offer shortly and hopes to resume construction on the project within 90 days.     In any event, after a five-month hiatus, work on the $2.8 billion project should resume soon, Enron Corp. said.     The power project was canceled by the Maharashtra government in August because of concerns over its high cost and environmental impact.     Enron has since offered to reduce the capital cost of the project and lower the price of the electricity it sells to the state.     Enron also is still trying to recover damages from the Maharashtra state government. The two sides have been meeting in London for arbitration, and finished two days of talks last Monday.     The next full hearing was set for June 3. Enron said it plans to continue arbitration while it studies the government's new terms.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996IPPs accuse NiMo of trying to slip out of contracts with tax proposal     Niagara Mohawk's (NiMo) petition for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to relieve New York utilities from paying a tax on natural gas used by unregulated generators (UG) is "yet another backhanded attempt" by NiMo to get out of its contracts with independent suppliers," according to New York independent power producers (IPPs).      NiMo has asked FERC to supersede a New York state law that requires utility customers to pay the independent producers' natural gas import tax, saying the statute conflicts with FERC's requirements that utilities pay unregulated generators no more than avoided costs.      "The facts are pretty simple: the New York State Legislature passed a tax, and the New York State Legislature mandated that the tax be recovered from utility electric and gas customers," said Independent Power Producers of New York Executive Director Carol Murphy.     "The fact that IPPs also act as tax collectors, just as the utilities do, has absolutely nothing to do with avoided costs and is certainly no reason for regulators in Washington, D.C., to begin second-guessing state tax policies and legislative prerogatives."     Murphy questions how the gas tax reimbursement that utilities pay independents could have anything to do with avoided costs when every penny the generators get from utilities is a penny they have to pay the state.     This petition "is just another fanciful fabrication that NiMo's lawyers have cooked up. It will not succeed at anything besides distracting everyone from negotiating real solutions," Murphy added. "What ratepayers probably don't know is that every time Niagara Mohawk files a lawsuit, however frivolous, they [ratepayers] pay for it."     NiMo claims the requirement that utilities pay the independents' 4.25% import tax places overall payment to unregulated generators above avoided costs and is a violation of federal law. The utility estimates that the tax will add $7.2 million to its customers bills in 1996 and $13.5 million in 2006.        "Not only are we required to purchase electricity from UGs regardless of customer need and often at prices that exceed the electricity's market value, but we are compelled to reimburse the UGs for the tax they pay on the natural gas used to produce that electricity," said NiMo CEO William Davis. "We believe that state law is pre-empted by federal law."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Independents argue for case-by-case determination in FERC's OCS inquiry     The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's (FERC) inquiry into whether it should deregulate facilities in the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) has drawn comments indicating a growing rift between independent and pipeline-affiliated offshore systems.     FERC launched the notice of inquiry (NOI) to free up the billions of dollars in offshore development capital stuck in limbo due to uncertainty surrounding whether new projects will be classified as non-jurisdictional gathering or regulated as interstate transmission.     A determination that an OCS facility performs a gathering function alters the customer protection equation far more than a similar decision for an onshore facility, FERC and the commenters acknowledge. That's because in the OCS there is no state authority to pick up the regulatory responsibility FERC would shed.     Blue Dolphin Pipe Line, an independent OCS facility that won a change in status to jurisdictionally exempt gathering, argues in its comments that facilities' status should be determined on a case-by-case basis.      Blue Dolphin expressed skepticism that any interstate or affiliated OCS facility could be safely deregulated and said any generic move to do so would violate the protections afforded by the Natural Gas Act.     Enron, which owns interstate pipelines and OCS facilities, urged FERC to grant all OCS facilities the presumption that they are gathering systems -- shifting the burden of proof to those who oppose the exempt status.     The primary function test should also be modified, eliminating reference to the diameter of pipes, the location of compression stations and requiring lower operating pressures than those found in onshore transmission facilities, Enron says.     The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA) would fill the regulatory gap that states now must plug when FERC declares onshore facilities perform a gathering function, Enron contends.     "The OCSLA and its requirement that pipelines provide open and nondiscriminatory access to both owner and non-owner shippers provides sufficient authority for regulation of offshore gathering and protects the public interest," Enron notes.     Blue Dolphin disagrees.     "Because the commission has rarely if ever engaged in active regulation under -- or even interpretation of -- the [OCSLA], it is not possible to conclude that reliance on the OCSLA is sufficient to protect the public interest," Blue Dolphin contends.     "Wholesale change in the regulation of all OCS pipelines is unlawful, unwarranted and likely only to produce regulatory uncertainty devastating to offshore production and transportation," Blue Dolphin asserts."In the absence of compelling reasons for change, existing policies and precedent should be observed."     Blue Dolphin suggests a series of safeguards FERC should impose before granting OCS facilities gathering status including:     ** Banning interstate pipelines or their affiliates from owning any OCS gathering systems. Existing facilities reclassified as gathering would then "be sold to independent third parties that are neither interstate pipelines nor their affiliates."     ** Performing market power studies as part of the modified primary function test FERC uses to determine the status of facilities. This is needed, Blue Dolphin contends, because OCS facilities can have market power in excess of that enjoyed by onshore interstates.     ** Ensuring that customers receive just and reasonable rates by imposing light-handed regulation on OCS facilities that lack market power instead of exempting them entirely.     "The commission's responsibility under the Natural Gas Act has been -- and remains -- to restrain pipelines' monopoly power," Blue Dolphin said in characterizing some of the NOI's suggestions as irresponsible and unlawful. "In an era of increasing competition in gas sales, this responsibility is even more important." (RM95-6)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Nuclear industry pushes for economies as new polls slam/praise its future     The country's 109 operating nuclear power plants operated at a record 78.2% capacity from January through October of 1995 besting the 75.1% capacity achieved for all of 1994, according to the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI).     Also, nuclear power production is estimated to have reached a record high in percentage of total domestic energy consumption -- including transportation -- at 7.2 quadrillion Btus claiming an 8.3% share, the American Petroleum Institute (API) reported in its 1995 statistical energy report.     API said that higher utilization of nuclear generating capacity pushed output since the number of operating plants has remained unchanged (see related story, p. 44).     In reporting that oil's share of the overall 1995 domestic energy market slipped under 40% for the first time in almost three decades, API found that nuclear energy was able to grab 25% of the market share lost by heavy residual oil -- used to power utility boilers -- as a result of fuel switching by electricity suppliers.     NEI President Phillip Bayne said that increased production along with a coordinated industry-wide program to reduce operating and maintenance costs is part of an overall strategy to keep nuclear electricity competitive with coal-fired plants by lowering cost per kilowatt hour.     Nuclear utilities, he said, have launched a number of initiatives -- individually and collectively -- to improve economic competitiveness.     While competitiveness within the soon-to-be deregulated electric utility industry has forced nuclear plant operators to focus on efficiency and cost reductions, it has also cast a pall over the immediate future of nuclear generation domestically. Industry officials continually site the exorbitant capital costs of building nuclear power plants as the primary reason utilities will unlikely seek license applications for new plants anytime soon. Also, analysts predict a glut of electric power on the market within the coming years.     But the lack of interest has not deterred the nuclear energy industry. NEI has been supporting efforts to develop advanced power plant designs, pre-approved by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, that would be ready should the domestic power market change course.Industry poll shows majority support     In the meantime, the U.S. nuclear generation industry is looking abroad for business opportunities. Energy-hungry developing nations, especially in Asia, are very receptive to nuclear-generated electricity as a means of providing power within the coming decades. And the U.S. nuclear industry believes U.S. advanced designs and technology will provide the safest and most efficient plants for those countries.     A new poll issued by NEI reports that three-fourths of Americans believe that also, responding that U.S. "peaceful" nuclear technology should continue to play a leading role in world markets.     The opinion poll of 1,000 "nationally representative" U.S. adults, conducted by Bruskin/Goldring Research for NEI, found that 57% of the public "care personally" about maintaining this leading role.     The poll also reports that 72% surveyed said advanced-design reactors should be considered for their areas of the country when new generating capacity is needed. And two-thirds say today's nuclear power plants are clean and reliable. Fifty-five percent say they are safe.Environmental group finds opposite results     Yet, the poll conducted for NEI differs dramatically from another poll released last week showing two-thirds of Americans opposed to nuclear power.     Commissioned by the Sustainable Energy Budget Coalition (SEBC) and conducted by Research/Strategy/Management Inc. (RSM), the poll found that an overwhelming majority of Americans believe that when cutting budgets, nuclear energy research and development should be the given the smallest allocation and renewable energy to largest     The poll interviewed 1,000 registered voters nationwide who SEBC said were more "affluent, more politically aware and more active.     "They probably would be more conservative than the whole population," said Ron Hinkley with RSM.     Added Scott Denman with the Safe Energy Communication Council, "The survey reveals that negative opinions about nuclear power can generate vote behavior among a segment of the population, particularly Independents, who believe that nuclear power should be the program cut first.     "These findings should not be lost on those members of Congress sympathetic to the nuclear industry's calls for additional funds to develop a new generation of commercial plants," he said. "Congress continues to ignore the people's will by spending our tax dollars on wasteful, out-moded, "junk-food" energy programs like nuclear power."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Dueling polls reach opposite results for pro-nuke, anti-nuke agendas     The nuclear industry is calling "hypocritical" a claim by environmental groups that a majority of Americans support continued studies on nuclear waste disposal -- perhaps another two years -- before any congressional action is taken.     The Safe Energy Communication Council (SECC) and Greenpeace released a poll last week reporting that "a lopsided 70% to 27% of the U.S. electorate wants Congress to immediately form an independent commission to find new solutions to storing radioactive waste."     What's lopsided, says the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI), is the one-question poll SECC and Greenpeace used to produce their figures.     "Their poll question is blatantly misleading by suggesting that no disposal solution exists, when scientists worldwide agree that an underground repository can best isolate used nuclear fuel from the environment," NEI said.     The question: Congress is considering changing the nuclear waste law. Two plans are being proposed.     Plan A would permit the transportation by rail and truck, in the near future, of radioactive waste from nuclear reactors around the country to a temporary, above-ground storage site in Nevada until a permanent solution can be found.     Plan B calls for the immediate formation of an independent review commission to find new solutions to storing radioactive waste before any of it is transported around the country.     Which of these plans do you support?     The results: 26.6% support Plan A; 69.7% support Plan B; and 3.7% don't know.     SECC's Scott Denman said the poll results show that Americans overwhelmingly oppose current legislation in Congress that would create a temporary storage facility near Yucca Mountain, Nevada.     "Members of Congress are so far out of touch with voters, they risk being out of a job if they continue to push this quick-fix scam for the serious problem of nuclear waste storage," said Denman.     NEI retaliated that the poll did not give people all the facts they need to form an informed opinion about nuclear waste disposal.     "SECC and Greenpeace won't give people all the facts they need to form an informed opinion about nuclear waste disposal," said NEI, "it's not surprising that their one-question poll produced a 'finding' that supports their antinuclear agenda."     NEI trotted out their own 1995 poll showing that 63% of Americans said that a temporary storage facility should be built in an unpopulated desert area where nuclear waste could be stored until a permanent facility is ready.     The nuclear industry is supporting H.R. 1020, and a companion Senate bill, that would immediately initiate construction of a temporary facility near Yucca Mountain for nuclear waste disposal.     SECC and Greenpeace are lining up behind S. 544, sponsored by Sen. Richard Bryan, D-Nev., that would place a two-year moratorium on the nuclear waste program and establish an independent, "blue-ribbon" commission to evaluate current efforts and recommend a solution.     NEI said the proposed commission would add an additional $5 billion onto nuclear electricity consumers' utility bills during the two-year moratorium, something SECC and Greenpeace failed to tell their respondents.     "If [respondents] had all the facts ... the survey results would have been different, and honest," NEI said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Oil crisis likely within 10 years, Energy Dept. officials predict     An Energy Dept. official said last week that he'd bet money there will be an oil crisis within the next 10 years.     And he's not a lone alarmist at DOE who believes this.     "This has been discussed in the highest ranks of the department. The likelihood of an oil crisis in the next decade is very plausible and prevalent through DOE," said Dr. Joseph Romm, the acting principal deputy assistant secretary for energy efficiency.     Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary testified to that fact in a telephone interview: "I take this very seriously. I see a crisis as imminent and something we should take heed of."           Romm said there was also a consensus among many energy experts that the country is sleep walking into a disaster by not addressing the possibility now.     Oil industry analysts argue that supplies are plentiful and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) no longer exercises the crippling control over the spigot it once did in the 1970s, so the possibility of a crisis or embargo is very far-fetched.     But Romm pointed out that the United States is already 52% dependent on imports for its oil needs now at a cost of over $50 billion a year to our trade deficit. That will grow to over 60% in the coming decade, DOE predicts. Coupled with the exponential demand for oil in developing countries, especially Asia, the politically unstable Persian Gulf countries could end up controlling nearly 80% of the global energy supply.     "That trend is inescapable," Romm said.     For the first time in four years, total U.S. petroleum imports, including refined products, declined, though they still account for more than 50% of the country's demand, and crude oil imports rose 3.2%, according to the American Petroleum Institute's (API) 1995 statistical report, (see story, p. 44).      O'Leary and Romm made their comments following the release of a new poll by the Sustainable Energy Budget Coalition (SEBC) supporting the country's need to seek alternative energy sources to lessen the dependence on foreign oil.Environmentalists say renewables the answer     The poll, conducted for the coalition of environmental and renewable energy supporters by Research/Strategy/Management (RSM) Inc. of Maryland, found that 75% of respondents want to reduce U.S. dependency on foreign oil with more than half favoring stronger support for government funding of energy efficiency and renewable energy sources.     The survey found that 41% make a balanced budget their priority.     An RSM researcher said the poll was conducted by telephone to 1,000 registered voters nationwide who were older, more affluent and more politically aware and active. He said the sample probably reflects a slight conservative bias.     According to the survey, a majority of respondents believed that funding priorities for energy research and development should be shifted from conventional energy sources such as fossil fuels and nuclear power to renewable and alternative energy sources that would lessen dependence on foreign oil and enhance national security.      "Through its actions during the past year, Congress is sending a message that it apparently prefers to risk sending Americans to war again to protect foreign supplies of oil or to risk the environment by opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge rather than invest in sustainable energy technologies," said Scott Denman with the Safe Energy Communication Council, a SEBC member.     O'Leary agreed that renewable energy and energy efficiency programs through DOE and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) were the answers to protecting the country's national security.     "We need everything we've got going now that is reliable, affordable and sustainable," she said alluding to the administration's continued efforts to increase renewable energy R&D and efficiency programs before a Congress that shows very little tolerance for such in reduced budget times.     The coalition released the poll on the fifth anniversary of the Gulf War to emphasize the seriousness of the country's growing oil import dependence and to demand that candidates in the 1996 election year put the nation's energy policy at the top of their campaign agendas.Spur domestic production, say producers     Domestic petroleum producers used the occasion to point out that elected leaders promised five years ago when the country went to war to protect it's access to a plentiful supply of Middle Eastern oil that they would find ways to increase domestic production to lessen foreign oil dependence.     Though they disagree on the means, the Independent Petroleum Assn. of America (IPAA) and the SEBC seem to agree on the outcome if some action is not taken.     "Is the United States less vulnerable to a similar conflict or threat to a supply disruption," asked Lew Ward, IPAA chairman. "I'm afraid the answer is no."     IPAA pointed out that domestic production is at its lowest level since 1954. As more imported oil floods the U.S. market, the group said, American producers are unable to compete and are forced to downsize casuing production to fall even more.     While pointing out recent laws that lift the export of crude from Alaska's North Slope giving West Coast producers new drilling incentives and encouraging deep water production in the Gulf of Mexico, IPAA said. Lawmakers are still not focused on a cohesive energy policy that would result in even greater domestic production.     IPAA said the budget negotiators proposal to sell 32 million barrels of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) in order to raise $470 million over the next seven years to balance the budget and reduce the deficit is one example the country's resckless energy policy.     "Dumping oil on the market only hurts domestic production, our last line of defense in the event of an emergency," Ward said.      The SPR holds nearly 600 million barrels of oil for use in the event of an oil disruption.     The administration originally only agreed to sell 6 million barrels to pay for remediation at the Weeks Island SPR facility in Louisiana.     But both Republican and Democratic proposals now under consideration would sell that amount plus the additional 32 million barrels.     Ward called this an "irresponsible energy strategy," and said that energy policy should be made a top priority again for the country and especially with presidential candidates.     His group believes that policy should focus on improving technologies for exploration and production and providing producers with incentives to drill and maintain marginal wells.     "We can and we should be doing more to mobilize U.S. producers and increase domestic production as a way of backing out oil imports," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Exploration and production spending will jump, worldwide survey shows     Oil and gas exploration and production expenditures (E&P) will increase by almost 8% in 1996, the greatest increase in six years, according to Salomon Brothers' worldwide survey of 275 oil and gas companies.     The biggest E&P target is Latin America.     The survey shows global E&P expenditures in 1996 of almost $64 billion, up from the $59 billion expected in 1995. U.S. spending is planned to increase 11.8% in 1996, after only a 4.7% advance in 1995. That translates into raised spending amounts of $18.2 billion from $16.3 billion in 1995, Salomon said.     "The results indicate that the recovery in international spending that began in 1995 will be sustained," said analyst Geoff Keiburtz.     He attributes the increased spending plans to a firmer outlook for natural gas prices, good drilling success and improved cost efficiency. Deferral of projects during the period of weak gas prices in 1995 also may be playing a part in the spending boost.     Latin America has displaced the Asia/Pacific region as having the greatest perceived E&P potential, the survey found, with over 60% of the respondents citing Latin America as a target. Fifty-three percent cited Asia/Pacific and 30% the Gulf of Mexico.     International E&P outside the United States and Canada are planned by British Petroleum, Arco, Texaco, Amoco, Unocal, Mobil and Exxon. Those reducing spending include British Gas and Phillips.     Some of the largest planned spenders, according to the survey, will be the 15 U.S. majors that will spend $10.3 billion, 13.4% more than last year and the strongest planned increase since the survey began 14 years ago.     U.S. independents, however, are planning to increase E&P spending at a more modest level of 9.3% over last year. Apache, Coastal, Cabot and Oryx Energy planned to spend the most in E&P, the survey said, while Kerr-McGee, KCS Energy and Burlington Resources plan to spend the least.Canada E&P spending will drop     Though total global E&P spending shows a rise, the survey found that Canadian companies will lower their E&P budgets this year. A 6.4% decline was reported by 96 companies there.     Salomon Brothers' said that companies are determining spending levels based on a WTI crude price of $17.48/bbl. The average natural gas price (Henry Hub) for 1996 is predicted to be $1.75/Mcf.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Environmentalists applaud SDG&E      The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) named the San Diego Gas & Electric Co. and its parent Enova Corp. the winners of its environmental award, making it the first time a private-sector utility has been given the honor.     NRDC said the utility company won the award for its long-term commitment to energy efficiency programs, which saved its customers more than 10 billion kilowatt hours of electricity during the past 18 years. Their efforts have also diverted several million tons of pollutants from the atmosphere as a result of reduced electricity demand, said Ralph Cavanagh, co-director of NRDC's energy program.       "Today, the company's energy-efficiency strategies are among the best anywhere at delivering increased productivity, lower operating costs and improved environmental quality," Cavanagh said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996WEP wants 6.2% rate increase     Wisconsin Electric Power Co. (WEP) is asking for an increase of 6.2% for electric customers, 1.4% for natural gas customers and 6.4% for steam customers to make up for a projected $82.2 million revenue deficiency for its utility operations in 1997.     "The proposed increase will help us deliver the service customers expect and keep us on solid financial footing as the competitive market arrives," said Richard Abdoo, the company's chairman and chief executive officer. WEP filed the rate increase request with the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Gasoline prices increaseEnding a six-month trend of declining prices, the price of self-serve regular unleaded gasoline increased 2.1 cents since December, according to the American Automobile Association (AAA).     The AAA monthly Fuel Gauge Survey found the national average price for self-serve unleaded is now $1.139 per gallon. Self-serve premium also rose 2 cents to $1.315, while full-serve regular unleaded averages $1.403 per gallon, up 1.3 cents from last month.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Nuclear plants shut     Two nuclear plants were shut last week while another was forced to operate on reduced power.      Commonwealth Edison Co. shut down its Zion 2 nuclear power plant Jan. 13 to inspect condensor box tubes on the non-nuclear side of the plant, said Gary Wald, a company spokesman. The 1,040-MW pressurized water reactor in Zion, Ill., will be back online sometime this week.     An electric cable malfunction caused Consumers Power Co.'s Palisades nuclear plant to go off line Jan. 17, said company spokesman Mark Savage. The 730-MW plant in South Haven, Mich., will not be restarted for a few days until repairs are made.       An inspection of Maine Yankee Atomic Power Co.'s  electric generation system required reduced power on Jan. 16.      The plant was restarted days earlier following an 11-month shutdown due to cracked generator tubes. Marshall Murphy, a plant spokesman, said the plant will likely be restored to about 30% of its capacity within a few days.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Westinghouse scores fuel cellsA generating plant powered by Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s solid-oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) reached a record-setting power output of 27 kilowatts during tests conducted by the Southern California Edison Company in Grand Terrace, Calif.      The Westinghouse unit was modified to allow it to use JP-8 military jet fuel similar to kerosene and DF-2 diesel fuel. The tests on logistic fuels are part of an effort to develop transportable power plants for military applications.       These fuels require a preprocessor to remove sulfur from the fuel and deliver methane to the SOFC. The unit also runs directly on natural gas and is designed to smoothly transfer from natural gas to logistic fuels and vice versa.     Westinghouse has received funding from the Energy Dept. and other domestic and foreign utilities to develop SOFCs for the distributed power and cogeneration market.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996CalendarJanuary 1996     Energy Week '96 Conference and Exhibition, Jan. 29-Feb. 2, Houston. Petrochemical industries, plant management, engineering technology, wind energy, drilling, (American Petroleum Institute, 202-682-8000).     Unbundling Transmission and Managing Open Access, Jan. 29-30, New Orleans, La. (The Center for Business Intelligence, 1-800-767-6200 or fax: 617-270-6216).     Texas Oil Marketers Assn. Winter Membership Meeting, Jan. 31-Feb. 2, Houston. (Jackie Browning Stocker, 512-476-9547).     February 1996Capturing and Retaining Wholesale/Industrial Power Customers, Feb. 5-6, New Orleans, La. (The Center for Business Intelligence, 800-767-9499 or fax 617-270-6216).     The ABCs of Successful Competitive Bidding and Power Contracts In The New Electricity Market, Feb. 7-8, Houston (Pasha Publications, 713-460-9200 or fax 713-460-9150).      New Frontiers in Utilities-Based Telecommunications: Strategies for Increased Market Share, Feb. 14-15, Atlanta. (International Communications for Management, 312-540-3083).     47th Annual Institute on Oil and Gas Law and Taxation, Feb. 15-16, Dallas. Offers law and tax presentations for the experienced oil and gas practitioner. (The Southwestern Legal Foundation, 214-883-2377 or fax 214-883-2458).     EPM Mexico, Feb. 20-23, Mexico City, Mexico. A universal industrial fair for suppliers and buyers seeking new manufacturing solutions. (Hanover Fairs USA, 609-987-1202 or fax 609-987-0092).     Restructuring the Electric Industry: What are the Costs and Benefits to Consumers?, Feb. 29-March 1, Washington, D.C. (NASUCA's 1995 Capitol Hill Conference, 202-727-3908).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 22, 1996Joint venture formed in Shanghai       Shanghai Petrochemical Co. Limited and the Phillips Petroleum International Corp. have announced the formation of a joint venture company called Shanghai Golden Phillips Petroleum Co. Limited.     The $100 million joint venture company will build a 100,000-ton rated capacity liner polyethylene plant and a 10,000-ton rated capacity raw material plant for the production of pipelines in Jinshanwei, Shanghai.Back to Headline List