WT03-B35-1IA059-000325-B003-235http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey87.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231401 text/html 63017HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:11:29 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:24 GMTContent-length: 62830Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey87.html Sample Issue Copyright EUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNet January 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES N.J. EXPANDS PSE&G STANDARD OFFER PLAN TO 150 MW FOR 1996-97, AT AVOIDED COST (670 words) CALIF. RESTRUCTURING PROPOSAL CALLS ON LAWMAKERS TO ENACT DSM SURCHARGE (725 words) MANY STATES REJECT EPACT STANDARDS ON DSM, IRP AND EFFICIENCY IN SUPPLY (386 words) PS COLORADO OFFERS GAS DRYER REBATES (96 words) PEPCO PROVIDES $250,000 TO NON-PROFITS (83 words) UTILITY RESTRUCTURING N.Y. ALJ BACKS SYSTEM BENEFITS CHARGE TO FUND DSM AS COMPETITION OPENS UP (678 words) UTILITIES MUST SHIFT INDUSTRIAL DSM TO CUSTOMER SERVICE, REPORT ADVISES (505 words) NRDC PUSHING ENERGY EFFICIENCY PLAN IN LONG ISLAND LIGHTING RESTRUCTURING (602 words) CONSULTANTS SEE NEED FOR UTILITIES TO RETHINK TRADITIONAL BUSINESS (817 words) RATE ISSUES COINCIDENT PEAK RATES HELP N.C. MUNI LOWER ITS WHOLESALE POWER COSTS (690 words) PROGRAMS SDG&E RETROFITS LIGHTS AT 175 SCHOOLS; SAVINGS ESTIMATED AT $1.8-MILLION/YEAR (407 words) LOAD RESEARCH PROJECT SEEN MAXIMIZING DSM EFFORT FOR N.C. MUNICIPAL AGENCY (493 words) PORTLAND GENERAL TO LIMIT LIGHTING REBATES; SETS `SITE-BASED' INCENTIVES (631 words) PACIFICORP OFFERS FREE EFFICIENCY MEASURES FOR ORE. APARTMENT OWNERS (224 words) ENERGY SERVICE COMPANIES SESCO PETITIONS REGULATORS ON PG&E'S PLAN FOR OVER-COLLECTED DSM FUNDS (522 words) NIPSCO NEGOTIATING WITH UNNAMED PARTNER TO DEVELOP RESIDENTIAL ENERGY SERVICES (304 words) COST RECOVERY 1994 SHAREHOLDER INCENTIVES APPROVED FOR SOCAL ED, PG&E, SDG&E AND SOCAL GAS (718 words) CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   N.J. EXPANDS PSE&G STANDARD OFFER PLAN TO 150 MW FOR 1996-97, AT AVOIDEDCOSTThe New Jersey Board of Public Utilities has voted to continue PublicService Electric & Gas' ``standard offer'' program, and has expanded theoffering for 1996-97 (Docket No. EE95090415).   Under the plan, PSE&G makes blocks of capacity available for energysavings and pays its avoided cost to demand-side management projects. Theprogram began in 1993, when the utility opened a 150-MW block through 1995,and in its recent order, the BPU expanded that to 185 MW for projectssubmitted by Jan. 2, 1996. For its 1996 DSM plan, PSE&G had proposedopening a new one-year, 75-MW block (DSR, 12 Oct '95, 1), but the BPUexpanded that to 150 MW for 1996-97.   The new 150-MW offer will be broken into three 50-MW blocks, which willprovide declining payments, since additional capacity will reduce the valueof savings to the company, and thereby, its avoided cost. That figure nowstands at $5.45/kW/month for capacity and about 2.6 cents/kWh for energy.However, the first 50-MW block of the new standard offer will set prices27% lower, while the second block will be priced 33% below Standard OfferNo. 1 and the third block will be set 38% below it.   Although Standard Offer No. 2 is set at 150 MW, the BPU made allowancefor a fourth block with no defined MW size, at prices that would be 44%lower than Standard Offer No. 1. In addition, there will be a 15-MWresidential ``carve-out,'' with at least half of that reserved forlow-income residences. For those projects, prices will be set 14% higherthan Standard Offer No. 1 for the first half of the contract period, and33% lower for the second half.   Further, PSE&G will accept up to 10 MW of fuel-switching projects, butonly at government-owned facilities. It will also accept up to 1 MW ofprojects that displace electric air conditioning in summer with chillerspowered by waste heat from cogeneration plants. These must involve existingcogeneration facilities that exceed 50% efficiency, and they must notresult in incremental fuel use or emissions.   If New Jersey opens up retail competition, PSE&G will continue to makestandard offer payments to projects whose hosts choose an electric supplierother than the utility. However, that pledge would only apply if PSE&G isstill allowed to recover its standard offer payments through some type ofsystem benefits charge. DSM advocates in many states are lobbying for suchcharges on distribution services, to maintain efficiency programs in theface of retail access.   In the standard offer program, projects are accepted on a first-come,first-served basis, though they must be qualified by PSE&G for technicalmerit and savings potential. They may be installed by users themselves, orby energy service companies. One ESCO that is active in the program isPSE&G's own subsidiary, Public Service Conservation Resources Corp.(PSCRC), which works with customers on standard offer projects and providesfinancing.   In pushing for the continuation of its standard offer program, PSE&Gargued that the market-based approach fits well in the rapidly deregulatingindustry. It told the BPU that ``given the right information, price signalsand product and service options, consumers are in the best position to makedecisions about how they should use and conserve energy.''   It added that the ``decentralized decision-making of a market economy''would stimulate innovation and reduce costs.   There is no set budget for the standard offer program, since it willdepend on how much savings PSE&G purchases. However, the BPU approved a$33-million, two-year budget for the utility to continue some ``core''programs, such as rebates for lighting and air conditioning retrofits.   PSE&G's plan was applauded by DSM advocates, including the Mid-AtlanticEnergy Project and N.J. Public Interest Research Group, who also praisedthe utility's willingness to work with them. ``PSE&G's DSM plan, and theprocess by which it was developed, should serve as a model for otherutilities in New Jersey and around the country,'' stated Daniel Rosenblum,director of the Mid-Atlantic Energy Project.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   CALIF. RESTRUCTURING PROPOSAL CALLS ON LAWMAKERS TO ENACT DSM SURCHARGE   The California Public Utilities Commission called on the CaliforniaLegislature to enact a nonbypassable ``public goods'' surcharge on retailelectricity sales to fund energy efficiency and research and developmentprograms in a competitive electric industry.   The PUC made the recommendation in its final restructuring order issuedDecember 20. The commission also recommended that the Legislature adopt aseparate universal surcharge to fund low-income weatherization programscurrently funded through utility demand-side management budgets.   The commission gave the Legislature, Governor, stakeholders, and thepublic 100 days to comment on its decision while the PUC establishes a``road map'' for implementing restructuring in California. ``Given theLegislature's role in creating these programs, we do not view itappropriate to alter them significantly without Legislative guidance,'' thePUC stated.   The PUC plans to adopt a funding level, establish an independentadministrator for the DSM and R&D funds, and work out other details duringthe implementation phase of restructuring. However, the PUC suggested thatthe public goods surcharge should be equal to three percent of totalrevenues from electricity sales in California.   The PUC noted that while support for a nonbypassable surcharge to fundenergy efficiency and conservation programs remained strong, stakeholdersdisagreed on the types of programs that should be funded and theappropriate funding levels.   The PUC specified that funding for energy efficiency programs shouldfocus on activities not provided by the competitive market that are in thebroad public interest and designed to transform the energy efficiencymarket. The commission conceded that delineating between competitive andother DSM activities will be difficult.   ``We do not intend for the surcharge to collect funds to pursue energyefficiency activities that the competitive market will provide on itsown,'' the PUC said. However, the commission observed that ``many programswith a market transformation, information, or education focus are notlikely to be provided by the competitive market.''   While acknowledging that there are various definitions of markettransformation activities, the commission concluded that it was appropriateto use public funding to ensure that consumers have information aboutmanaging their energy use. Residential and small business customersgenerally have a greater need for these public programs than largecustomers, which have greater resources available to manage their energyuse, the PUC noted. Moreover, financial incentives to develop the marketfor energy efficient products and services, such as the Super-EfficientRefrigerator Program and manufacturer rebates for fluorescent light-bulbsand high-efficiency motors should continue, the PUC suggested. ``We expectthat public funding would be needed only for specified and limited periodsof time, to cause the market to be transformed,'' the PUC said.   The PUC adopted a two-track approach to continuing DSM funding in acompetitive industry. In the short-term the commission plans to utilize theutilities' expertise in administering DSM programs. However, after a shorttransition period, the PUC plans to establish an independent, nonprofitorganization to collect the surcharge and allocate the funds competitivelyto ensure equal opportunity for non-utility energy service companies.   The PUC anticipates that by January 1, 1997 DSM costs will no longer beembedded in electric rates but will be collected as part of the publicgoods surcharge on retail electricity sales. Initially, the surchargeshould be a line item on utility bills corresponding to each utility'sauthorized DSM funding in their service area. In time the PUC intends forthe same surcharge to be applied consistently throughout the state.   The commission plans to hold workshops to provide guidance onestablishing the DSM programs that will be funded through the surcharge,the details of the independent administrator and transition period, and howutility expertise can be utilized.   ``This guidance should be considered a starting point and not final,''the PUC said. ``If the workshops flesh out the two tracks in more detailand identify areas where public funding should be expanded or limited, wewill consider modifying our decision.''   The PUC noted that the California Energy Commission is alsodeliberating--through its Energy Services Working Group--how best topromote energy efficiency in a competitive electric industry. The CECworking group has recommended a surcharge to fund DSM and energy efficiencyR&D beginning January 1, 1996 while supporting more market-driven fundingapproaches. The working group recommended that the PUC continue to overseeutility DSM expenditures until 1998 while market structure details areworked out.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   MANY STATES REJECT EPACT STANDARDS ON DSM, IRP AND EFFICIENCY IN SUPPLY   Many states have rejected the efficiency guidelines set down in the 1992Energy Policy Act (EPACT), saying they conflict with existing stateregulations, according to a recent survey.   St. Louis consulting firm Brubaker & Associates Inc. (BAI) polled statecommissions and found that almost twice as many states rejected the EPACTstandards as adopted them. However, most commissions took no action,explaining that they were already in compliance with the standards beforeEPACT was passed by Congress in 1992.   In Section 111 of the act, Congress stated three efficiency standards(7,8 and 9): integrated resource planning (IRP) should be employed by eachutility, and plans should be updated regularly, providing for publicparticipation; investments in conservation and demand-side managementshould be at least as profitable as supply-side resources, givingconsideration to reduced sales, and should be monitored and evaluated;energy efficiency investments in power generation and supply should beencouraged by providing incentives for better maintenance and investmentsin efficient generation, transmission and distribution.   EPACT called for states to consider these guidelines and determinewhether adopting them would be consistent with state law. States were alsotold to determine whether adopting the standards would advance conservationand maintain equitable rates to electricity consumers. The act set adeadline of Oct. 24, 1995 for these investigations.   In its survey, Brubaker found that 12 states rejected the IRP standard,seven adopted it and most others said they were already in compliance (somehad not yet ruled). Similarly, 12 states rejected the criterion forinvestments in DSM, while 7 states adopted it and others either said theywere already in compliance or had not yet addressed the issue. Onefficiency in generation, 12 states rejected while only five adopted.   States that rejected all three standards are: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas,Delaware, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Montana, New Mexico, NorthDakota, Virginia and West Virginia. Those that adopted all three standardsare: Florida, Idaho, Oklahoma and Wyoming. However, several others adoptedthe IRP and DSM standards, while rejecting or reaching no decision the lastone, including Colorado, Connecticut and Indiana. Those states that saidthey were already in compliance with all standards are: Georgia, Hawaii,Illinois, Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, Nevada, NewHampshire, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, SouthCarolina and Vermont.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PS COLORADO OFFERS GAS DRYER REBATES   Public Service Colorado has inaugurated a natural gas dryer rebateprogram that provides $70 to first-time buyers or those replacing anelectric clothes dryer.   The two-month program expiring Dec. 31, 1995 is part of the company'sdemand-side management efforts to help customers use energy wisely.   ``Customers can dry almost three loads of laundry in a natural gas dryerfor what it costs to dry one load in an electric dryer,'' said KathyWorthington, marketing program leader at PS Colorado. The offer isavailable only to residential customers of the company.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PEPCO PROVIDES $250,000 TO NON-PROFITS   Potomac Electric Power spent $250,000 in 1995 to help subsidize theweatherization of homes belonging to low-income and senior customers. Overthe past 12 years, the utility has helped weatherize more than 20,000homes, working in conjunction with charitable groups.   Under its Community Conservation Program, the company awarded contractsworth $250,000 in 1995 to non-profit, community-based organizations to dothe work. Matching funds from private organizations brought the totalbudget up to about $1-million for the year.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   N.Y. ALJ BACKS SYSTEM BENEFITS CHARGE TO FUND DSM AS COMPETITION OPENS UP   An administrative law judge at the New York Public Service Commissionhas recommended imposing a mechanism to fund demand-side management as thestate opens up competition. She also emphasized wholesale, rather than theretail competition that DSM advocates fear would encourage cheap, dirtypower.   ALJ Judith Lee issued her proposed decision in the PSC's CompetitiveOpportunities case (No. 94-E-0952). In it, she stated that ``Retailcompetition has the potential to benefit all customers by providing greaterchoice among their electricity providers, as well as increased pricing andreliability options. But retail access brings with it significant risks andrequires considerable caution, and should be provided only if it is in thebest interests of all consumers.''   With that note of caution, she urged the PSC to establish wholesalecompetition first, ``with an eye toward adding retail access as rapidly aspossible once a market is established and reliability is ensured.''However, she offered no time frame for the transition, and retail wheelingadvocates--such as large industrials--bitterly condemned the decision,saying it gives utilities veto power over moves toward retail access.   In earlier comments in the case, DSM advocates joined the utilities inendorsing a wholesale pool, rather than retail access (DSR, 9 Nov '95, 7).They argued that deregulation ``must protect the long-term economic andenvironmental health of the state, and not focus entirely on short-termprice considerations.'' With a wholesale pool, they said, regulators wouldhave more control over resource choices, and could insist that distributionutilities acquire a certain amount of DSM and renewables. They could alsoimpose a ``system benefits charge'' on retail rates to fund DSM andrenewables.   But even if retail competition were allowed, distribution utilitieswould still deliver power from outside producers, and regulators couldimpose the system benefits charge or ``wires charge'' on those deliveries,the efficiency groups said. In her proposed decision, Judge Lee opened thedoor for the option: ``Any restructuring model should include a mechanismfor recovering costs required to be spent on environmental and other publicpolicy considerations.''   The ALJ ruling was praised by David Wooley, executive director of PaceEnergy Project, at the Pace University Center for Environmental LegalStudies in White Plains, N.Y. He said Judge Lee was ``appropriatelycautionary'' about the transition to retail competition. Further, ``She hasclearly endorsed a system benefits charge, and that was one of our mainobjectives,'' he told Demand-Side Report.   Wooley foresees a system benefits charge of 1.5-2 mills/kWh, which hesaid would have a minimal rate impact. The funds could be administered by anon-profit entity, a ``quasi-governmental'' entity whose board wouldcontain representatives of all customer sectors. Wooley does not rule oututilities overseeing DSM efforts, but he fears any link between thedistribution company and its generation affiliate, which might oppose DSM.``It's not impossible to erect barriers, but we're concerned because thegenerating company would see DSM as competition, just it would see othergenerators as competition,'' he said.   Wooley is skeptical of the argument--often advance by retail competitionadvocates--that in an open market, energy service companies wouldproliferate to replace utility DSM programs. ``It's not at all clear thatESCOs would arise to take over the conservation efforts,'' he said.``Especially during a transition period, you need mechanisms to jump-startthe market.''   Eventually, the system benefits charge could shrink, Wooley said, but headded, ``There will always be a place for this to bring new technologies tothe market.'' He said the 1.5-2 mills/kWh surcharge is a ``reasonable''proposal that could benefit everyone if it is administered well.   On that note, Wooley dismissed the notion put forth by large users thatthey are non-participants in most of the programs. ``Anyone who buyscommercial lighting has benefited from DSM efforts,'' he said. ``The markethas advanced, and what is standard now is very different from what wasstandard a few years ago.'' To continue that market transformation, DSMfunds could go to equipment manufacturers, as well as users, to subsidizeefficiency upgrades in their product lines, he said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   UTILITIES MUST SHIFT INDUSTRIAL DSM TO CUSTOMER SERVICE, REPORT ADVISES   Although utilities are under pressure to cut costs in the competitivemarket, they must view industrial demand-side management as a means ofretaining these customers in that same tough environment, according to arecent report.   However, DSM must be shifted from a ``resource procurement'' strategy toa customer-service approach, says IRT Environment Inc.. The Basalt, Colo.,information and consulting firm surveyed manufacturers and utilities andfound that they are far apart on what industrial DSM should include.   The problem is urgent, IRT says, because industrials are utilities'``least captive'' customers, with options for fuel switching, cogeneration,and shifting loads to other regions. Most of them are unhappy paying forDSM in the first place, and say they do not even get much for these ratehikes. Many large manufacturers have been pursuing energy conservation foryears, IRT notes, and they condemn rate-based DSM as a subsidy forothers--including competing industrial firms that have not taken the sameinitiative. ``Utilities have been regarded by many industrial customers asvestiges of a socialist system, monopolies used to deliver not onlyelectricity but public policy,'' IRT says.   Part of the problem is that utility DSM programs are often rigid,providing audits and rebates for motors and lighting, but not improvingprocesses, the report notes. This type of work is much more difficultbecause processes can differ greatly from industry to industry, and evenfrom company to company within an industry. Process improvements demand thekind of customized services that utilities must provide in the morecompetitive market, according to the report. These should transcend energyefficiency, and also focus on productivity improvements and pollutioncontrol, IRT advises. However, utilities are still likely to encounterhostility. In interviewing industrials, IRT found that some doubt utilitiesare capable of providing effective energy services, since they have noentrepreneurial skills. They think utilities should just get out of the wayand stop hiking rates for programs that are unwanted. At best, utilitiescan promote efficiency through information, cost-based rates and financing,some firms said.   To overcome industrial skepticism, some utilities are contracting withexisting energy service companies or even acquiring existing ESCOs. Theymay offer energy services outside of rate base through unregulatedsubsidiaries. Others are using consultants with expertise in particularindustries to help their customers.   Another approach is taken by Niagara Mohawk Power in New York, whichallows industrials to opt out of DSM rebate programs and avoid the rateimpact. However, the utility will link these customers with private ESCOs,and will help them line up financing for efficiency projects. Meanwhile,Detroit Edison has made efficiency part of the long-term supply contractsit has signed with the ``Big 3'' automakers. The utility will provide 38on-site energy managers, and has already seen $1-million in savings atseveral facilities in a limited test of the program.   The report, ``Industrial Efficiency Programs: Building StrategicPartnerships,'' is available for $100 from The Results Center, IRTEnvironment Inc., P.O. Box 2239, Basalt, Colo. 81621; (970) 927-3155.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   NRDC PUSHING ENERGY EFFICIENCY PLAN IN LONG ISLAND LIGHTING RESTRUCTURING   The Natural Resources Defense Council and other groups are lobbying theLong Island Power Authority (LIPA) to emphasize energy efficiency in itsrestructuring of Long Island Lighting.   Concerned by the utility's high rates--averaging 15.3 cents/kWh--andtheir impact on the economy, New York Gov. George Pataki has called for thedismantling of the utility. He recently proposed a plan that calls for LIPAto take over LILCO's distribution system, auction off its generatingplants, and shop around for the cheapest power in the wholesale market.   However, NRDC, the Long Island Citizens Advisory Panel (CAP) and otherDSM proponents stress that the governor's plan only predicts 12% ratereductions, which will not nearly bring rates in line with regional ornational averages. The only way to help businesses and residences is to cuttheir bills by aggressively pursuing DSM, they argue (DSR, 7 Dec, 3).   Presenting the breakup plan, neither Gov. Pataki nor LIPA chairman JamesGill mentioned energy efficiency. However, Ashok Gupta, senior energyeconomist for New York-based NRDC, told Demand-Side Report that he hasgotten a good reception at LIPA and has further meetings planned for earlyin the new year.   In an outline of its Long Island Energy Efficiency Initiative, NRDCnotes that the State Energy Plan estimates the savings potential on LongIsland at $400-million per year, but ``without technical and financialassistance, these economic investments appear difficult, risky andexpensive,'' it warns. Some subsidies are needed because ``High transactioncosts, scarcity and cost of capital, lack of expertise, split incentivesand other related hurdles stand in the way of private-sector investment inenergy efficiency.''   To overcome those hurdles, NRDC has proposed a fund that would financedthrough through a 0.2 cents/kWh rate surcharge. That would raise$32-million per year over five years, or $160-million, which could beadministered by LIPA and the New York Power Authority (NYPA). However, allenergy services and products would be delivered by private energy servicecompanies.   Incentives would serve as a marketing tool for ESCOs, and these would bemade available on a first-come, first-served basis, so that ``energyservice companies will in essence race to enroll new projects, generating aquick market upsurge,'' NRDC predicts. LIPA, or whatever entity takes overLILCO's distribution system, would let ESCOs collect payments fromconsumers through their monthly electric bills.   Part of the efficiency fund could be used to guarantee loans by privatelenders, to make capital more accessible and hold down interest rates,according to the plan. The financial institutions could collect these loansthrough electric bills, and payments could be timed so that users pay themoff through energy savings.   In addition, LIPA could provide ``energy savings advances.'' Under thisscheme, when consumers sign contracts with ESCOs, they would be giveninterest-free advances of 10% of their total investment, to be repaidthrough future bills.   The initiative would also provide coupons to cut the cost of purchases,such as efficient lighting, refrigerators and other appliances. ``Thoughpurchases of such equipment often pay for themselves out of saved energycosts, their higher up-front cost often deters consumers,'' NRDC notes.Some coupons could be given to landlords, to encourage efficient purchases,since renters usually have no say in their appliances, even though they paythe bills. Other funds could be used to support design assistance forarchitects and builders, and to accelerate the introduction of newtechnologies.   Overall, NRDC sees the initiative providing an additional 10% reductionin energy bills, as well as stimulating private-sector investment worth$1-billion, helping businesses become more competitive and creating jobs inenergy services and construction.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   CONSULTANTS SEE NEED FOR UTILITIES TO RETHINK TRADITIONAL BUSINESS   ``Electric utilities are dead,'' according to Mitch Diamond, vicepresident, energy group, at Booz, Allen & Hamilton Inc., the New YorkCity-based consulting firm.   In their stead are a number of distinct businesses that traditionalinvestor-owned utilities can choose to participate in or not as theindustry restructures, Diamond said. Whereas utilities now verticallyintegrate generation, transmission, distribution and customer service,these and other business functions will evolve into separate businessenterprises, in the form of power production companies, regional networkoperators, bulk power traders, distribution system operators and retailpower marketers.   Diamond made his remarks at the ``Competitive Analysis and Benchmarkingfor Power Companies'' conference last month, sponsored by the Boston-basedCenter for Business Intelligence in Washington D.C. The conference broughttogether a number of consultants and utility executives to talk about theintegration of competitive intelligence techniques into the utilityindustry as restructuring and deregulation progresses.   Diamond said utilities should concentrate on organizing themselves to dobetter in the future what they have already done in the past. To accomplishthis, a lot of analysis and hard thinking will be required, he said. Hesuggested that executives decide which parts of the business they are bestat and concentrate on them, leaving the parts that they are weakest at toother companies.   He cautioned against a strategy pursued by several major utilities inthe industry: going overseas to build power plants in developing countries.``Your business is not to go build plants in Argentina,'' he said, ``but tobe better in the business you're now in, here in the states.''   To back up his claim, he presented data suggesting that the bestperformers in different industries consistently outperform by wide marginsthe average performance within those industries. In effect, he said,pursuing international development opportunities may provide short-termwindfalls, but to the possible detriment of the work necessary to excel athome.   And to excel in the native market, he said, utilities must become morecustomer-sensitive and willing to tailor their services to individualcustomers' needs. In his company's analysis, he said it was discoveredthat, across a variety of industries, customers switch providers as much,if not more so, because of poor service as because of price differences. Hesaid the way to ensure the least amount of customer flight is to treatcustomers as individuals, learn their individual needs and respond to them.That way, when a new supplier woos them, the bond of loyalty andrecognition will be harder to break.   Also speaking at the conference was Sanford Cohen, an analyst at MerrillLynch, who presented a regional analysis of how 50 utilities stand in termsof their industrial power prices.   In the mid-Atlantic region, Merrill Lynch found that Allegheny Power,with ``among the lowest price and cost structures in the nation,'' wasstrongest, with Baltimore Gas & Electric, Pennsylvania Power and & Light,DQE and PECO Energy also strong. The analyst forecast that PECO Energy,Public Service Enterprise Group and DQE would soon bring their current highprices ``in-line with regional averages.'' Most at risk because ofcompetition in the region were General Public Utilities and Public ServiceElectric & Gas.   The Midwest, Merrill Lynch said, is ``another area that is primed forcompetition.'' It noted Ohio Edison, Detroit Edison and DQE as expectedgood performers. Most at risk is CMS Energy.   In the Northeast, the analyst firm found no utilities in goodcompetitive positions. ``By national standards,'' it said, ``all of theutilities in the Northeast have high prices. These price levels are notgoing unnoticed by customers in the region. More than any other region, theproblems of the Northeast are homogeneous and it is in each utility'sinterest to stall retail wheeling as long as possible.'' It pickedNortheast Utilities as the utility with the greatest chance to improve itsposition.   In the Southeast, Merrill Lynch picked Carolina Power & Light as mostlikely to improve, although it is currently ``the weakest of regionalcompetitors. Improvements in nuclear performance coupled with largereductions in O&M budgets over the next several years should help improvethe company's cost structure. Prices will also decline dramatically due tothe expiration of riders for nuclear investment recovery, as well asexpected discounting for industrial customers.'' It picked Southern Companyand Duke Power as presently best equipped to handle competition.   In the region including Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas, the analyst foundthat Entergy is showing the greatest improvement. It said its analysis inthis region was otherwise incomplete.   And in the West, the analyst found that California utilities are highlyat risk because of power-purchase contracts and commitments to costlynuclear facilities, a situation not likely to improve, despite ``heroicefforts...to reduce price levels,'' because of the huge interconnected gridin the West availing customers of cheaper supplies from Canada and Mexicoand elsewhere in the region.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   COINCIDENT PEAK RATES HELP N.C. MUNI LOWER ITS WHOLESALE POWER COSTS   The municipal utility in Greenville, N.C., said thatcoincident-peak-based rates it charges all large industrial, commercial andinstitutional customers has helped the muni realize significant savings inits wholesale power costs, which are based in large part on Greenville'speak demand each month.   The Greenville Utilities Commission, as the muni is known, also said ithopes to trim peak-period demand even more with a residential time-of-userate available beginning this month to 200 partipants in a pilot test.   Roger Jones, general manager of the Greenville muni, said all municustomers that demand 750 kW or more now pay one of three coincident peak(CP) rates: An ``A'' rate for those whose energy use must be relativelyconstant; a ``B'' rate for those with more flexibility; and a ``C'' ratefor those willing and able to make significant reductions in their energyuse during coincident peaks.   Under each rate, the customer pays a basic monthly charge of $440, plusa relatively high per/kW rate for its demand during the 60 minutes eachmonth when the North Carolina Eastern Municipal Power Agency (NCEMPA)--themuni's wholesale supplier--experiences its highest systemwide demand.   The customer also pays a much smaller per/kW charge for differencebetween that coincident-peak level and its highest demand for all thatmonth, plus energy charges.   For instance, under the ``C'' rate, a 3-MW customer that reduces itscoincident-peak demand to 1 MW pays a $440 basic charge, plus demandcharges of $21.34/kW on the 1-MW coincident-peak demand and $2.86/kW on the2 MW above that level. The customer also pays an energy charge of 3.323cents/kWh.   Jones said that the muni's 750-kW and higher customers together accountfor about one-quarter of Greenville's total energy use, and that the CPrates have encouraged them to reduce their peak-period demand by 15 to 20%from what it typically would have been without the CP rates.   He noted that reduction translates directly into savings in thewholesale power costs paid by Greenville to NCEMPA, which buys most of itspower from Carolina Power & Light.   The magnitude of reductions in coincident-peak demand varied widely fromcustomer to customer, the muni manager said. Some are able only to trimtheir demand slightly, while others have been ``very aggressive'' and haveslashed peak-period demand by more than 50%.   One large industrial customer that typically demands about 8 MW reducesits demand to between 1 and 1.5 MW during coincident peaks, Jones noted,saving both the customer and the muni thousands of dollars in monthly powercosts.   The residential time-of-use rate program Greenville is now pilot-testingalso is aimed at reducing peak-period demand and wholesale power costs.   Jones said the pilot requires that participants sign up for the muni's``Beat-the-Peak'' load-management program, under which load-controlswitches are placed on customers' heat pumps, electric furnaces, centralair conditioners and electric water heaters, and those devices are remotelyswitched off during peak periods.   The TOU program sets on-peak and off-peak energy-use hours for threedifferent times of the year. On-peak hours are 6 a.m. to 10 a.m. during themonths of January, February, March, November and December; 1 p.m. to 7 p.m.in May, June, July, August and September; and 6 a.m. to 10 a.m. and 1 p.m.to 7 p.m. in April and October.   Participants pay a basic customer charge of $13.09/month, plus 6.449cents/kWh for off-peak energy and 17.402 cents/kWh for on-peak energy. Thestandard residential rate, in comparison, features a basic customer chargeof $8.09/month, plus energy charges of 9.473 cents for all kWh used fromJuly through October, and 8.257 cents for all kWh used the rest of theyear.   Jones said he expects the residential TOU pilot to make at least aslight contribution to lowering Greenville's peak-period demand, andanticipates that after a year-long test and perhaps some adjustments, aresidential TOU rate is likely to be offered on a much wider scale in1997.   He added, however, that unlike the CP rate for large energy users, themuni ``for the foreseeable future'' is likely to give residential customersa choice between standard and a TOU rates.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   SDG&E RETROFITS LIGHTS AT 175 SCHOOLS; SAVINGS ESTIMATED AT$1.8-MILLION/YEAR   San Diego Gas & Electric has completed an $11-million lighting retrofitproject at 175 schools in the San Diego Unified School District andofficials expect an annual savings of $1.8-million in energy bills.   The utility said the project, largest of its type on the SDG&E system,is expected to conserve 16.2 million kWh each year. Under SDG&E'sdemand-side management incentive program, shareholders will receive about$2-million more in earnings, the company said.   The installations in each school included energy-efficient fluorescentlamps, ballasts and fixtures in offices and classrooms. Also, occupancysensors in classrooms ensure lights are automatically turned off when notin use. Exit signs also are saving energy with light-emitting diode kits.   Gregg Lawless, SDG&E marketing account executive who served as teamleader for the lighting retrofit, said employees working on the projectused faster and better approaches.   ``We broke some rules,'' Lawless said. ``The project's one-year timeline may seem long at first, but not when you recall that there are 175schools. That's two days per school for the retrofits of all classrooms andoffices--to get done without disrupting classes.'' Lawless said, ``Wemoved fast, took risks and emphasized a high level of teamwork, bothinternally and with our contractors and the school district.''   As an example, he said, SDG&E's procurement agents ``moved us throughthe selection of contractors and bidding very quickly. It can be acumbersome process, but they did it in less than 60 days.'' Another keyfactor in the project success, Lawless said, was excellent communication,especially by SDG&E's team of energy consultants led by Kraig Akers.   Lawless said, ``Akers and his team completed the audits for all 175schools, they calculated the estimated energy savings and they determinedour incentives for the customer.'' On this project, he said, each energyaudit involved a representative of SDG&E, the school district and theschool district's energy consultant.   ``The complexity of this approach,'' Lawless said, ``increased the needfor good communication. Throughout the project, we've made a point to keepeveryone up to date at all times, on all matters. It helps us to stayfocused.''   Mike Lorch, principal of Kearny High School, said, ``There's a dramaticchange in the quality of light in classrooms and it's had a very positiveimpact on morale at our school. Some teachers were so fired up, they wentout and bought supplies and painted classrooms on their own time.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   LOAD RESEARCH PROJECT SEEN MAXIMIZING DSM EFFORT FOR N.C. MUNICIPAL AGENCY   North Carolina Municipal Power Agency No. 1, which arranges power for 19municipal utilities in western North Carolina, said a far-reachingload-research project it is undertaking should help the agency maximize theeffectiveness of its extensive demand-side management effort.   Mark Otersen, NCMPA-1's supervisor of demand-side operations, said the$250,000 project will involve the installation by this spring of new,modified metering equipment at the agency's largest wholesale powerdelivery points, as well as equipment to monitor the loads of ``well over50'' of its munis' largest retail customers.   The delivery-point meters--combined with telecommunications and computerequipment to transmit and compile the meter data--will enable NCMPA-1 tomeasure the demand of its muni members on a real-time, minute-by-minutebasis, he said. The customer-load monitors, in turn, will let the agencygather information on customer demand and chart customer load``shapes''--or patterns of demand.   That data, Otersen said, should help NCMPA-1 design a menu ofinnovative, DSM-related rates for industries with common load shapes, andhelp its member munis convince large energy users of the benefits of usingsuch rates.   He noted that relatively few of the large retail customers served bymunis in western North Carolina currently participate in load-managementprograms that provide incentives to those who agree to let their utilitycurtail or interrupt power during peak periods, or who agree to runpeak-shaving standby generators.   With the customer-load data and newly developed rates in hand, Otersensaid, NCMPA-1 and its members ``will be able to say to a large customer,`Here is where you are now, and here is how much you might save if youcould shift this much demand.' ''   Also the new delivery-point meters and customer monitors could be usedto give NCMPA-1 precise data on the impact individual elements of itsoverall DSM effort have on demand. For instance, he said, a muni mightimplement only its load control program for standby generation, or forresidential water heaters, and be able to measure the MW difference betweendemand just before controls were implemented and just after.   In the future, with that information in hand, Otersen added, it might bepossible for NCMPA-1 and its munis to determine on some days that they onlyneed to implement a portion of their overall DSM effort--perhaps onlyresidential air-conditioner load controls--to meet their load-reductiongoals.   Otersen and Woody Adams, the agency's power-supply manager, noted thatoptimizing NCMPA-1's DSM effort really is only a side benefit of the$250,000 load-research project, which is being undertaken primarily toenable the agency know with considerable accuracy how much surplus energyit has available each hour for possible sale to others on the wholesalemarket.   That knowledge will become increasingly important through the late1990s, when the agency expects to have increasing amounts of surplus energyavailable as Duke Power buys back less and less of NCMPA-1's 850-MWentitlement to Duke's 2,200-MW Catawba nuclear power station in Clover,S.C.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PORTLAND GENERAL TO LIMIT LIGHTING REBATES; SETS `SITE-BASED' INCENTIVES   Portland General Electric has proposed an ``Earth Smart'' program toprovide incentives for energy-efficient commercial design; the utility willlimit its lighting rebates; and it plans to initiate ``site-based''incentives that provide different incentives based on the sized of acustomer's facility.   The changes to its non-residential program are not as dramatic asexpected, given that PGE has said its demand-side management target woulddrop significantly in 1996, according to Lynn Plamondon, an Oregon PublicUtility Commission staff member. The company said earlier it wouldmake the transition from a target of 20 MW to a ``threshold goal'' of 6 MW,which means the threshold is only a bare minimum (DSR, 28 Sept '95, 8).   Plamondon noted that PGE's least-cost plan, which includes the proposalto lower DSM goals, has not yet been ``acknowledged'' by the Oregon PUC.   ``The company's goals will be controversial. Their target is up to 6 MW.I am not sure we will go for that. I have seen the higher targets push themto do more. If they have target of 5 or 6 MW, I am not sure they will bepushed to do that.''   In it proposed changes to its nonresidential programs, PGE wants tobegin the Earth Smart commercial program. ``The goal of the program is toencourage construction of commercial buildings with the highest level ofcost-effective energy efficiency and environmental sensitivity,'' says acommission memo.   Earth Smart is expected to save 1.2 average megawatts annually at atotal resource cost of 2.2 cents/kWh and a utility program cost of 1.4cents/kWh. The cost-effectiveness limit is 3.1 cents/kWh, according to thememo.   It will be offered at two levels: one, the ``gold'' option applies tobuildings that produce energy savings at least 30% above the Oregon EnergyCode. The ``green'' option applies to buildings yielding savings at least20% above the code.   Customized financial incentives for architectural design assistance, anintegrated package of energy efficient building and equipment measures andbuilding commissioning will be included, according to the staff memo.Customer incentives plus other program costs are limited to either 50% ofthe project's incremental costs or 2 cents/kWh, whichever is lower.   In addition, PGE wants to revise its lighting program rebates to reflectchanges in equipment costs, practices, equipment availability and newenergy efficiency lighting measures. Lighting rebates will only go tocommercial buildings and industrial facilities of less than 20,000 squarefeet. Customized incentives for lighting and other energy efficiencymeasures will be available to owners of facilities larger than 20,000square feet based on the economics of the project, according to the staffmemo.   PGE also wants to implement different incentives based on the size ofthe facility. ``The purpose of the program is to allow PGE more flexibilityin delivering energy efficiency to different target markets,'' said thestaff memo.   Owners of buildings that are 20,000 square feet or smaller will continueto receive incentives of up to 25% of the incremental cost for measures notavailable under other demand-side management options.   But PGE proposes to increase the minimum simple payback period from 1 to1.5 years for measures that qualify for incentives.   Incentives for facilities larger than 20,000 square feet will becustomized based on the economics of the project, but will not exceed 2cents/kWh saved. ``The focus of this incentive option is on the energyefficiency of the overall facility for proposed new construction orretrofit projects,'' said the staff memo.   The site-based incentives program is expected to save up to 1.4 averageMW annually. The total resource cost will be 2.9 cents/kWh and the utilityprogram cost will be 1.1 cents/kWh.   The proposals are expected to be approved by the commission and go intoeffect Jan. 1, 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PACIFICORP OFFERS FREE EFFICIENCY MEASURES FOR ORE. APARTMENT OWNERS   PacifiCorp has offered to provide $2.5-million in free energy-savingmeasures to 10,000 apartment owners in Oregon as part of the EnvironmentalTechnology Leadership Challenge, a national program that will be launchedin Portland, Ore., where the utility is based.   Under the program, businesses, government organizations and non-profitgroups issue challenges designed to improve environmental quality.   The project is sponsored by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Foundation andfunded by a number of businesses, said Curt Nichols, senior energy programmanager for the Portland Energy Office.   The first 10,000 apartment owners who sign up will receive the freeenergy-saving measures, said a spokeswoman for PacifiCorp.   That is expected to save 2.5 MW in 1996. It is a follow-up of an earlierprogram that provided free energy-saving measures to owners of multi-familyunits, she said.   In addition, PacifiCorp is working with the Portland Trail Blazersbasketball team to challenge facility managers to install state-of-the-artenergy technologies, said Nichols.   And Philips Lighting in Portland asked public and private companiesusing florescent lamps to switch to ``Econowatt'' florescent tubes that usemercury technology.   The lamp is said to be the first mercury florescent lamp with lowenough mercury levels to allow for non-toxic disposal.   Similar programs will be launched in Chicago, Orlando, Fla., ChulaVista, Calif. and Baltimore in a few weeks.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   SESCO PETITIONS REGULATORS ON PG&E'S PLAN FOR OVER-COLLECTED DSM FUNDS   SESCO Inc., the Lake Forest, N.J.-based energy service company, hasfiled a protest with the California Public Utilities Commission overPacific Gas & Electric's proposal for distributing $23.4-million plusinterest of over-collected demand-side management funds from 1993 and1994.   PG&E has filed an ``advice letter'' (Document 1555-E) with the CPUC,noting that it underspent its 1993 and 1994 electric DSM budgets by a totalof $106.9-million. The commission has already required that $83.5-millionbe returned to ratepayers (Decision 94-12-047). The number was an estimateand the CPUC directed the utility to notify it of any significant changesin its 1994 year end balances. PG&E said it has closed out its accounts forthose years and has an additional $23.4-million in over-collected funds,for a total of $106.9-million.   The utility now proposes to retain the final $23.4-million and reserveit for eventual payment to contractors participating in its ``integrated''bidding solicitation. The pilot integrated resource bid effort is beingconducted by PG&E at the request of the CPUC to test how well supply-sideand demand-side resources can compete for the same block of capacity (DSR13 April '95, 2; 19 Jan, 3).   The utility maintains that if the integrated bidding contract paymentsexceed the amount retained, any future unspent DSM funds would be reservedto cover the spending. PG&E is currently engaged in contract negotiationswith 13 winning DSM bidders, representing 37 MW, at a cost of$28.9-million, to be paid over the seven to 10 years of any completedcontracts.   In its advice letter, PG&E said it had unsuccessfully asked the CPUC tosuspend integrated bidding because it was ``very concerned'' about enteringinto long term, pay-for-performance DSM contracts at a time when theCalifornia electric utility industry is restructuring. The utility saidthat any agreement to pay for energy savings over a multi-year period couldresult in an increase in stranded costs for PG&E.   SESCO says that, while it supports the need to develop a way to dealwith the issue of long term DSM commitments under restructuring, ``wedefinitely believe this advice letter is not the appropriate vehicle.'' Itnotes that the utility should ``leave restructuring issues to therestructuring docket,'' which the CPUC is considering.   SESCO also believes that PG&E's proposal does increase rates. It alsosays if a transfer of funds proceeds, the utility should provide for aresidential set aside.   The unspent funds should be allotted at the same ratio as originallyintended, says SESCO. Residential customers provide about 35% of PG&E'srevenues, so should receive a similar portion of the unspent budget amountscredited, says the firm. SESCO contends that the advice letter andprocedure will ``result in continuing damage to the interests ofresidential customers.''   SESCO says the 1993 and 1994 programs and budgets were approved by theCPUC to meet needs of all ratepayers. It notes, ``instead of the transferof funding to an untested and unreviewed set of programs that largelyexclude residential customers, we propose that funding go to supportexisting programs that have received full regulatory review and do notdiscriminate against PG&E's residential customers.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   NIPSCO NEGOTIATING WITH UNNAMED PARTNER TO DEVELOP RESIDENTIAL ENERGYSERVICES   Northern Indiana Public Service is negotiating with an unidentifiedcompany to develop and provide a variety of energy efficiency programs forresidential customers within its service territory.   ``We want to give people the tools to help them manage their energy,''said a NIPSCO spokeswoman. The Hammond-based utility has been criticized bysome consumer advocates for its less-than-enthusiastic support fordemand-side management.   ``There's a reason for that,'' the spokeswoman told Demand-Side Report. ``Traditional demand-side management programs, as we see them, have notbeen effective.'' Consequently, if the current negotiations produce apartnering agreement, ``we're calling it energy efficiency, not demand-sidemanagement.''   Whatever it is called, NIPSCO is looking to launch a pilot program inits service territory later this year that would help residential customerslearn more about their energy usage in exchange for information about thatusage. The program would involve ``taking data you would get off a meterand helping residential customers identify what their energy usage is,''the spokeswoman said.   The utility hopes to develop a ``pre-paid metering'' service it canmarket to customers as well as a host of other programs, includingresidential energy management. The spokeswoman declined to identify itsprospective partner except to say the company is not another utility orutility vendor. ``We're talking about partnering with hardware and softwarecompanies,'' she said.   NIPSCO recently signed a five-year agreement to provide meter-readingservices to the city of Elkhart, Ind., following the completion of asuccessful pilot program. Though not a DSM program, the program is anexample of how much emphasis NIPSCO is placing on meter reading, somethingthe utility believes it does very well.   NIPSCO also is negotiating with other investor-owned electric utilities,rural electric membership corporations, municipal electric systems andwater utilities to provide them with meter reading services also.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   1994 SHAREHOLDER INCENTIVES APPROVED FOR SOCAL ED, PG&E, SDG&E AND SOCALGAS   The California Public Utilities Commission December 20 approvedshareholder incentives for 1994 demand-side management programs of SouthernCalifornia Edison, Pacific Gas & Electric, San Diego Gas & Electric andSouthern California Gas. The 1995 annual earnings assessment proceedingconstitutes the first application of the PUC's new ex post protocols toutility DSM earnings claims. Beginning with this proceeding, the PUCimplemented a more stringent framework for evaluating savings from utilityDSM prgrams, linking new comprehensive measurements to utility earningsfrom DSM shareholder incentives.   In accordance with the new rules, utility total earnings' claims will bebased on the prior program year's achievements, with per-unit savingsmeasured over a 7 to 10 year period after implementation of the programs.Utilities may recover those claims in four equal installments in rates inthe first, second, fifth, and tenth years of the proceeding.   The PUC authorized Edison to recover $7.2-million of total shareholderearnings from its 1994 DSM programs in four equal installments over a10-year measurement period, with recovery of 25% or $1.8-million in 1996.Edison estimated that its 1994 DSM programs would yield $129-million of netbenefits before earnings for $99.2 million of related programexpenditures.   Similarly, the PUC awarded PG&E $19,317,000 for its 1994 DSM shareholderincentive earnings to be recovered in four installments over a 10-yearmeasurement period. The PUC authorized PG&E to recover $4,344,038 in 1996for its electric programs and $485,213 for its gas programs. PG&Eforecasted $202.6-million of net benefits before earnings for$158.2-million worth of DSM program expenditures in 1994.   The PUC awarded SDG&E $8,966,100 for its 1994 DSM shareholder incentiveearnings. As with the other utilities, the PUC authorized San Diego torecover the total amount in four installments over a 10-year measurementperiod, with recovery in 1996 of $2,189,930 for its electric programs and$183,228 for its gas programs. SDG&E forecast $64-million in net benefitsbefore earnings for $30.2 million of DSM program expenditures in 1994. ThePUC likewise authorized SoCalGas to recover $2,898,000 for its 1994 DSMshareholder incentive earnings in four installments over a 10-yearmeasurement period, with recovery of $714,582 in 1996. SoCal Gas projectedthat its 1994 DSM programs would yield $14.8-million of net benefits for$42.8-million of program expenditures. The PUC also approved SoCal Gas'request to recover $7,254,000 in 1996 revenue requirements due to changesin federal and state corporate income tax liabilities as a result of 1993federal tax reform legislation.   The PUC directed the utilities when feasible to consider non-pricefactors along with price factors in their resource procurement. To theextent that non-price factors developed for supply-side resources in stateresource plans affect DSM programs utilities should include them incost-effective analyses. Non-price factors should be included in the RateImpact Measure test. The PUC also directed electric utilities to publishinformation on transmission and distribution costs for the purpose ofquantifying avoided costs.   Moreover, the utilities will be required to confer with the PUC'sDivision of Ratepayer Advocates and other interested stakeholders todetermine the appropriate avoided costs in their annual forecasts.   The PUC directed the utilities to utilize the avoided cost calculationin their annual forecasts to determine benefits and related earnings foreach DSM program.   In other action, as part of PG&E's general rate case the PUC authorizedPG&E to spend $129.42-million for DSM programs in 1996, including$99-million for energy efficiency programs, one-third less than the$150-million PG&E spent on conservation programs in 1994. PG&E spent anaverage $155 million-a-year for conservation programs between 1990 and1994, and an average $123-million-a-year between 1980 and 1994. The PUCordered PG&E to spend $5-million for programs designed to transform themarket for energy efficient residential appliances, industrial motors, andcommercial air conditioning. PG&E had opposed spending money on markettransformation programs, arguing that the benefits were difficult tomeasure and noting that the PUC has not yet developed appropriate policy ormeasurement protocols.   The PUC denied the utility's plan to spend $6.5-million in expenses plus$12-million in capital costs to install 40,000 time-of-use meters to enablecustomers to take advantage of off-peak rates. The PUC determined that themeters would likely be rendered obsolete by technological advancesfollowing electric restructuring because they lacked the ability to providereal-time information and cannot be read remotely.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-2IA059-000325-B003-265http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey60.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231510 text/html 69855HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:13:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:07 GMTContent-length: 69668Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey60.html Sample Issue Copyright ENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ENVIRONMENT Biomarkers Trace Oil Spill Sources (333 words) Skylab's Reversible Transformation (671 words) Persian Gulf: Where's the Oil? (395 words) GAS FLOODING Non-Cryogenic N2 Production Units (621 words) WAG Project Success in Salt Creek Field (418 words) GOVERNMENT DOE Program Aids Smaller Producers (442 words) TRRC Amends Its Inactive Well Rule (304 words) Differing Views on Compliance (739 words) CHEMICAL EOR Improved Gels for Oil Field Brines (781 words) Heavy Oil PDVSA Is Now a Mature Corporation (658 words) Suncor Scales Up in Australia (645 words) Industry News ChevronMoves Toward Its Goals (752 words) Chevron, Maraven Form Major Alliance (407 words) Occidental Expands Ecuador Operations (155 words) Parker Opens Vietnam Market (147 words) Pennzoil in China Joint Venture (184 words) Briefly Noted: (359 words) NEW TECHNOLOGY Making Well Info More Accessible (486 words) NON-VERTICAL DRILLING Short Radius-Curved Borehole Apparatus (357 words) refining Energy BioSystems Better Biocatalyst (285 words) Exxon Upgrades Steam Cracker Tars (189 words) THERMAL Solvent, Steam Soak Promising (194 words) CALENDAR (134 words) CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Biomarkers TraceOil Spill SourcesBiomarker compounds have long been used to identify petroleumdeposits, fingerprint the sources of oil spills, and monitor theoil weathering process. However, in highly degraded oil, many oilcomponents such as the n-alkanes, branched alkanes, and PAHs can belost and unavailable as biomarkers.Working with the Minerals Management Service (Washington, DC; Tel:202/208-3983), Zhendi Wang and Merv Fingas of the EmergenciesScience Div. (Environmental Technology Centre, Environment Canada,3439 River Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0H3, Canada) have developeda method of using biomarker compounds such as triterpanes andsteranes, compounds which are highly resistant to weathering. Theanalytical methods were designed to identify, characterize andquantify oil samples having various forms, natures andconcentrations.The researchers noted that using biomarkers to track the source ofspilled oil and to monitor weathered oil has several advantages ascompared to other approaches, including the following:    Each oil type has a different compound distribution    Triterpanes and steranes are highly resistant to degradation    Triterpanes and steranes are accurately measured using gaschromatography-mass spectrometry    Biomarker compounds are often more abundant in highlyweathered oils    Ratios of certain biomarkers can more accurately indicate theextent of biodegradation than the traditional methodsThe study showed that sources of oil spills could be tracked bycomparing the distribution patterns of biomarker compounds and therelative ratios of selected paired hopanes in spilled oil sampleswith reference oils. The researchers found that the relative ratiosof C29-hopane to C30-hopane were more resistant to degradation thanother ratioed pairs of hopanes.C29-Hopane and C30-hopane were often the most abundant hopanes,allowing the most accurate measurements. Comparing the ratios ofC29-hopane to C30-hopane in weathered and unweathered oil samplesresulted in a more accurate value for the degree of biodegradationthan traditional aliphatic-isoprenoid hydrocarbon ratios.  For moreinformation, see "Using Biomarker Compounds to Track the Source ofSpilled Oil and to Monitor the Oil Weathering process," in LC GC[13, No. 12, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Skylab's ReversibleTransformationGuy I. Z. Kalocsai of Skylab International Ltd. (Valletta, Malta)has developed a method for reversibly transforming organiccompounds into a phase more suitable for subsequent handling butfrom which the original organic compounds can be readily recovered.The invention is particularly suited for the recovery and re-use ofliquid hydrocarbons, either naturally occurring or synthetic,and/or their derivatives, and it is expected to be especiallyuseful in the recovery of hydrocarbons from an oil spill and for avariety of other applications.Traditional methods of attempting to clean up oil spills include(1) the use of oil-skimming boats and containment booms; (2)bombarding the floating oil with chemical dispersants; and (3)bioremediation, whereby oil-consuming bacteria are dumped on theoil. However, none of these current methods are consideredsatisfactory as significant quantities of the oil spilled cannotseemingly be recovered or dispersed by any of these methods andpollution of the environment can continue for many yearsafterwards.Kalocsai found that if a hydrocarbon(s) is contacted with one ormore particular reagents, an absorbent can be produced whichabsorbs substantially all of the hydrocarbon(s). The elasticity ofthe product which is formed can readily be controlled from elastic,through viscous liquid to plastic or brittle solid in an efficientand rapid manner. The original hydrocarbon can be readily recoveredfrom this product.By using this method (U.S. Patent 5,468,261), a spilled hydrocarbonis modified to produce an elastic compound which can be readilyretrieved from a body of water by towing, pushing or skimming theelastic material from the surface of the water or by using spikedrollers connected between two vessels which, on rotation, can rollup the elastic material.The method can be used to treat only the perimeter of an oil spillto produce a containment barrier for the remaining, untreatedhydrocarbon,  eliminating the need for artificial booms andbarriers. A system using this method can be carried on vessels orhoused on site to prevent serious oil or similar spillage or leaksand to be used in the neutralizing and clean-up or salvage ofhydrocarbon leaks or spills.The hydrocarbon may be a solid, liquid or a gas dissolved ortrapped in a suitable medium. The hydrocarbon may be soluble orinsoluble in water, with best results obtained for hydrocarbonswhich are insoluble in water. Preferred hydrocarbons includeethers; petroleum based liquids including kerosene, petroleum,crude oil; aromatic compounds, for example, toluene; ketones suchas methyl iso-butyl ketone; natural and refined animal, mineral andvegetable oils, for example, sunflower oil. Preferably, the firstreagent to be used should be an organic or inorganic acid, salt orbase which is insoluble in water but soluble in the hydrocarbon orits derivative.Preferably, the organic acid is a fatty acid (stearic, oleic,palmitic and levulinic acids, etc.). The preferred choice for thesecond reagent depends on the end product required. An alkali(ammonia, sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate or bicarbonate ororganic alkaline reagents) should be used for a granular product.A solution of an elastomer or a latex should be used for a semi-elastic product, and for a more elastic product a solution of anelastomer or a latex is followed by the addition of an aqueousacetate solution should be used. Any organic or metal acetate canbe used, such as ammonium acetate and zinc acetate.This method for the reversible transformation of hydrocarbons canalso be applied for a wide range of purposes which includemanufacturing solid or viscous liquid compounds for plasticsproduction, storing and/or transporting volatile, unstable,environmentally sensitive or toxic hydrocarbons, effectivelyabsorbing liquid hydrocarbon compounds, and sealing leaking ordamaged containers of liquid hydrocarbon compounds.It might also convert volatile liquid hydrocarbons to lessvolatile, more manageable compounds or be used to quell oil wellfires by converting the oil to a candle-like consistency whichburns at a much lower temperature than the untreated oil and whichis thus much easier to extinguish.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Persian Gulf:Where's the Oil?During the war with Iran, millions of gallons of oil spilled onland and at sea. Following the war, scientists surveyed the PersianGulf to track the impact of the massive oil spill. Researchers havefound that both land and sea are recovering through the help ofnaturally occurring microbes.Oil pollution along some shores has rapidly disappeared whilesimultaneously microbial mats, thick layers of microbes, weregrowing on top of the oil. To understand how the microbial matswere absorbing and breaking down the oil, the Dept. of Defense isfunding a study of the microbial mats at Northwestern University(Evanston, IL)."All we know at this point is that sunlight seems to enhance theactivity of the mats in breaking down the oil," reports David A.Stahl, associate professor of civil engineering (McCormick Schoolof Engineering and Applied Science, Northwestern Univ., Evanston,IL; Tel: 708/-491-4997). "It may be that the microbes that usephotosynthesis are doing the job, or it may be that theirbyproducts are being used by another microbe in the mat community,making it possible for them to do the job," he said.Stahl receives new microbial mats every few months, which he testsusing the latest molecular biology methods. Stahl says thatprobably far less than 1% of the microbial world has beenidentified, making his research largely that of finding andcharacterizing new forms of microbial life.Samir Radwan of the University of Kuwait (Safat, Kuwait) reportsthat wild flowers are growing in the oil soaked desert. While theshoots of the plant have an oil stained ring at its base, the rootsare oil free and healthy. Radwan believes that the roots"recruited" oil degrading microbes naturally found in the soil.Radwan and his team cultured bacteria and fungi found in the oilsand and found many well known oil degrading microbes consisting ofArthrobacter bacteria. Just 1 cm away from the roots was acompletely different community of oil degrading bacteria and fungi.Laboratory experiments replicated what was observed in the desert.Radwan believes that rich nutrients such as sugars, availableoxygen, amino acids and vitamins attract petroleum-degradingmicrobes.The researchers recommend that suitable plants be denselycultivated in polluted desert areas for bioremediation. Thisapproach may also be applicable in polluted areas in other parts ofthe world.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Non-Cryogenic N2Production UnitsGeneron Systems Inc. (400 W. Sam Houston Pkwy. South, Houston, TX77042; Tel: 713/978-3100, Fax: 713/978-3185) provides on sitenitrogen generation for the oil and gas industry. Over 200 oil andgas wells have been drilled over the last two years using Generon'sGenisisTM nitrogen production units (NPUs). These units work withexisting oil field air compression equipment and can provide from500-3,000 standard cubic feet per minute of gaseous nitrogen inpurities from 90-99.5% oxygen free."Generon also sells smaller NPU systems and we have had severalrequests for these systems in Texas to evaluate their use fornitrogen flooding for enhanced oil recovery," John Koenst, productmanager for Generon, told EERN.The Generon membrane module contains polymer hollow fiber membraneswhich separate gas components of the compressed air stream. Eachmembrane fiber is about the size of a human hair with a round borethrough the center. Dry, clean, compressed air passes through thefiber bundle. It is the varying rates of permeation of nitrogen andoxygen molecules that form the basis of Generon membrane separationtechnology. "Fast" gases like oxygen, carbon dioxide, and watervapor diffuse through the membrane walls more quickly thannitrogen, which is concentrated inside the fibers and delivered asthe product gas. The nitrogen product exits the end of each moduleand is collected at the outlet manifold for delivery.Nitrogen from a GENISYS NPU, used with traditional air drillingequipment, can provide lower drilling costs, reduce the use ofdrill mud and mud chemicals, and lessen the surface damage andenvironmental impact often associated with other drilling methods.Similar to air drilling operations, GENISYS systems deliver anextremely low density drilling "fluid" that can significantlyreduce drilling time because of improved rates of penetration. Theinert, non-reactive nature of gaseous nitrogen is such that it willnot support combustion. Because of this, any risk of down holefires, explosions and associated tool damage are virtuallyeliminated when using GENISYS NPUs. GENISYS systems are selfcontained, incorporating the Generon nitrogen producing, hollowfiber membrane modules and systems.A benefit of GENISYS Nitrogen Production Units (NPUs) is that theywill reduce the risk of burnoffs commonly encountered when drillingwith plain compressed air. As little as 5% probability of a burnoffis high enough to justify the use of a GENISYS NPU. The cost of aGENISYS NPU in a typical West Texas area drilling location addsabout $0.88 per drilled foot. This is in contrast to the $2.00 perfoot added for extra water, chemicals, bit wear and the unknowncost of a burnoff due to mud rings.Coiled tubing operations with nitrogen from Generon's GENISYSproduct line may reduce well costs and maximize recovery, all atonce. Oil and gas well completions and workovers with coiled tubingare a proven method of reducing total well costs and maximizingrecovery from the reservoir. High pressure GENISYS nitrogen isintroduced continuously to the tubing instead of more costly,delivered liquid nitrogen.Experience with GENISYS NPUs has shown that using nitrogen in placeof misted, compressed air is a safer and more economical method ofdrilling. Drilling with mist is slower than drilling with nitrogenand 30% more compressed air is required for the "misting up." Thisincreased capacity results in the need for additional or larger aircompressors to do the job, adding costs to the drilling operation.Using nitrogen from Genisys will result in as much as a 50% costsavings on most wells.At the close of 1995, Dow Chemical announced that it would sell itsGeneron subsidiary to MG Industries Inc.  MG, part of the HoechstGroup of companies, is a mid-sized industrial gas firm.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996WAG Project Successin Salt Creek FieldAt the recently held Permian Basin CO2 Conference (December 4-5,1995) in Midland TX, Abel Salazar of Mobil Oil discussed the casehistory of the Salt Creek water-alternating-gas (WAG) project andshared the key lessons learned from the project.  "The Salt CreekField phase 1 area has been a very successful WAG using CO2," saidSalazar. "The WAG project began two years and one month ago andmore than 50% of the current oil production of 27,000 bbls/day areattributed to CO2 injection."The Salt Creek Field covers 12,000 acres and is located in KentCo., TX, approximately 90 NE of Midland, TX. The field contains 178active producers, 57 WAG or CO2 injectors and 78 water injectors.When the project started, 18,500 bbls/day were produced. Less thanone month later, the field began to respond and one year later theproduction peaked at 30,000 bbls/day. A total of 7.2 billion bblsof oil have been produced over the two years of CO2 flooding aspart of the WAG treatment."Without CO2 injection, many of these wells would have beenuneconomical," said Salazar. "The biggest challenge at Salt CreekField is managing the producing gas oil ratio, and WAG is thecheapest and quickest method to do this." He said that Mobil wasvery happy with the WAG results and that Mobil will expand into thephase 2 area as of March 1996 and will continue expansion into thephase 3 area through the year 2001."Salt Creek Field is very dynamic and needs continuoussurveillance," Salazar explained. "The key to the success of theCO2 injection is management. A detailed pattern analysis isnecessary, as are team work and having good communication withfield personnel."Salazar offered some specific guidelines based on Mobil'sexperience with the field. He counseled to use maximum availablecarbon dioxide supply rate as long as possible from pipeline andgas plant capacities and vary WAG ratios on a pattern by patternbasis. WAG/breakthrough problems can be identified by watching cashflow per producing well and not allowing the cash flow to gonegative. Apply same waterflood workover procedures during carbondioxide flood. Exception is for high GOR wells which requireincreased mud costs. Supplement fuel may be necessary to insureproper carbon dioxide flare operation.Another guide is that all surface systems should be planned forflexibility.Remember that the vendor/engineering contractor community knowsvery little about metering carbon dioxide streams at either high orlow pressures.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DOE Program AidsSmaller ProducersIndependent producers today account for nearly 40% of the nation'sdomestic oil supply, but virtually none of these companies have thetechnical capability or resources to try untried or unfamiliartechnological approaches that potentially could improve theireconomic viability. As a result, with oil prices remainingrelatively low, many of these companies are on the verge ofabandoning much of the nation's remaining oil resource. To helpmeet this need, the Dept. of Energy (DOE) (1000 Independence Ave.SW, Washington, DC 20585; Tel: 202/586-5000) is assisting severalof the nation's smallest independent oil producers in applyinginnovative technologies that could help maintain the viability ofan increasingly important segment of the U.S. petroleum industry.DOE, working through its National Institute for Petroleum andEnergy Research (NIPER, 220 N. Virginia, Bartlesville, OK 74003;Tel: 918/336-2400, Fax: 918/337-4339) is providing nearly $400,000in technical assistance contracts to eight independent producers.The producers and their project partners provide more than $500,000in private sector cost-sharing and in-kind contributions. Byproviding a small amount of federal cost-sharing, $50,000 or lessper project, the DOE is encouraging the producers to experimentwith the higher-risk approaches that could mean the differencebetween maintaining production from an oil field or shutting it in.The program is directed at companies with less than 50 employees orcontractors who have no affiliation with a major oil company.The eight companies, and others added to the program in the future,will be the focus of an extensive technology transfer effort to beconducted by the DOE and BDM-Oklahoma, the operator of NIPER.Through workshops, technical reports, and the use of expanding DOEand industry electronic networks to the petroleum industry,techniques and results from the trial projects will be disseminatedto other small producers.This effort differs from the larger Reservoir Class FieldDemonstration Program that DOE initiated in 1992.  The ReservoirClass program, now underway in 14 States, involves full-scale fieldtests that, in most cases, are demonstrating multiple techniquesfor maintaining production from fields threatened by near-termabandonment.  The smaller effort is pinpointing specific productionproblems and attempting to demonstrate lower-cost remedies, oftenfocusing on an individual well or group of wells.The DOE technical assistance program remains open for independentproducers to submit proposals.  Since BDM-Oklahoma announced thestart of the small producer program last March, independent oilfield operators have submitted 37 proposals.  Those not selectedremain eligible for further consideration, and additional proposalsare being accepted.  DOE has just over $240,000 in remaining fundsset aside for this effort, and additional project selections areexpected approximately every three months through next May. :Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TRRC Amends ItsInactive Well RuleTexas Railroad Commissioners (TRRC, Box 12967 Austin, TX 78711-2967; Tel: 512/463-7288) have approved a rule change designed tohelp more inactive oil and gas wells qualify for a state severancetax exemption approved by the legislature. Chairman Carole KeetonRylander and Commissioners Barry Williamson and Charles R. Matthewsexpanded provisions of the current program which encouragesoperators to bring wells that have been inactive for at least threeyears back on production, thereby qualifying them for up to a 10-year exemption from state severance tax on the oil or gas theyproduce.Under the rule change, the Texas Railroad Commission (TRRC) will beable to certify an eligible well as a "three year inactive well"without it having to be brought back into production at the time ofcertification. This will give the operator of a certified well theleeway of bringing it back on tax-exempt production anytime duringthe 10 years following the certification date. The new procedurerequires the operator of a certified well to file a test reportshowing productive capability with the Commission before applyingto the state comptroller for the tax incentive."Texas is a true leader in the area of tax incentive developmentand implementation," Commissioner Williamson said. "This particularrule change will extend the life of thousands of Texas wells,creating jobs and tax revenue and developing natural resources thatwould otherwise be lost to the state."The Three Year Inactive Well Incentive program has been anunqualified success. Since its beginning in 1993, almost 5,500 oiland gas wells, capable of producing 16.4 million barrels of oil and153.8 billion cubic feet of gas a year, have been certified. TheCommission estimates the value of that production at $584 millionand the positive impact on the Texas economy at $1.7 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Differing Viewson CompliancePetroleum producers and refiners are vitally interested in thequality of water that they can legally discharge and equallyinterested in the quality of water available for their use.  An oldsaying is "Don't inject any water into your well that you wouldn'tdrink." Injected minerals and microbes can have disastrous effects.The EPA's goal of maintaining and protecting surface water qualityhas led the EPA to set some very low limits for a variety ofpollutants. The demanding EPA requirements for testing andreporting have prompted some contrasting reactions.While Anna Rule (Hampton Roads Sanitation District, Virginia Beach,VA; Tel: 804/874-1287) exposes the impracticalities andinadequacies of compliance testing, Darrell R. Wilder(Environmental Services Lab, Eastman Chemical Co., Kingsport, TN37662-5054) sees compliance testing and waste minimization asopportunities for self-directed efforts to eliminate sources ofpollution and reduce the burden of testing.Writing in Water Environment & Technology [7-11, 31-34, 1995] Rulepoints out that the minimum concentration at which a chemical'spresence can be determined by a specific method is an exceedinglyminute but imprecise quantity which has nevertheless become aregulatory goal and performance standard. A method detection limit(MDL) is the minimum concentration of a substance which can beidentified, measured, and reported with 99% confidence that itsconcentration is greater than zero. The EPA bases MDL on thestandard deviation of a set of replicate determinations.The EPA has set water quality criteria for some substances at orbelow MDLs without considering the limits of analytical technology.Compliance with permit limits set below MDLs or at zero isproblematic because measurement errors, variability, anduncertainty. Measurements at ultradilute levels are consequentlyanything but absolutely true and exact determinations.Rule indicates the flaws in deriving a confidence interval from aset of determinations and suggests that prediction intervals ortolerance intervals are more appropriate for estimating the rangeof future multiple measurements and the probability that a givenpercentage of them attain a given MDL. Rule points out that itintroduces a bias to treat results at or below an MDL as zero ornondetectable while accepting higher values as true and accurate."All measurements, at any level, include defined and unavoidableimprecision. Analytical and sample variance, or relative standarddeviation of measurements (RSD) is not constant throughout theconcentration range but gradually increases as the results approachthe lower or upper end of the analytical range. . . . The practiceof eliminating low-level data by reporting 'less than' or 'zero' iscalled left-censoring and is regarded as an unnecessary loss ofvaluable information." While it is statistically valid to use low-end data, this approach often conflicts with setting regulatorylimits.Rule favors the calibration curve method as an alternative forestimating measurement detection limits. This method findstolerance intervals for assessing future performance and uses themto define uncertainty bands on the calibration curve. The analystmay then compute and define minimum concentrations that have anacceptable level of confidence with a predetermined RSD. Thecalibration curve method is the basis of a proposal presented toEPA by a Detection/Quantitation Workgroup representing theregulated community. Other concepts of MDL may be appropriate, butthe problem is the validity of low-end results. Carefully developedand documented protocols should allow a more effective validationand define more appropriate uses although at a higher cost.Working the higher end of compliance testing, Wilder acceptscompliance testing as a fact of life for environmental dischargesin the chemical industry. Now that the NPDES program has entered aphase of diminishing returns, the EPA is encouraging a "front end"approach to pollution control that encourages proactive wasteminimization and pollution prevention.Government initiatives and voluntary programs have createdfinancial incentives for chemical companies to go beyond routinecompliance by developing environmental strategies that reflectenvironmental responsibility. Writing in Analytical Chemistry [25-2, 77-89, 1995] Wilder presents a review of some new measurementtechnologies for preventing pollution and cutting waste.Wilder considers technologies for measurement of wasteloadconcentrations, flow measurements, monitoring specific wastecomponents, monitoring networks, process control of activatedsludge treatment systems, and measurement of air emissions. Wilderbelieves that internal and self-directed efforts by chemicalcompanies in all these areas give analysts scope for ingenuity andcreativity in identifying and eliminating sources of toxiccontaminants. Successful results could reduce the burden ofcompliance testing.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Improved Gels forOil Field BrinesGelled or crosslinked water-soluble polymers are used in enhancedoil recovery and other oil field operations to change formationpermeability, enhancing the effectiveness of water floodingoperations. Generally, polymers along with an appropriatecrosslinking system are injected in an aqueous solution into theformation and permeate into and gel in the regions of highest waterpermeability. By using a produced brine as the aqueous solutioncarrier for the polymers, operators can avoid the environmentalconcerns as well as cost for disposing of a produced brine. It alsosaves the cost associated with acquiring and pre-treating freshwater for use as the aqueous solution.Most produced brines are hard brines, defined as having a salinityof greater than 2% total dissolved solids, basically inorganicsalts. Chromium(III) carboxylates such as chromium acetate are theonly known crosslinkers which can be used to produce stable gels inproduced brines for near-wellbore treatment. Although achromium(III) salt is not as toxic as a chromium(VI) salt, it isstill not desirable in the environment. Its use may requireadditional costs to assure the integrity of the injection wells toavoid contamination of ground water sources.Ahmad Moradi-Araghi of Phillips Petroleum Co. (16 Phillips Bldg.,Bartlesville, OK 74004; Tel: 918/661-6600) has found a moreenvironmentally suitable gelling composition that can form stablegels in produced brines. It has the benefit that the gellingcomposition does not crosslink too fast (i.e., gel times longerthan 2 hours) so that individual components of the composition canbe injected simultaneously into the wells. The composition consistsof a produced brine; a water-soluble polymer (i.e.,polyacrylamide), a crosslinker (i.e., a complexed zirconiumcompound), and optionally a complexing ligand (i.e., lactic acid).The composition can be used for either in depth treatment of an oilfield or near-wellbore treatment such as water shutoff, gasshutoff, and zone abandonment.More specific information is included in U.S. Patent 5,478,802. Thepatent says that it is desirable to delay the rate of gelation sothat the components of the composition can be injected at the sametime without plugging up the injection or producing wells.  Aproduced brine having a salinity of from 4-25% generally producesbetter results.Suitable polymers are those which are capable of gelling in thepresence of polyvalent metal ion crosslinking agents. Polymerscapable of gelling in the presence of crosslinking agents within agelation pH range, include biopolysaccharides, cellulose ethers,and acrylamide-based polymers. The preferred biopolysaccharides arepolysaccharide B-1459 and xanthan gums which are biopolysaccharidesproduced by the action of Xanthomonas campestris bacteria.Preferred cellulose ethers include carboxymethylhydroxyethylcellulose (CMHEC) and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). Preferredpolymers which contain acrylamide as well as 0.5-5 mole % ofpendant carboxylate (acrylate) groups are the partially hydrolyzedpolyacrylamides possessing pendant carboxylate groups through whichcrosslinking can take place.The crosslinker is a metal compound selected from the groupconsisting of a complexed zirconium compound, a complexed titaniumcompound, and mixtures of these. These compounds are commerciallyavailable.A suitable complexing ligand to retard the rate of gelation may bechosen from the group consisting of lactic acid, neutralized lacticacid, citric acid, ammonium, potassium or sodium citrate, isocitricacid, ammonium, potassium or sodium isocitrate, malic acid,ammonium, potassium or sodium malate, tartaric acid, ammonium,potassium or sodium tartrate, triethanolamine, malonic acid,ammonium, potassium or sodium malonate, and mixtures of these. Dueto their ready availability and low cost, the presently preferredcomplexing ligands are triethanolamine, citric acid, lactic acid,tartaric acid and salts of these.The composition of the invention can be prepared by mixing theindividual components together employing conventionally well-knownmixing means. The order of adding individual components does notchange the characteristics of the composition.The concentration of crosslinker in the composition depends largelyon the concentration of polymer in the composition. Lowerconcentrations of polymer require lower concentrations ofcrosslinker. Further, it has been found that for a givenconcentration of polymer, increasing the concentration ofcrosslinker generally substantially increases the rate of gelation.The concentration of crosslinker in the injected slug variesgenerally over the broad range of 25-5,000 ppm, preferably over therange of 100-2,000 ppm based on Zr or Ti concentration.The concentration of the complexing ligand in the composition alsodepends on the concentrations of the water-soluble polymer in thecomposition and on the desired rate of gelation. Generally, thefaster the gelation rate, the lower concentration of the complexingligand is required. Generally, the concentration of the complexingligand varies broadly in the range of about 25-5,000 ppm,preferably in the range of about 50-3,000 ppm, and most preferablyin the range of 100-2,000 ppm.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PDVSA Is Now aMature CorporationPetroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA, Apartado 169, Caracas 1010-A,Venezuela) recently celebrated its 20th anniversary. PDVSA hasmoved from its initial role of being "a simple coordinator" of 14subsidiaries to "a mature and powerful corporation, with clarity ofobjectives, and holding a first class national and internationalposition," said PDVSA president Luis Giusti. "Today, PDVSA is astrong and solvent corporation holding an excellent position on themain world markets, with a modern production and refininginfrastructure and a first class technical team."PDVSA has confirmed that the Orinoco Oil Belt contains reserves ofheavy and extra heavy crudes and bitumens estimated atapproximately 1.2 trillion barrels, of which some 270 billionbarrels are recoverable with the use of today's technology. Thosemassive reserves of hard to market heavy crudes and bitumens in theBelt have posed a major challenge for PDVSA. The corporation hasapproached development in two ways: negotiating strategicassociations with foreign oil companies to exploit and upgrade therecoverable resources and embarking on an ambitious projectconverting bitumen into Orimulsion, a unique boiler fuel used inplants that generate electricity.Maraven, one of the PDVSA Group has worked out two majordevelopment projects in partnership with several internationalcompanies. Along with Conoco Inc. (P.O. Box 1267, Ponca City, OK74602-1267; Tel: 405/767-3456), Maraven will produce approximately120,000 barrels per day of extra-heavy crude from the Belt.That crude will be upgraded in Venezuela to a lighter syntheticcrude using Conoco's delayed coking technology. A similarproduction and upgrading project involving Maraven, Total (Cedex47, 92069 Paris la Defense, Paris, France), Itochu (1-3 Kita-Kyutaromachi, Osaka OSK0541, Japan), and Marubeni Corp. (5-7Honmachi, 2-Chome, Osaka OSK0541, Japan) are also ready to goonstream.Letters of intent already have been signed for a third developmentproject in the belt that will bring Corpoven, a member of the PDVSAgroup, and ARCO International Oil and Gas Co. in a strategicassociation to produce some 200,000 barrels per day (bpd) of mediumgrade crudes, and a fourth project involving a partnership betweenLagoven, a member of the PDVSA Group, and Mobil Oil Corp. (3225Gallows Rd., Fairfax, VA 22037; Tel: 703/846-3000) to produce100,000 bpd from the eastern region of the Belt.The corporation hopes those four projects will generate a combinedoutput of between 400,000-500,000 bpd of synthetic crude by theturn of the century. Those joint venture deals follow a series ofoperating agreements between PDVSA subsidiaries and several privateforeign companies for the reactivation of marginal or inactive oilfields which now are producing an additional 58,00 bpd of crudes.PDVSA expects to exceed 430,000 bpd by the year 2000.PDVSA subsidiaries have made a series of operating agreements withprivate foreign companies for the reactivation of marginal orinactive oil fields which are now producing an additional 58,000barrels per day of crudes. That figure is expected to exceed430,000 bpd by the turn of the century.PDVSA has begun an ambitious plan to manufacture and exportOrimulsion. Orimulsion exports have grown from about 1.7 millionmetric tons in 1992 to approximately 2.43 million metric tons in1994. The plan projects Orimulsion exports at approximately 20million metric tons by the year 2000.  Bitumenes Orinoco, S.A.(BITOR), the subsidiary of PDVSA responsible for the manufacture,transport and marketing of Orimulsion, has already signed a supplycontract agreement with Canada's New Brunswick Power, which adaptedits Dalhousie power plant to burn Orimulsion fuel, and with FloridaPower & Light which will use Orimulsion in its Manatee, FL plant.BITOR is negotiating with electric facilities in Europe and Asia.BITOR has shipped significant test volumes of Orimulsion topotential clients in Portugal, Italy and Germany. A supply contracthas been signed with SK-Power of Denmark for the purchase of up to1.5 million metric tons a year of the product, for two years, whichbegan in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Suncor ScalesUp in AustraliaIn Australia, Suncor Inc. (P.O. Box 38, 112 4th Ave. SW, Calgary,Albert, Canada; Tel: 403/269-8100) will scale up and apply Taciukprocessor technology. Taciuk processor technology was originallydeveloped by the Alberta Oil Sands Technology Research Authority(AOSTRA), the functions of which are now part of the Alberta Dept.of Energy (5th Floor, 801 6th Ave. SW, Calgary, Alberta T2P 3W2,Canada; Tel: 403/297-3380). The Taciuk processor combines theextraction, upgrading and energy-generating processes oftraditional oil sands/shales projects and requires less capital andequipment."Suncor was the first in the world to pioneer the commercialdevelopment of the oil sands," said Suncor president and CEO RickGeorge. "We are uniquely positioned to apply our expertise in oilsands development in other parts of the world."Suncor has reached an agreement with two Australian companies,Southern Pacific Petroleum NL (Lufthansa House, 143 MacQuarie St.,Sidney, NSW 2000, Australia) and Central Pacific Minerals NL(McFarlane House, 127 George St., Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia),to begin development work to demonstrate the commercial viabilityof producing oil from Australian oil shale using the Taciukprocess.Suncor will invest $7 million to conduct preliminary engineeringand complete commercial negotiations to build a shale oil plant inGladstone, a port city on the east coast in Queensland, Australia.The agreement covers the development of the Stuart oil shaledeposit which is estimated to contain the equivalent of threebillion barrels of shale oil.Development work is expected to take six to nine months tocomplete. After that the partners will decide whether to proceedwith the 4,500 barrel a day plant. The project is estimated to costabout $200 million, of which Suncor would contribute up to anadditional $65 million over the next two years. At that point,Suncor would earn a 50% interest in the project.If the project is successful, Suncor and its partners have plans todevelop a second and third stage, which could ultimately result inan 85,000 barrel a day commercial operation over a 10 year period.In addition, Suncor has the right to acquire an option for $3.5million to purchase a 22.4% interest in Southern Pacific Petroleumand Central Pacific Minerals. This option can be exercised any timeup to six months after the shale oil plant begins operations.George said the project fits strategically with Suncor's growthplans. "Our core businesses continue as the foundation of ourgrowth," said George. "To create additional shareholder value, weare pushing the boundaries of our existing businesses and lookingfor new yet related energy opportunities." Suncor plans todiversify in stages through a series of modest investments.Suncor has plans to spend more than $1 billion over five years toincrease production at its Oil Sands and Resources groups. Suncorplans to invest approximately $475 million on capital andexploration programs in 1996, up about 20% from 1995. Of the $475million, approximately $260 million will be directed to the oilsands, $160 million will go to the conventional oil and gasdivision and $55 million will be spent at Sunoco, Suncor's refiningand marketing group."The increased spending supports our plans to expand ourconventional exploration and production and oil sands operations,"said Rick George, Suncor president and CEO. The Oil Sands Groupcapital program includes projects to expand production, plan a newmine site, reduce sulfur dioxide emissions and make otherenvironmental and sustaining capital investments.At Resources Group, capital will be spent on increasing reservesand production through exploration, development and acquisitions.Suncor also plans to spend approximately $17 million on a projectto test a new technology at its Burnt Lake heavy oil property. Inits downstream operations, Suncor will increase spending toapproximately $55 million to improve environmental, energy andoperating efficiency at its refining and Sunoco retail operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ChevronMovesToward Its GoalsChevron Corp. (P.O. Box 7753, San Francisco, CA 94120-7753; Tel:415/894-4440) chairman Ken Derr told a meeting of financialanalysts that Chevron has made great strides in the second half of1995 toward improving shareholder value and reducing the company'salready competitive cost structure. He noted that Chevron's stockhit an all-time high during December 1995 and that Chevron has hadits most productive year of oil discoveries in 15 years, based onthe projected reserves from a number of key wells.One promising area is a new discovery in the Congo, Moho Marine 1,which is one of Chevron's largest discoveries in West Africa. Thefield appears to be geologically similar to nearby N'Kossa. TheN'Kossa field is on track to begin production in mid-1996, withpeak production of 110,000 barrels per day (bpd) expected in late1997. Chevron's share is 30%.Several promising areas are in Northwest Australia, where Chevronand partners have made major discoveries and added new production.Last month, the Wanaea and Cossack fields began production and arescheduled to reach design capacity of 115,000 bpd in the firstquarter. Huge gas discoveries at Chrysaor and Perseus were alsoannounced in the past year."One of Chevron's enduring strengths is our ability to find oil andgas, and we are completing an exceptionally good year of newdiscoveries," Derr said. "In addition to this, we expect to replacemore than 110% of our worldwide proved reserves when final 1995figures are in."Also in the exploration and production area, Chevron announced inDecember 1995 a major alliance with Maraven of Venezuela to furtherdevelop the huge Boscan oil field and supply heavy crude oil toU.S. refineries (see article in foreign Industry News, this issue).Several company businesses in December 1995 have announcedrestructuring to reduce costs, improve efficiency and to meetstrategic intents, Derr noted, including:Chevron Chemical Co., which announced a restructuring alonggeographic lines, forming a new International Group as well as aU.S. chemicals division. The action supports the chemical company'sstrategic intent to improve competitive financial performance whiledeveloping attractive opportunities for growth, Derr said. Theformer Aromatics and Olefins divisions, both headquartered inHouston, will be combined to form one U.S. Chemicals Div., toremain in Houston.A new international group, eventually to be based in San Ramon, CA,will help Chevron focus specifically on growth markets in keyregions around the world.  Chevron Chemical's other major division,the Oronite Additives Div., based in San Ramon, already operatesinternationally and is unaffected by the reorganization.U.S. products marketing announced a consolidation of regionaloffices and support functions, reducing costs $8 million per yearand supporting greater customer focus. U.S. refining also has a newmanagement team charged with achieving incident free operationwhile reducing costs. The business activities of ChevronInternational Oil Co. are being reorganized, as announced earlythis month. As part of the change, the company's internationallubricants business will be consolidated with the U.S. businessinto a new Global Lubricants unit.Another major step was taken by Caltex, Chevron's 50-50 jointventure with Texaco, which is a major refiner/marketer in Asia.Caltex recently announced the $2 billion sale of its 50% interestin a refining company in Japan, where markets are mature, in orderto focus more on growth areas such as China and India. The actionsupports the strategy of growing Caltex in attractive markets,while achieving superior competitive financial performance.Beta Well to SellKazakstan InterestThe Board of Directors of Beta Well Service Inc. (Calgary, Alberta,Canada; Tel: 403/290-0660) has approved a conditional agreement inprinciple to sell its 50% interest in the Zhetybay-Questpartnership, two well servicing rigs and related equipment, all ofwhich are located in Kazakstan, to a large oil and gas company.  Itis proposed that the transaction's effective date and closing datewill be March 31,1996. If the sale is completed, the considerationwould be approximately $12 million in cash 91 days after closing,and deferred payments totaling $30 million contingent uponZhetybay-Quest's profitability.A company spokesman said that if the transaction can be completed,it would be a positive development for all interested parties."Beta would have the opportunity to realize a significant return onits Zhetybay-Quest investment.  The financial strength of theprospective new owner would assure its Kazak partner and thegovernment of Kazakstan that the Zhetybay field would be developedon a timely basis."Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Chevron, MaravenForm Major AllianceChevron (6001 Bollinger Canyon Rd., San Ramon, CA 94583; Tel:510/842-1000) and Maraven S.A. (Apartado Postal 829, Caracas,Venezuela 1010-A;  Tel: 58/2 908 3096) have formed a multi-facetedalliance which will further the development of the Boscan oil fieldin Venezuela and provide for supplies of heavy crude oil to Chevronin the U.S.The alliance covers an initial period of 20 years with an optional10 year extension. Chevron will operate Venezuela's Boscan heavyoil field, and anticipates a $2 billion investment over a 20-30year period.  Maraven will become Chevron's joint-venture partnerin a West Coast asphalt business, and will also supply crude forChevron's refinery at Pascagoula, MS, and for the company's asphaltplants at Perth Amboy, NJ, Portland, OR, and Richmond Beach, WA.For the Boscan Field, Chevron and Maraven have structured anOperating Service Agreement to assure continued development of the50-year-old Boscan field, discovered by Chevron in 1946.  "We planto increase production from 80,000 barrels per day (bpd) to 115,000bpd during the next three years," said Richard Matzke, president ofChevron Overseas Petroleum Inc., who signed the agreement.Independent studies confirm the Boscan field contains 1.6 billionbarrels of proven reserves.  Chevron will be responsible foroperations and production, while Maraven will be responsible formarketing. Through the new arrangement, Chevron becomes the firstinternational oil company since 1975 to be responsible for such ahigh level of production in Venezuela.  "We're encouraged byMaraven's demonstration of trust in our technical expertise,"Matzke said. He noted that the work to be done, albeit challenging,will result in major economic enhancements for the Venezuelaneconomy."Boscan crude, with an API gravity of 10 degrees, is an excellentasphalt feedstock," explained Dave O'Reilly, president of ChevronU.S.A. (CUSA) Products Co., who signed the downstream agreements."This new alliance provides an opportunity for Chevron and Maravento collaborate on both upstream and downstream ventures," O'Reillysaid.Affiliates of Chevron and Maraven will also form a partnership toacquire and process feedstock into asphalt and other products formarketing in the Western U.S. The new joint venture, to be namedChevron Ven Asphalt Alliance, will have a processing and serviceagreement with CUSA Products which will retain its West Coastasphalt refineries and perform supply, processing and marketingfunctions on behalf of the joint venture.  "This venture shouldincrease asphalt production and offer new marketing opportunities,"said O'Reilly.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Occidental ExpandsEcuador OperationsOccidental Petroleum Corp. (10889 Wilshire Blvd, Los Angeles, CA90024-4201; Tel: 213/879-1700) and Canadian Occidental PetroleumLtd. have reached an agreement with Petroecuador, the Ecuadorianstate oil company, to increase exploration and developmentactivities on Block 15 in the prolific Oriente Basin in easternEcuador.The agreement calls for Occidental as operator to conduct anexploration program in the 97% of the block that has yet to beexplored.  In exchange, Occidental receives improved contract termsregarding new discoveries, including a minimum extension of sevenyears to develop new discoveries.Occidental acquired the 494,000-acre block in 1985 under a risk-service contract with Petroecuador. To date, six fields have beendiscovered, and four of those have been developed and are producingapproximately 24,000 barrels of oil per day.  The 20-yearexploitation period under the contract began in 1992. Occidentalhas an 85% interest in the block with Canadian Occidental holdingthe remaining 15%.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Parker OpensVietnam MarketA subsidiary of Parker Drilling Co. Inc. (8 E. 3rd St., Tulsa, OK74103; Tel: 918/585-8221) will become the first Western drillingcontractor to work on-land in Vietnam. Parker DrillingInternational Ltd. will drill two wells south of Hanoi for theAustralian oil company Anzoil NL.  The location is near the coastof the Gulf of Tonkin. Terms of the contract were not released."Parker has a long tradition in pioneering new drilling markets,"said Robert L. Parker, Jr., president and CEO. "Vietnam holds greatpotential and we plan to establish along-term presence in thisenergy-rich country," he added. The operator is hopeful significantreserves will be found, since offshore discoveries have alreadybeen made nearby, Parker explained. The contract calls for Parkerto provide a rig and crews to drill the two wells. A rig will bemobilized next month from operations in the Philippines.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Pennzoil in ChinaJoint VenturePennzoil Products Co. (Pennzoil Place, P.O. Box 2967, Houston, TX77262-8200; Tel: 713/546-6100) has acquired a 50% equity share ina new lubricant manufacturing and marketing joint venture betweenPennzoil and Lithcon Petroleum Inc. in Tianjin, China.William E. Welcher, group VP, products marketing, said thatPennzoil and Lithcon have purchased land and an existing, newbuilding in Tianjin which will be utilized for a lubricating oilblending plant and a sales and marketing office complex. "Theexisting facility is strategically located close to one of China'slargest ports in the Tianjin Economic Technological DevelopmentArea," said Welcher.  "It is also located in the Bohai Bay area,China's second largest economic zone."Welcher said that owing to Bohai Bay's natural and labor resources,large market and technology, this area is expected to become thenucleus of the northeast Asia's economic belt which spans north andnorth-east China, South Korea, Mongolia, Siberia and the Far East.The total lubricants requirement within the five provinces locatedaround Tianjin together with the municipalities of Beijing andTianjin is approximately one-third of China's total lubricantdemand.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:    Nuevo Energy Co. (1221 Lamar, Houston, TX 77010; Tel: 713/753-1343) has successfully completed its ARCO Fee A-360 #1-H well,located in the Brookeland Field in Jasper County, TX.  This AustinChalk well tested at an initial rate of 12.4 million cubic feet ofgas per day, and 1,780 barrels of oil per day on a 48/64-inch chokewith a flowing tubing pressure of 1,750 pounds per square inch.This dual lateral horizontal well was drilled to a vertical depthof 11,200 ft., then drilled 9,410 ft. horizontally. The AustinChalk has been the focus of a great many horizontal wells in recentyears, which have rejuvenated this area.    Oceaneering International, Inc.( P.O. Box 218130, Houston, TX77218; Tel: 713/578-8868, Fax: 713/578-5243) will significantlyexpand the company's remotely operated vehicle (ROV) fleet.  Sevennew Hydra MAGNUM and QUANTUM work class vehicles will bemanufactured at Oceaneering's Morgan City, LA, facility fordelivery between January and July of 1996. These units are beingbuilt to meet increased market demand for ROVs around the world inwater depths greater than 1,000 ft. of sea water (fsw) and insevere weather conditions, such as those encountered off the Westof Shetlands in the North Sea.    Swift Energy Co. (16825 Northchase, Houston, TX 77060; Tel:713/874-2700 or 800/777-2412) has successfully tested anexploratory oil well as part of its expanded drilling activities.The K.M. Mines No. 1 located in Campbell County, WY discovered anew oil field producing from the Minnelusa "B" sand where it isestimated that two to four additional wells will be drilled tofully develop the field. The well was tested at a daily rate of 240barrels of 22 API gravity oil at a depth of approximately 9,600 ft.    Caltex Petroleum Co. (Irving, Texas) has signed a letter ofintent to sell its 50% interest in Nippon Petroleum RefiningCompany (NPRC, Tokyo, Japan) to its partner, Nippon Oil Co., Ltd.(2 Chome Chiyoda Ku, 2 3 Uchisaiwaicho, Tokyo 100) for 200 billionyen (approximately U.S. $2 billion). The parties have agreed tocomplete the sale by the end of the first quarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Making Well InfoMore AccessibleObtaining data for an oil or gas producing property is a timeconsuming and difficult task, limiting the producer's effectivenessto make sound business and engineering decisions. The data arelocated in a variety of places, some of which are inaccessible tothe average user. Independent producers would like more effectiveaccess to this crucial information to expand their businessoptions. Major oil companies with properties in which production isno longer justified would like more effective access to facilitatethe sale of any properties that independents might see as viable.Government agencies would like to see more effective access for theindependents to avoid the abandonment of wells that might beproductive.Sam Coleman (Tel: 510/422-4323) and Jeff Wagoner (Tel: 510/422-1374) of Lawrence Livermore National Lab (Univ. of California, P.O.Box 808, L-156, Livermore, CA 94551) are developing a database ofexisting oil field data for California and Texas. These states,like many other states, provide public access to oil and gasproduction data, and other types of well information. Much of thedata is centrally located. However, the data are in a format thatis difficult to search and retrieve with access mechanisms whichare ineffective, tedious, and expensive to maintain.The Oil and Gas Data Infrastructure Project is designing,implementing, and integrating inexpensive, standards-based,mechanisms for online access to data from Texas, California, andother states. The project will combine database, Internet, andWorld Wide Web technology to make existing Oil and Gas data readilyavailable for online analysis.Cost-effective access will be available through the existingInternet infrastructure using de facto Internet tools. Data will bedisplayed on the user's personal computer or downloaded foranalysis by a variety of existing commercial applications. Theproject will deliver a demonstration system that will serve as aprototype for use by government agencies and private corporations.It is anticipated that cost effective analysis of data willfacilitate the transfer of petroleum leases to independentproducers, slow the abandonment of wells, enhance the production ofexisting fields, and increase the efficiency of drillingactivities.The California Div. of Oil and Gas and Geothermal Resources and theTexas Railroad Commission maintain a great deal of information oneach well. This includes applications to do work, permits issued,drilling and exploration histories and maps.The information has been available to the public and industry, butinterested parties must come to the regional offices, identify andlocate information they need, and request or create hard copies ofany desired information. Both California and Texas governmentagencies are interested in providing electronic systems for wellrecords to improve public access and reduce operating expenses.The Dept. of Energys (DOE, 1000 Independence Ave. SW, Washington,DC 20585; Tel: 202/586-5000) Advanced Computational TechnologyInitiative is supporting software development at the nationallaboratories and the analysis of Texas and California data throughthe university partners.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Short Radius-CurvedBorehole ApparatusW. James Hughes, James W. McCabe, and Owen L. Marks, Jr. ofMaverick Tool Co. (211 Beeline Dr., Bensenville, IL 60106. Tel:708/860-5632) have developed a new method and apparatus to drill ashort radius curved boreholes portion of a horizontal ordirectional well. This technique can achieve a radius of curvatureof less than 20 ft.A tight radius of curvature is rotary drilled by use of flexiblecomposite drilling pipe or other common flexible pipe whichterminate within an eccentric collar on the final drill stringsection. The eccentric collar is equipped with a retractable andgrooved compression pad which expands outwardly to hold theeccentric collar (which is also grooved on its opposite side)against the side of the well bore to prevent the eccentric collarfrom rotating during the rotary drilling process. The final drillstring section connects to a lower drill bit collar and rotarydrill bit through a driving ball and socket connection. Theeccentric collar on the final drill string section that engages thewell bore forces the deflection of the drill bit about the ball andsocket connection and holds this orientation as the rotating drillproceeds forward.The short radius required for lateral or horizontal drilling hasbeen a difficult drilling process to control. In the past, awhipstock was employed to drill short radius horizontal holes belowa vertical cased well bore. This technique limits the smallestcurvature radius for surface drilling to 19 feet which is 3 ofdeflection per foot over 30 ft. of linear drilling to produce ahorizontal drainhole at depths greater than 2,000 ft.Although others have achieved some degree of success in drilling atight radius or curvature, Maverick's new patented (U.S. 5,467,834)apparatus addresses the problems of the inconsistent radius ofcurvature, the weakness of ball/pin flexible joint which could failunder normal operating conditions, and the difficulty inmaintaining the desired orientation of deflection. It overcomes theinability to accurately determine the direction and correct forerrors and the multiple problems caused by constant engagement ofspring-loaded blades ranging from misorientation to sticking in thehole.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Energy BioSystemsBetter BiocatalystEnergy BioSystems Corp. (4200 Research Forest Dr., The Woodlands,TX 77381; Tel: 713/364-6100, Fax: 713/364-6110) has made a majoradvance in the performance of the biocatalyst which drives thecompany's proprietary biocatalytic desulfurization (BDS) system.Application of recent discoveries has lead to a six- to eightfoldincrease in the specific activity of intermediate reactionscritical to BDS economics."In the last few months we have applied the discoveries reported inSeptember," said Dr. Daniel J. Monticello, VP of R&D at EnergyBiosystems. "The resulting improvement exceeds our expectation ofa three- to fivefold increase. We are now significantly closer tothe performance level needed for commercialization of BDS, butadditional development is required on a dinal reaction to producethe prototype biocatalyst necessary for pilot plant demonstrationruns," he continued. Further improvements are expected in early1996 which should lead to the biocatalyst performance required forcommercial demonstration of BDS technology.Energy BioSystems announced that the U.S. Patent and TrademarkOffice has issued two new process patents to the company. "Wecontinue to improve the process design of BDS as well as thebiocatalyst," commented Dr. Monticello, "and we continue to pursuestrong patent protection for these improvements in order to enhanceour competitive position as we move toward the commercialization ofBDS."The first patent (U.S. 5,472,875) claims a new reactor designinvolving the introduction of air or oxygen-enriched gas into theoil prior to treatment with the biocatalyst. The second patent(U.S. 5,468,626) claims a method by which a biosorption agentpreferentially adsorbs sulfur-containing compounds from petroleum.Such a process design could reduce the size of the bioreactor byconcentrating on those compounds requiring desulfurization, thusreducing capital equipment cost.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Exxon UpgradesSteam Cracker TarsResearchers at Exxon Corp. (1251 Avenue of the Americas, New York,NY 10020) have discovered a process for the production of gaseousmono- and di-olefins, particularly ethylene, propylene andbutadiene. The advantage of the process is that it prevents ormitigates reactions of asphaltene precursors to form asphaltenes.The patented process (U.S. 5,443,715) involves first introducing ahydrocarbon feedstock stream into a high temperature thermalcracking zone to produce a high temperature cracked product stream.The cracked product stream is quenched to stop the crackingreactions. At least one HDD (hydrogen donor diluent) such ashydrotreated steam cracked tar oils is injected into the crackedproduct stream at or downstream of the point at which the reactionis quenched, so as to prevent thermal degradation reactions of thesteam cracked liquids.Normally gaseous olefins are recovered from the cracked productstream, and a liquid product stream is recovered which contains adiminished asphaltene content. In this manner, the process upgradesthe tars that are formed during the production of gaseous olefins.The inventors are Dane C. Grenoble, Roy T. Halle, Martin L.Gorbaty, and Harold W. Helmke.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Solvent, SteamSoak PromisingResearchers at Maraven (Apdo. 829, Caracas 1010-A, Venezuela) haveevaluated using various additives to enhance oil recovery andimprove the economics of steam soak projects. Initial results areencouraging. Solvent injection with steam resulted in initial oilrates 50% higher than steam alone. The steam soak process can beefficient and economical, but in western Venezuela itseffectiveness is linked to formation compaction, the mainproduction mechanism. To optimize the effects of the steam soakprocess, various additives were tested to improve the cyclebehavior.The additives used in the tests included surfactants to increasevertical steam distribution and improve the flow of the heated oil,solvents to increase oil mobility and steam stimulation followed bya slug of natural gas to increase the heated area and reactivatethe solution gas drive mechanism.It was concluded that steam soak with solvent coinjection was themost feasible approach, since solvent additives are abundant andcost less than the other additives used in this study. Furtherobservation and evaluation of this approach was recommended. Theresults were first presented at the Unitar International Conferenceon Heavy Crude and Tar Sands held in Houston, TX.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARJanuary 29-Feb. 2, 1996, Energy Week Conference & Exhibition,including Petro-Safe, at the George R. Brown Convention Center,Houston, TX. Sponsors: ASME International Petroleum Div. andAmerican Petroleum Institute. Contact: Michelle Chapel, 3050 PostOak Blvd., Suite 205, Houston, TX 77056-6524; Tel: 713/963-6215.January 31, 1996, Ukrainian Energy Conference, Houston, TX.Contact: Eugene Safley or Merle Grabhorn, Tel: 800/645-7525.February 5-6, 1996, CERI North American Crude Oil & LiquidsConference, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. For more information, callTel: 403/282-1231.February 14-15, 1996, SPE Formation Damage Control Symposium,Lafayette, LA. For details, call Tel: 214/952-9393.February 25-29, 1996, AIChE Spring National Meeting, SheratonHotel, New Orleans. Call Tel: 212/705-7845 for information.February 29-March 1, 1996, InterAmerican Petroleum and GasConference, Fairmont Hotel, Dallas, TX. For more information, callTel: 808/944-7526.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-3IA059-000325-B003-306http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey31.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231533 text/html 57995HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:13:43 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 08-Jan-97 21:54:51 GMTContent-length: 57807Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey31.html Sample Issue Copyright EUROPE ENERGY via NewsNet October 25, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SUPERPHENIX TO SHUT DOWN IN EARLY 1997 FOR REFURBISHMENT (263 words) PAPOUTSIS CALLS FOR PRE-COMPETITIVE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY POLICY. (163 words) COMMISSION LAUNCHES JOULE PROJECT SELECTION INVESTIGATION. (150 words) VAN MIERT SEEKS "CLARIFICATIONS" OVER ELECTRABEL ACCORDS (210 words) EUROPE'S LARGEST WIND ENERGY PLANT OPENS IN WALES (179 words) FRENCH PETROLEUM INDUSTRY EXPANDS DURING 1996 (301 words) BRITISH ENERGY TO SHED 1,460 JOBS OVER THREE YEARS (219 words) FOREIGN INVESTORS FLOCK TO GAZPROM (304 words) ON-SHORE BUSINESS SHAVES 7% OFF NORSK HYDRO PROFITS (307 words) SHELL THREATENS TO PROSECUTE ROMANIA'S CRP (252 words) ELF OFFERS OUTLETS FOR QATARI GAS (233 words) GEC ALSTHOM FORMS RUSSIAN MOTOR/GENERATOR VENTURE (93 words) INAUGURATION OF THE MAGHREB-EUROPE GAS PIPELINE (159 words) GREEN LIGHT FOR ELF NEGOTIATIONS ON NEW DEPOSIT IN AZERBAIJAN (265 words) RWE TO RAISE DIVIDENDS FOR 1995/96 (165 words) COAL USE AND OUTPUT IN WESTERN EUROPE STILL FALLING (273 words) EU PETROL AND HEATING OIL PRICES UP ON OCTOBER 21 (127 words) ELECTRICITY: EUROPEAN PRODUCTION BELOW OECD AVERAGE IN JULY (255 words) NORWAY EAGER TO SELL GAS TO POLAND. (170 words) TAXATION/EXCISE DUTIES: COMMISSION SOON TO PROPOSE TAXES ON ALL ENERGY SOURCES (741 words) AUSTRALIA LIFTS EMBARGO ON URANIUM SHIPMENTS TO FRANCE (359 words) EUROPEAN COMMISSION: ENERGY SECTOR PLANS UNDER 1997 WORK PROGRAMME (706 words) CEDEC CRITICISES ELECTRICITY DIRECTIVE COMMON POSITION (190 words) EU/VENEZUELA: EUROPEAN BUSINESSES ENCOURAGED TO INVEST (409 words) COMPETITION: VAN MIERT CONSIDERS FUTURE OF OIL SALES COMPETITION EXEMPTIONS (443 words) EUROPEAN COMMISSION TO CREATE ENERGY ADVISORY COMMITTEE (171 words) COGENERATION: NEW POLITICAL SUPPORT EXPRESSED AT CONFERENCE (690 words) CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SUPERPHENIX TO SHUT DOWN IN EARLY 1997 FOR REFURBISHMENTfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Superphenix prototype nuclear plant will be shut down for five monthsin early 1997 for modifications to its fast breeder reactor, which willhenceforth be used for research, local authorities announced on October11. The modifications, announced during an information meeting with theofficials, will mainly involve the replacement of some subassemblies inthe reactor's core and the installation of experimental sub-assemblies"with a higher plutonium content or containing radioactive waste with along half-life, such as neptunium". The Superphenix plant, located atCreys-Malville, in France's Rhone-Alpes region, has encountered manyproblems since it was opened in 1986 and has actually operated very littlesince that date. Back on line in August 1994, the plant is now running at60% capacity. Its management expects authorisation for an increase to 90%shortly, but will not ask permission to turn Superphenix up to 100% power,given the short time remaining before the shutdown.In its annual report, the French Court of Auditors has estimated the totalcost of Superphenix at 60 billion French Francs. A spokesman for the plantsaid that this calculation was based on a shutdown in 2000, while theprogramme provided for operation until 2015. The representative alsoindicated that the 51% of the fast breeder reactor's costs were beingassumed by EDF and 49% by Italy and a consortium of several othercountries. He said that the reactor could make a "decisive" contributionto research into energy options for the year 2025 and beyond.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996PAPOUTSIS CALLS FOR PRE-COMPETITIVE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY POLICY.from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478"This is an opportune moment to define a Community-wide policy forpre-competitive activities in the field of energy technologies, with themain objective of meeting the urgent needs of EU industry and society atlarge", said Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis during a conference onOctober 11. He warned that while EU firms are among the world leaders inthe manufacture and supply of clean and efficient energy technologies, theEuropean Union has been less successful than the United States and Japanin the diffusion of research and the development and marketing of proventechnologies. A future initiative for energy technologies must focus noton the development of technology per se, he explained, but rather on itsuse to meet the immediate needs of the market and the citizen. It mustalso contain activities dealing with all the stages in the technologicaldevelopment process, including R&D and market commercialisation.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COMMISSION LAUNCHES JOULE PROJECT SELECTION INVESTIGATION.from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commission has decided to launch a detailed inquiry to ensurethat the procedural rules governing EU funds for Joule projects ofresearch into renewable forms of energy are obeyed without exception,Research Commissioner Edith Cresson has responded in answer to aParliamentary question about the falsification of Joule programme expertreports. The Commission has already publicly denied and demonstrated tothe European Parliament that these accusations - the latest appearing inthe Austrian magazine Sonnenzeitung - were false, the Commissioner said,and it "vigorously refutes" any unjustified allegations made against theEzio Andreta, the Director responsible for research and technologicaldevelopment projects concerning energy. However, Commissioner Cressonconfirmed that another Commission official involved, Wolfgang Palz, hasbeen assigned to other duties - with his consent - while awaiting theresults of the inquiry.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996VAN MIERT SEEKS "CLARIFICATIONS" OVER ELECTRABEL ACCORDSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478European Competition Commissioner Karel Van Miert has written to theBelgian Government asking for "clarifications" over plans by the powerutility ELECTRABEL, to force local authorities into long-term electricitysupply contracts, it was revealed on October 22. In March this year,Electrabel, which is privately owned, offered the Belgian intercommunales(joint ventures between municipalities for electricity distribution) thechance to buy stakes in the company in return for signing 30-yearelectricity distribution contracts. Mr Van Miert has repeatedly said that,under EU rules on free and fair competition, he will not accept contractslasting more than 15 years.The Commissioner is now reported to have asked the Belgian authorities fora clearer explanation of how much freedom the local authorities will haveto end the contracts with Electrabel and choose to go to another supplier.An EU source said that although the Commission had recently received aletter from Leo Peeters, Flemish Minister for Home Affairs, agreeing "inprinciple" to the 15-year contracts, Mr Van Miert was concerned aboutrecent indications that the parties to the agreements might be planning aU-turn over commitments made in May for a definite reduction in theirduration.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EUROPE'S LARGEST WIND ENERGY PLANT OPENS IN WALESfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The largest wind energy plant in Europe began operating on October 23,according to NATIONAL POWER, the British electricity production company.Located in Carno, Wales, the plant is capable of producing enough energyto meet the needs of 25,000 homes. The plant, equipped with 56 turbinesand able to generate up to 33 megawatts of electricity, cost NationalPower GBP26 million (about USD41 million). According to HughBabington-Smith, Executive Director of the British Wind EnergyAssociation, 10% of the UK's electricity could be produced by wind by2025. If the Government adopted this goal, 13,000 new jobs could becreated in wind energy production. Currently, about 150,000 people inBritain get their electricity from 31 wind energy plants. "We have 40% ofEurope's total wind resources, but we risk falling behind the rest of theworld in wind energy development", Mr Babington-Smith added. The County ofPowys, a rural area of Wales, will now obtain 40% of its electricity fromfour wind-powered generating plants.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FRENCH PETROLEUM INDUSTRY EXPANDS DURING 1996from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The French upstream oil industry is expected to see a slight increase inturnover during 1996, to about 49 billion French Francs from 48 billion in1995, according to an annual survey by the French Petroleum Institute(Institut Francais du Petrole - IFP), the Committee on Oil and MarineStudies (Comite d'Etudes Petrolires et Marines - CEPM) and the Groupementdes Entreprises Parapetrolires et paragazires (GEP) published on October22. Next year also looks promising, with three-quarters of the companiessurveyed (accounting for 65% of turnover in the industry) expecting theirbusiness to grow. Service providers were particularly optimistic. Despitestrong international competition, the French oil industry has once againmanaged to play an important role on the world market, according tofigures provided by the IFP, CEPM and GDP. The world oil exploration andproduction market is estimated at between USD110 and 120 billion,including the countries of the former Soviet Union. France claims a 6%market share. In 1995, turnover in the upstream oil industry, at 48billion Francs, was 6% higher than the year before. The increase wasparticularly marked in the offshore sector, which had a 32% rise inactivity, followed by a slight slump in 1996. More than 80% of turnover isgenerated outside the country and climbed from 25 to 40 billion Francsbetween 1990 and 1995. The share of business in the rest of WesternEurope, outside France, is estimated at FF13 billion. The UK, Norway andthe Netherlands are major customers, but Germany and other Europeancountries are also valuable markets. French firms conduct nearlyone-fourth of their foreign business in Africa. However, they are minorplayers in North America and particularly the United States.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BRITISH ENERGY TO SHED 1,460 JOBS OVER THREE YEARSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478BRITISH ENERGY, which owns and operates Britain's eight most modernnuclear power stations has rocked the trade unions by unveiling plans toshed 1,460 jobs over the next three years. The workforce of the companyprivatised in mid-July will be reduced to 4,800. British Energy's ManagingDirector, Robert Hawley, lays claim to a clear and simple strategy toreduce costs and improve efficiency in order to ensure the nuclear energycompany can continue to compete effectively with conventional electricitygeneration. Mr Hawley has reiterated the company's promise to nevercompromise its total commitment to safety, insisting there would be littlepoint in reducing staff numbers if safety standards could not bemaintained. The plan is expected to secure wage cost savings of aboutGBP50 million per year. British Energy will, however, need to offsetrestructuring costs of about GBP100 million, which will be covered byexisting funds and spread over three years.The restructuring at British Energy is part of a general trend of job cutsin the privatised energy sector. By the year 2000, British Energy willhave reduced its 1992 workforce by 40%. POWERGEN and NATIONAL POWER,Britain's leading traditional generators, will have reduced theirworkforces by 71 ands 63% respectively.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FOREIGN INVESTORS FLOCK TO GAZPROMfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478GAZPROM will enter international markets at the relatively high price ofUSUSD1.57 a share, with foreign investors queuing up for a share of thejewel of Russian industry. However, analysts are still questioning whetherGazprom, which holds a quarter of global gas reserves, is really a gooddeal or rather an over-weight monster that will always be tarnished by thestigma of the Soviet era. The company has announced profits of USD3.5billion for 1995, but accounts will only be published according tointernational standards from this year, providing a more accuratebarometer of its health.The conglomerate has announced that Gazprom shares will begin trading oninternational stock markets on October 28, at USD15.75 for batches of tenshares. Company Chairman Rem Viakhirev, has indicated that the share issueis heavily over-subscribed despite the fact the price is three timeshigher than on internal stock markets (about USD0.6 a share). Gazprom willissue 23.7 million batches of ten shares -American Deposit Stocks (ADS)-representing a little more than 1% of the company. This initial sale isexpected to raise USD400 million, with Gazprom planing to float a further8% of capital on the international markets. The share price values theconglomerate at USD38.5 billion, a fairly modest sum, given that Gazprom,a giant even by monopoly standards, sells nearly USD8 billion worth ofnatural gas to the West each year. A brochure published by Gazprom at thebeginning of the year, estimated the company's real value at closer toUSD5 a share. Despite being Europe's leading gas exporter, with aworkforce of 230,000 employed in 40 subsidiaries, and 145,000 kilometresof gas pipelines throughout the former USSR, Gazprom nonetheless remains ahigh risk enigma for foreign investors.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ON-SHORE BUSINESS SHAVES 7% OFF NORSK HYDRO PROFITSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Norwegian group NORSK HYDRO (oil, gas, chemicals, petrochemicals,fertilizers) has announced a 7% fall in pre-tax profits over the firstnine months of the year, blamed on a decline in "on-shore" activitieswhich higher than anticipated oil prices have been unable to offset. At8.403 billion Norwegian Krone (USD 1.292 billion), profits are NKr 450million short of analysts' forecasts, and compare with a profit of NKr9.023 billion over the corresponding period last year. Norsk Hydroturnover is up 6% from NKr 59.464 billion to 63.121 billion (USD 9.710billion), with operating profits down 9% to NKr 7.899 billion.The company is blaming the fall in profits on a decline in revenue fromon-shore activities. High prices for aluminium and petrochemical productslast year have fallen back this year. In addition, the group has beenforced to tap operating profits to pay higher taxes brought about by anincrease in the proportion of revenue from the oil and gas sectors. NorskHydro Chairman Egil Myklebust claims this varied picture again illustrateshow the company's diverse activities have a balancing effect on ourrevenue. He believes the group's avowed goal of securing an operatingprofit of NKr 10 billion for the year as a whole is still within reach.The oil and gas sector has seen a 96% increase in operating profits to NKr4.291 billion (USD 660.1 million) over the first nine months of the year,thanks to the high price of hydrocarbons and increased production, up 17%to 3.4 million tonnes oil equivalent. The average price of crude oil hasrisen 32% over the third quarter to NKr 136 (USD 20.9) per barrel. In 1995the group posted record pre-tax profits of NKr 11.089 billion (USD1.706billion).Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SHELL THREATENS TO PROSECUTE ROMANIA'S CRPfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478Anglo-Dutch oil multinational ROYAL DUTCH SHELL is threatening to bringcharges against the state-controlled Romanian oil company CRP, which ithas accused of discriminating against private clients. In an open letterdated October 15 and signed jointly with the Italian oil company AGIP,Shell argues that the creation of CRP this Summer threatens to represent"a step backwards" with "disastrous consequences" for the Romanian oilindustry. If CRP wants to take a step forwards it must respect twofundamental principles: profitability and non-discrimination. Howeverrecent practices have, according to Shell, highlighted flagrant violationsof these principles. The company claims that refineries controlled by CRPtend to discriminate against independent distributors, and in favour ofother clients that have close ties with the company, despite being "badpayers". A CRP spokesman has rejected these accusations, insisting thatShell has enjoyed the same treatment as other clients. Since moving on tothe Romanian market two years ago, the Anglo-Dutch giant has established achain of service stations around Bucharest and plans to extend its networkthroughout the country. Shell warns that if the current situationcontinues, CRP will have to answer in court for the abuse of its dominantmarket position, and indeed violation of the Energy Charter that Romaniasigned. The World Bank, which has granted Romania a USD175 million loan toregenerate the oil sector, recently condemned the creation of the CRP as"contrary to market deregulation".Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ELF OFFERS OUTLETS FOR QATARI GASfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The French oil company ELF AQUITAINE has highlighted access to outlets aspart of its bid to participate in liquefied natural gas projects in Qatar.Speaking on October 17, on the sidelines of an international gasconference in Abou Dhabi, Bruno Karcher of Elf's gas division indicatedthat the French oil group believes it can guarantee outlets in Europe forLNG from Qatar, which has the region's second largest gas reserves,estimated at 7,000 billion cubic metres. Mr Karcher indicated that thisoffer has been passed on to the Qatari Government. The state-runconglomerate Qatar General Petroleum Corporation (QGPC) is the majorityshareholder in three LNG export projects, one of which, Qatargas, shouldbe operational by the end of the year. The other two, Rasgas andEnron/QGPC are still at the planning stage. The foreign partners inQatargas are MOBIL (United States), TOTAL (France) and the Japanesecompanies MITSUI and MARUBENI, and outlets have already been secured inJapan for all Qatargas production. Rasgas, in which Mobil has a 30% stake,has thus far placed only a quarter of maximum projected production inSouth Korea. Finally, the American company ENRON and QGPC are expected tofinalise an agreement to build a third gas liquefaction plant later thisyear. Enron plans to market production in Israel, Jordan and India.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996GEC ALSTHOM FORMS RUSSIAN MOTOR/GENERATOR VENTUREfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478GEC ALSTHOM, a 50-50 joint venture between France's ALCATEL ALSTHOM andBritain's GEC Plc, said it had formed a joint venture with Russianindustrial group PRIVOD to build motors and generators. GEC Alsthom willhold 20 % of the new venture, named PRIVOD ELECTROMECHANICAL, which willmanufacture diesel-driven generators and turbo-generators up to 150megawatts as well as synchronous and asynchronous motors. PrivodElectromechanical will employ 800 people at an industrial site in Lysva inthe Ural Mountains.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996INAUGURATION OF THE MAGHREB-EUROPE GAS PIPELINEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Maghreb-Europe gas pipeline will be opened at the end of October orthe beginning of November, Algeria's Energy Minister Amar Makhloufiannounced on October 14, indicating that final tests are progressingaccording to plan. Begun in 1994, the pipeline will link Algeria's HassiR'Mel gas field to the Spanish city of Seville, via Morocco and theStraits of Gibraltar. 1,265 km long and with an initial capacity of 8billion m3/year the pipeline will initially supply the Spanish andMoroccan markets, and later Portugal, France and Germany, as capacityincreases to 20 billion m3/year about the year 2000. With the entry intoservice of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline, the second structure linkingAlgeria to Europe, after the Transmed pipeline laid at the beginning ofthe 1980s between Hassi R'Mel and Italy, Algeria expects to double gasexports by the beginning of the next millennium.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996GREEN LIGHT FOR ELF NEGOTIATIONS ON NEW DEPOSIT IN AZERBAIJANfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Azerbaijani President, Gueidar Aliev, has authorised the French oilcompany ELF AQUITAINE to finalise negotiations on becoming the principaloperator of an major exploration zone in the Caspian Sea. Announced onOctober 11, the Presidential green light coincided with the French ForeignMinister Herve de Charette's visit to Baku, on the last stage of athree-day tour of the Caucuses that took him from Armenia to Georgia andfinally to Azerbaijan. ELF is now free to pursue negotiations with theAzerbaijani oil company SOCAR, and draw up a definitive agreement for theexploration and exploitation of the Leninakan offshore field, which maycontain up to 50 million tonnes of oil. The agreement will leave ELFcontrolling the field with a 75% stake in operations.Joel Bouchaud, Elf's Director for the Orient, the CIS and Latin American,explained that the company's objective will now be to finalise anagreement before President Aliev's the official visit to France on January13. Mr Bouchaud indicated that once contracts have been exchanged, Elf maysurrender a part of its stake. In April 1995 ELF missed out on animportant contract for the exploitation of the Chirag-Azeri-Gunshli field,now operated by the Americans. In June, Elf secured a 10% stake in theexploration of the Chahdeniz field controlled jointly by BRITISH PETROLEUMand the Norwegian company STATOIL. Azerbaijani oil reserves are estimatedat about a billion tonnes. 8 million tonnes are currently extractedannually, compared with 40 million tonnes during Azerbaijan's Sovietperiod.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996RWE TO RAISE DIVIDENDS FOR 1995/96from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478On October 19, RWE, Germany's leading regional energy utility, announcednet profits of 1.2 billion Deutschemarks for the 1995/96 financial year(July to June) a 10% improvement on the previous year. Turnover has risen2.9% from DM 63.6 billion to 65.4 billion. The group proposes to raise itsshare dividend from DM 1.40 in 1994/95 to DM 1.50. These figures are inline with provisional results published at the beginning of July.RWE's Board has also announced the appointment of Clemens Boersig to thepost of Financial Director from April 1, 1997. 48 years old, Mr Boersig iscurrently a member of the Board of ROBERT BOSH GmbH. Two Directors of RWEsubsidiaries will also join the Board next year: from April 1, ThomasGeitner, presently Chairman of the LAHMEYER AG and RHEINELEKTRA AG Boards,and from June 1, Rudolf Schwan a member of the RWE ENERGIE AG Board.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COAL USE AND OUTPUT IN WESTERN EUROPE STILL FALLINGfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478With coal use in Western Europe expected to continue its decline as moreand more energy efficiency and ecological control measures areimplemented, the urgent application of clean coal technologies will beessential in asserting a role for coal in sustainable energy development,the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE) reported onOctober 10. In a survey of coal developments in Eastern and Western Europein 1995/1996, the ECE says the future of coal will increasingly depend onthe electricity industry as demand from other sectors, such ascoke-making, is forecast to continue declining. Some 85% of the hard coaland virtually all of the brown coal consumed in the ECE region (whichcovers both East and West Europe) was used for heat and electricity in1995, compared with only about 12% of ECE hard coal output used forcoke-making. Coal provides close to 40% of the ECE region's electricity,and after oil and natural gas is the area's most important source ofprimary energy.The UN/ECE notes that the decline of coal production in Europe hasaccelerated since 1990, with hard coal output falling about 30 milliontonnes (or 5%) in 1995, taking it to 19% of global output as compared to25% in 1990. While a temporary stabilisation of output is forecast for1996, further reductions are planned for the 1996-2005 period, especiallyin Germany, France, Poland and Russia. Overall European coal exports havealso declined from some 80 million tonnes in 1990 to 70 million in 1995;Western European exports have virtually ceased.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU PETROL AND HEATING OIL PRICES UP ON OCTOBER 21from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478All categories of EU fuel and heating oil prices rose between October 7and October 21, according to figures from the European Commission's EnergyDirectorate-General (DGXVII). Continuing a four-week trend, the averageprice of premium-grade petrol rose slightly from ECU 216.92/1,000 litresto ECU 220.61/1,000 litres, Euro-super unleaded premium-grade was up toECU 232.46/1,000 litres from ECU 227.30/1,000 litres, and motor dieseljumped to ECU 251.14/1,000 litres from ECU 238.60/1,000 litres. Heatingoil prices increased to ECU 221.41/1,000 litres from ECU 219.50/1,000litres (and rose as high as ECU 225.58/1,000 litres on October 14), andresidual fuel oil prices were up to ECU 123.99 from ECU 119.83 per 1,000litres on average.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ELECTRICITY: EUROPEAN PRODUCTION BELOW OECD AVERAGE IN JULYfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478European electricity production increased by 3.1% in the first sevenmonths of 1996 as compared to the same period last year, while output inthe Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development region as awhole rose 3.6%, the International Energy Agency announced in its monthlyelectricity survey published on October 10. By way of comparison,increases of 4.6% were registered in the United States, 3.3% in Japan,1.7% in Canada and 1.2% in Australia.Electricity output in OECD Europe increased by 1.4% to 187.8 terawatthours in July 1996 compared with twelve months before, and nuclear andthermal electricity production increased by 6.4% (to 60.7 TWh) and 3.7%(to 88.6 TWh) respectively. In contrast, hydro-electric power generationfell, for the second month in a row, by 10.0% to 38.5 TWhUS electricity output declined by 1.3% (to 288.9 TWh), due primarily to adrop in thermal and nuclear power generation of 2.2% (to 199.8 TWh) and1.7% (to 61.0 TWh) respectively and a 6.6% rise in hydro-electricityproduction (to 28.2 TWh).Electricity output in Japan increased by 4.7% following an 8.3% rise innuclear production, a 7.3% rise in thermal electricity output and a dropof 14.2% in hydro -electricity generation.Canada also saw an increase in electricity output; but only of 1.5%,resulting from a rise in hydro-power generation of 10.9% and a fall innuclear and thermal electricity production of 15.6% and 8.0% respectively.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996NORWAY EAGER TO SELL GAS TO POLAND.from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Norwegian Foreign Minister, Bjorn Tore Godal, has indicated that hisGovernment would support the sale of gas to Poland. Accompanying KingHarald V on an official visit to Warsaw on October 15, Mr Godal'sdeclaration came after a meeting with his Polish counterpart DariuszRosati. The two Ministers nevertheless agreed that the conclusion ofconcrete agreements should be left to specialised companies. Mr Rosaticlaims that Polish companies have long been interested in purchasing gasfrom Norway, as Russian gas supplies will be insufficient to cover demand.Moreover, the Minister is aware that Poland would do well to diversify itssupply sources, in order to guarantee energy security. At the end ofSeptember, Poland signed an important contract with Russia covering thesupply of 250 billion m3 of Siberian gas over 25 years. The first threebillion m3 should reach Poland in 1997, with supplies rising to 14 billionm3 per year by 2010.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996TAXATION/EXCISE DUTIES: COMMISSION SOON TO PROPOSE TAXES ON ALL ENERGYSOURCESfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commission is expected to come up with a proposal before theend of November for an increase in minimum excise duty rates on mineraloils and the inclusion of other energy sources - electricity, natural gas,coal and perhaps even biofuels - in the excise duty system. If theproposal is approved by the full team of Commissioners and the Council ofFinance Ministers (which could be more difficult), excise duties onmineral oils would gradually be increased, particularly in those MemberStates that currently have the lowest taxes. With the proposed energy/CO2tax stalled for the past four years, the Commission's main goal is now towin acceptance for the principle of some kind of tax, no matter how small,on all energy sources. The proposal, which puts more emphasis on theprinciple than actual tax rates, has already created "very serioustensions" within the Commission, according to well-placed sources.Since January 1, 1993, the Member States have been required to set exciseduties rates on mineral oils above a Community minimum rate (expressed inECU) for each product and its particular use (heating oil, lead-freepetrol, etc.) under Directive 92/82/EEC governing excise duties on mineraloils. The same excise duty system covers tobacco and alcoholic drinks too(although the Commission does not intend to modify the rates for theseproducts at the moment). A closer convergence of duty rates among theMember States within the Single Market to prevent distortions ofcompetition was one of the Commission's and the Member States' objectivesin adopting this system. Some current minimum rates are listed below.* Heavy fuel oil: ECU 13 per 1,000 kg* liquefied petroleum gas and methane for industrial use: ECU 36/1,000 kg* leaded petrol: ECU 337 /1,000 litres* lead-free petrol: ECU 287/1,000 litresCommission sources say that minimum rates should now be increased, notonly to keep pace with inflation, but also as a first step towards acloser approximation of rates (setting a minimum rate tends to beineffective, since market forces push rates downward, according toexperts). This approximation of rates would discourage cross-bordershopping and would incorporate environmental concerns into policies inother areas, now that the specific proposal for an energy/CO2 tax hasfoundered. New rates should be high enough to create an incentive, but notso high as to ruin the proposal's chances of adoption by theCommissioners, informed sources explain. To soften the psychological andpractical impact of these measures, the increase would be gradual.Commission experts speak of raising rates by about 30% over five to tenyears, but this is only theoretical. Several Directorate-Generals - DG III(Industry), DG XXI (Taxation), DG XI (Environment), DG XV (InternalMarket) and DG XVII (Energy) must still consult among themselves.Most of the Member States apply taxes at levels well above Communityminimum rates. But others (Portugal, Greece, Ireland and Luxembourg)impose rates on certain products (some types of mineral oils) that areequivalent to or only slightly higher than the minimum. These MemberStates would eventually be required to raise their minimum rates to complywith the new European minima (and for this reason are likely to oppose theproposal in Council). The rise would also concern those States whose ratesare already well above the minimum rates. "This increase would give MemberStates with high excise duty rates more room to manoeuvre, making exciseduties higher everywhere", says an expert on this issue, also bringing upthe concept of shifting taxes on labour to other bases, preferably with apositive impact in terms of environmental protection.These are exactly the arguments that have spurred the Commission tobroaden the scope of application of the Directive on excise duties toinclude other energy sources such as coal, natural gas and electricity.The Commission's first concern seems to be winning acceptance for theprinciple of taxation of these products, regardless of the rate, as afirst step towards compensating for the failure of the energy/CO2 taxproposal. As mentioned earlier, even biofuels could be include in thisproposal, which would thus supersede Directive 92/81/EEC on the structureof excise duties on mineral oils, that on excise duty rates (92/82/EEC)and the draft Directive on excise duty reductions for biofuels (still heldup in the Council).Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996AUSTRALIA LIFTS EMBARGO ON URANIUM SHIPMENTS TO FRANCEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Australian Government announced on October 21 that it would lift theembargo on new deliveries of uranium imposed in 1988 in protest of Frenchnuclear tests in the Pacific. This decision came in response to France'ssigning of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the Australian Minster of ForeignAffairs and Trade, Tim Fischer. The embargo covered new uranium contracts,but not those signed before it took effect. Mr Fischer emphasised thatFrance's accession to the Treaty marked the fulfilment of promises it madeon January 29 to stop all nuclear testing. Australia's uranium exportpolicy prohibits sales of uranium for other than peaceful uses.During the crisis sparked last year by French nuclear tests on MururoaAtoll, Australia's Labour Government refused to impose a total embargo onshipments of uranium to France, explaining that such a measure would costAustralia more than France. The decision to lift the embargo wasimmediately condemned by environmentalists, who claimed that France hadnot promised not to use Australian uranium for military purposes. "Thefact that the Australian Government seems ready to do anything to sellAustralian uranium is unfortunate", said Jim Downey, head of an Australianconservation association, adding that France had not yet proved its goodfaith on nuclear issues.Australia originally imposed an embargo in 1983, lifted it in 1986 andreapplied it in 1988. According to the Australian Uranium InformationCentre, Australia currently has orders for AUSD11 million (eight millionUS Dollars) worth of non-enriched uranium, representing only 3% ofFrance's needs, but accounting for about 10% of Australia's exports.Uranium Miner Energy Resources of Australia Ltd (ERA) sells 272 tonnes ofconcentrated uranium oxide to France each year, at AUSD40,000(USUSD30,400) per tonne, under a long-term contract with Electricite deFrance (EDF). ERA's Director, Phillip Shirvington, indicated that the doorwas now open for new exports, but that extensive negotiations were stillrequired. "This decision allows us to extend our contract with EDF whenthe current one expires in the next century and to sign other contracts",Mr Shirvington added.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EUROPEAN COMMISSION: ENERGY SECTOR PLANS UNDER 1997 WORK PROGRAMMEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478"1997 will be a watershed year marked by three major events: theInter-Governmental Conference, Economic and Monetary Union, the financialpackage for post-1999 and enlargement", Jacques Santer told the EuropeanParliament, meeting in plenary in Strasbourg on October 22. The Presidentof the European Commission was presenting his institution's work programmefor 1997, along with a report on the implementation of the 1996 programme.While the Commission's main priorities as the turn of the century nearsare growth and employment, development of a European model of society andcloser relations with third countries, actions are also foreseen in theenergy and environment fields. Mr Santer's presentation did not sway theParliament, however, which gave the programme a critical reception andaccused the Commission of legislative inertia.Among the measures proposed specifically for the energy sector are aproposal on the promotion of clean coal technology (CARNOT) andcommunications on a renewable energy strategy, a cogeneration promotionstrategy, on the role of energy management in regions, cities and onislands, on the part played by technology and strategy for energy RTD, andon the harmonisation of nuclear transport conditions. The Commission alsoplans to engage in negotiations on radioactive waste and Euratom accessionand revise legislation on compulsory oil stocks and on the pricetransparency of crude oil and oil products. (See the list of plannedCommission actions below.)I>"The Single Market has taken shape but it remains incomplete", theCommission notes in its Work Programme. It therefore plans to work rightthroughout 1997 to win the Council's agreement on several pending piecesof legislation, including that on opening up the internal market fornatural gas. The Commission will put more pressure on the Member States tospeed up their transposition of Directives needed for the properfunctioning of the Internal Market. Rules on state aid will be assessed interms of their impact on employment. The Commission will also continue itsefforts to simplify legislation.The Commission plans to propose measures to make companies better able tocompete, particularly in high-tech sectors; defend its Fifth FrameworkProgramme for Research and Technological Development; and take initiativesto stimulate innovation at the conclusion of the process of consultationon the Green Paper it unveiled this year.As concerns the environment, apart from the revision of the Fifth ActionProgramme - Towards Sustainable Development, the Commission wants to be a"driving force" in preparations for the Conference to be held in 1997 as afollow-up to the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992.List of planned Commission actions in the energy, environmental protectionand research and development areas in 1997:ENERGY- Communication on a "renewable energy strategy"- Proposal on the promotion of clean coal technology (CARNOT)- Communication on a strategy for the promotion of co-generation- Communication on the role of energy management in regions, cities and onthe islands- Communication on the part played by technology and strategy for energyRTD- Communication on harmonisation of conditions for nuclear transport- Revision of legislation on compulsory oil stocks and revision oflegislation concerning price transparency of crude oil and oil products- Revision of Regulations N degrees 1 and n degrees 4 (Euratom) on notification ofinvestment projects- European Energy Charter: implementation and negotiating second phaseENVIRONMENT- Communication on environmental businesses and industry, job creation andgreening of industry- Negotiation of Convention on radioactive waste and Euratom accession- Approximation of environmental and radiation protection legislation inthe Central and Eastern European Countries- Implementing the IAEA's reinforced non-proliferation programme- Revision of Directive on control of shipments of radioactive waste- Revision of Directive on large combustion plants- Revision of Regulation on ozone-depleting substances- Directives on air quality (SO2, NOX, lead)- Heavy goods vehicle emissionsR&TD- Scientific and Technical Cooperation Agreements with third countries- Multilateral agreement on construction of the ITER fusion reactor- Euratom/US bilateral Agreement on controlled thermonuclear fusionCopyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996CEDEC CRITICISES ELECTRICITY DIRECTIVE COMMON POSITIONfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The EU Council of Ministers' June 20 common position on the internalelectricity market Directive cannot be defended from an economic, socialor legal point of view, and it compromises the rights and interests ofdistribution companies, the European Confederation of Public CommunalEnergy Distributors (CEDEC) says. "The existing version of the Directiveleads to a division of the single electricity market in two: on the onehand, a privileged group of 'eligible clients' that can freely choosetheir supplier in Europe and negotiate their prices, and on the otherhand, clients that will remain tied to their current distributor and uponwhom prices will be imposed as in the past", CEDEC argues in its Octobernewsletter."In fact, it would be economically and socially inadmissible that theadvantages of liberalised electricity production and sales on Europeanmarkets benefit only large industrial consumers of electricity", whilesmall consumers are excluded from the advantages that increasedcompetition will bring, CEDEC continues. CEDEC groups national communalenergy distribution associations in Belgium, Germany, France, Italy andAustria.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU/VENEZUELA: EUROPEAN BUSINESSES ENCOURAGED TO INVESTfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478Venezuela is reforming its economy and European companies are welcome toinvest in several industries, including those in the energy sector. Thisis the message the country is sending out through a series of seminars on"Doing Business in Venezuela" being held this month in Amsterdam,Brussels, Madrid, Milan and Padova as part of an effort to diversifysources of investment and enhance the country's access to new markets."Venezuela is the best kept secret in Latin America", Luis XavierGrisanti, Ambassador to the EU, Belgium and Luxembourg told Europe Energyon October 16. But with opportunities for foreign investors abounding andseminars like the one in Brussels on October 14 attracting 115participants from the financial, industrial and international servicessectors, the secret may not remain concealed for long.The Ambassador said that potential investors are being attracted primarilyby the country's extensive privatisation programme and other open marketreforms such as the abolition of exchange and price controls - includingpetrol and electricity price rises - liberalisation of interest rates andthe reduction of the fiscal deficit. These are being implemented as partof a global macro-economic stabilisation programme, called "AgendaVenezuela," that aims to help the country get fully back on its feet aftera serious financial crisis in 1994.A long list of assets and companies up for privatisation by early 1997includes several electric power systems, including the Nueva Esparta StatePower System, Energia Electrica de Barquisimeto (Enelbar) in the state ofLara and the Enelven-Enelco power system in the state of Zulia. The gas,petrochemical, coal and oil sectors are also being opened to foreigninvestment; a first round of tenders for "share-risk contracts" in newareas of oil exploration has already taken place, and bidding foroperational contracts for marginal wells is to be held in 1997. WithUSD1.3 billion spent in 1994 on purchasing materials and equipment for theoil industry, opportunities for companies providing goods and servicesalso exist.The seminars, in which high-level officials such as Venezuela's PlanningMinister Teodoro Petkoff, Deputy Minister of Energy and Mines EvananRomero and Bank Deposit Guarantee Fund President Esther de Margulis haveparticipated, are being sponsored by the Government of Venezuela, theEuropean Commission and the National Council for Investment Promotion(CONAPRI). A series of similar meetings is taking place in the UnitedStates.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COMPETITION: VAN MIERT CONSIDERS FUTURE OF OIL SALES COMPETITIONEXEMPTIONSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commissioner for Competition, Karel Van Miert, is consideringa proposal for a two-year extension of rules - which are due to expire atthe end of 1997 - that exempt exclusive supply and distribution agreementsin the oil and beer sectors from European Union competition rules underArticle 85.3 of the EU Treaty. The Commission said on October 16 that theproposal was to avoid a "legal vacuum" that could occur if the existing"block exemptions" from EU competition rules were to expire beforeconsultations on the Commission's Green Paper on the long-term future ofexclusive supply and distribution agreements, due to be published by early1997, were concluded. The Green Paper, also known as the verticalrestraints paper, is already a year overdue.The Regulations at stake cover tens of thousands of agreements by which asupplier, on the one hand, appoints a reseller as his exclusivedistributor in a given area (Regulation 1983/83), and on the other hand, areseller agrees to buy all his products from one supplier only (Regulation1984/83). These exemptions from normal EU competition rules currentlyallow oil companies to make exclusive supply agreements with petrolstations.The Green Paper is expected to call for the review of agreements withinthe oil, beer and perfume sectors and also to address the issue offranchising, covered by a separate block exemption which expires at theend of 1999. One solution which could be put forward in the Green Paperwould be to carry on with sectoral block exemptions. Another would be tobase exemptions on the market share of the company operating therestrictive agreements. In the meantime, when Mr Van Miert makes a formalproposal for the extension of the rules, his decision must be approved bythe full team of Commissioners.The European oil industry, represented by Europia, is especially concernedthat if the block exemptions were rescinded, petrol distributors which nowbenefit from acceptable exclusive purchasing or supply agreements couldsuffer in a climate of increased uncertainty. In informal talks with theCommission's Directorate-General responsible for Competition on thepreparation of the Green Paper, the industry has already indicated thatwhile it would like the legal certainty provided by Regulation 1984/83 tocontinue, the regime could be improved. Europia suggested that the newregime should allow a duration of 10 years or more for the exclusivepurchasing agreement, which would lead to adequate return on capitalemployed, and the inclusion within the exclusive purchasing regime oflubricants, company fuel card schemes and all-convenience store goods.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EUROPEAN COMMISSION TO CREATE ENERGY ADVISORY COMMITTEEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commission is likely to adopt by early November a Decision tocreate an Energy Advisory Committee, as called for in its December 1995Energy Policy White Paper, as part of an effort to establish an informalbut institutionalised dialogue with the energy sector and ensure itssupport when new areas of action in the energy field are chosen. ThisCommittee will be expected to assist in identifying energy policy areaswhere Commission action is deemed to be necessary, provide advice on themeans needed to implement Commission proposals and give opinions on theseproposals before they are finalised.The Committee is to be composed of 31 representatives of energy producers,distributors, consumers, unions, and associations dealing with theprotection of the environment. During the preparation of the White Paper,all these interested parties had indicated to the Commission the prioritythey place on dialogue and transparency in the formulation of EU energypolicy.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COGENERATION: NEW POLITICAL SUPPORT EXPRESSED AT CONFERENCEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478In a special report on the recent conference on Prospects and challengesfor Europe's cogeneration markets, freelance journalist Steve Hodgson,writing for Cogen Europe, looks at how a new political momentum isbuilding toward a new cogeneration strategy, what elements Cogen Europethinks this strategy should contain, and what cogeneration's prospects arein a liberalised electricity market.Prospects for an EU cogeneration strategy have received a major boost fromPeter Scholten of the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs. Speaking atCogen Europe's annual conference in Brussels on October 10-11 (see lastissue of Europe Energy), Mr Scholten announced that the proposed strategywill be on the agenda for the May 1997 Energy Council under theforthcoming Dutch EU Council Presidency if the Communication from theCommission on the subject is presented in time.Earlier during the conference, Joanna Tachmintzis, a member of EnergyCommissioner Christos Papoutsis' Cabinet, said that Europe's cogenerationindustry is entering "a new phase in its development," and that newcogeneration capacity will be an essential element of efforts to curbEurope's CO2 emissions in the coming years.She added that the prospects for cogeneration will boosted by both theproposed internal electricity market Directive and by the Communication oncogeneration from the Commission, which is due to be published early in1997. This strategy will be framed to take account of both EUenvironmental and energy policy objectives and could, said Ms Tachmintzis,include an EU target for cogeneration, something for which Cogen Europehas long been calling.As well as setting a European target for cogeneration, Cogen Europebelieves that the strategy should also:*provide ongoing monitoring of market barriers to cogeneration in eachcountry,*prioritise cogeneration's position within the EU's carbon reductionprogrammes, and*establish cogeneration support programmes for central and eastern Europe.Another major conclusion from the conference was that the liberalisationof electricity markets currently taking place in Europe will aid thedevelopment of decentralised cogeneration plant but may harm prospects forexisting city-wide cogeneration/district heating systems. Many nationalelectricity markets are already moving towards more competitive andtransparent structures, a trend which helps cogeneration and which CogenEurope supports.The amount of cogeneration used in each country is a function of itshistory, climate and level of industrialisation, but also of theprevailing legal/regulatory/market framework. While only some 7% ofEurope's electricity is generated by cogeneration, three countries - theNetherlands, Denmark and Finland - generate more than 30% in this way.Cogen Europe suggests that a 30% share could be achieved across thecontinent by 2010, providing ECU 140 billion of investment opportunities,new jobs and massive CO2 cuts.Announcing the preliminary results of a major Cogen Europe study at theconference, UK and Danish consultants Ilex and Ramboll said thatliberalisation helps cogeneration in industry, buildings and small-scaledistrict heating schemes by allowing energy users to self-generate theirown power and by removing a number of market barriers. City-wide systemsmay need protection in a more competitive environment.Equally importantly, liberalisation promotes more progressive utilitythinking as well as structures, said Ilex/Ramboll, and increases customerchoice. Thus the UK energy markets, perhaps the most liberalised in theEU, have helped cogeneration grow by 50% since the electricity industrywas first privatised in 1990.Cogen Europe believes that, to be helpful to cogeneration, nationalframeworks should include greater competition in electricity generation,more open access to the transmission system and a service-orienteddistribution system. If these measures were accompanied by moves toreflect environmental costs in energy prices, this would help cogenerationbegin to meet its enormous potential in Europe, both East and West.Over 230 delegates attended the conference to learn about the latest movesfrom Brussels and to hear presentations on the prospects for cogenerationwithin 13 countries, among them 10 EU Member States, Hungary, Poland andthe Czech Republic. Cogen Europe was able to report that it now has 117members, including a network of 11 national promotional organisations.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List WT03-B35-4IA059-000325-B004-35http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey94.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231626 text/html 101300HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:14:02 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:31 GMTContent-length: 101112Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey94.html Sample Issue Copyright EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GADONNEIX TO PRESIDE OVER GDF AFTER FRENCH TOP JOBS RESHUFFLE (409 words) ITALY UNVEILS PLAN FOR ENEL SALE AND LIMITED DEREGULATION (551 words) COMMISSION HOPEFUL ON POWER (306 words) CO2 TAX SCHEDULE IN JEOPARDY (233 words) NESTE SELLS SOVEREIGN INTEREST TO UK REC NORTHERN ELECTRIC (198 words) STATOIL PLANS 1996 OUTPUT BOOST (279 words) STATOIL REPORTS MAJOR FIND (167 words) RECORD OUTPUT PREDICTION (183 words) SPAIN PLANS $200M REFINERY PIPELINE LINK BY 1997 (218 words) CEPSA SET TO BEAT SALES RECORD (145 words) ESSO SAYS IT WILL STOP LEADED PETROL MARKETING THIS YEAR (695 words) IPIC IN OMV SHAREHOLDER SPAT (224 words) HELSINKI TRIGGERS PROTESTS WITH REMOVAL OF PRICE SUBSIDY (265 words) TRANSGAS CANDIDATES MULTIPLY (93 words) COMPLAINTS OVER 'HIGH' PRICES (203 words) EVN SUCCESS IN HUNGARY (178 words) DRAFT DOMESTIC LICENCE DETAILS (133 words) GERMAN IMPORTERS PREDICT 10% SLUMP IN 1996 SALES (148 words) CDF STRIKE SETTLED QUICKLY (164 words) RWE VOWS TO FIGHT ON TO BRING MUELHEIM-KAERLICH BACK ON LINE (314 words) REACTOR SABOTAGED BY SALT (139 words) NORDIC MARKET BEGINS TRADING (362 words) DISTRIBUTION CONTRACTS DISPUTED (298 words) GEC, CEGELEC BUY AEG ASSETS (216 words) EVS/BADENWERK HYDRO TAKEOVER (259 words) HUNGARIAN POWER STAMPEDE (194 words) RAINS BREAK HYDRO DECLINE (615 words) MADRID IMPOSES TARIFF SQUEEZE (502 words) ENDESA'S LATIN AMERICA SPREE (235 words) NO NEW CAPACITY BEFORE 2000 (133 words) PORVOO REFINERY POWER PLAN (104 words) POWERGEN'S REFINERY CHP DEAL (132 words) OFFER AMENDS REC LICENCES (110 words) STEEL AUTOPRODUCER BUYOUT (203 words) HEALTHY YEAR FOR VERBUND (147 words) TARIFF RULING TO STAY IN PLACE (352 words) SWITZERLAND ORDERS REDUCTION IN CAR FUEL CONSUMPTION (294 words) GAS-DRIVEN BUS TRIAL IN BRISTOL (149 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW LITTLE CHANGE IN GERMAN INPUTS SEEN BUT CO2 PLANS QUERIED (568 words) SPECIAL REPORT - SPANISH GAS (1490 words) SWEDISH ENERGY COMMISSION REPORT ON NUCLEAR PHASE-OUT (1281 words) NEWS FORMER EDF HEAD AVOIDS OIL JOB (124 words) INCIDENT ON AMOCO GAS RIG (68 words) BAVARIAN/CZECH OIL LINK ON LINE (90 words) OMV EYES ADRIATIC RETAIL EXPANSION (122 words) GERMAN INTEREST IN KAZAKH OIL FIELD (56 words) RWE-DEA DETAILS INVESTMENT PLANS (73 words) WINTER WEATHER EXPOSES BG TO CRITICS (139 words) SNAM GAS SALES ON THE UP (59 words) EDP UNVEILS PRICE CUT PROGRAMME (82 words) EAST MIDLANDS OFFER CUSTOMERS REBATE (55 words) GERMAN MINI-CHP INTEREST BOOMS (91 words) DENMARK'S 3Q GAS DEMAND UP 9% (73 words) CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GADONNEIX TO PRESIDE OVER GDF AFTER FRENCH TOP JOBS RESHUFFLEPierre Gadonneix has been appointed president of Gaz de France (GdF)following the sudden move of his predecessor, Loik le Floch-Prigent, totake over running the state railway company, SNCF. Employees of thelatter provided the backbone to the recent wave of strikes in France(EER 449/15): le Floch-Prigent was chosen by Paris because he managesto combine socialist politics with managerial competence.Gadonneix, who was appointed the general manager of GdF in July 1987,had already been passed over for the top job twice. In 1988, whenJacques Fournier left, it went to Francis Gutmann. In 1993, Gadonneixsaw le Floch-Prigent appointed over his head.It remains to be seen how far Gadonneix will pursue theinternationalist and market-oriented policies of his predecessor. Hemust renegotiate the company's charter with the government, whichdefines its activities. In its home market, GdF faces challenges fromboth electricity and fuel oil, and could also face an assault on itsmonopoly of gas distribution.Internationally, Gadonneix must manage those GdF assets alreadyacquired in Canada, Uruguay, and the US. Eventually, he will also haveto face pressure from Brussels to deregulate, even if the EuropeanCommission has concentrated on electricity in the first instance.In a spell at the industry ministry, Gadonneix worked with liberallyinclined ministers such as Michel d'Ornano, Rene Monory, and AlainMadelin. But he will face fierce opposition from the country's tradeunions to any liberalisation. The unions had already designated 4January as the next day of action to defend French-style publicservice.In fact, le Floch-Prigent's plans to exchange shareholdings with theRussian gas company Gazprom were always likely to cause problems if hehad got anywhere near putting them into practice. The fact that cur-rent industry minister Franck Borotra favours selling minority stakesto Elf or Norway's Statoil, or to individuals, will do Gadonneix nofavours.The appointment of Gadonneix contrasts with the recent politicallymotivated parachutage of Edmond Alphandery (EER 449/2) at the head ofElectricite de France (EdF). But like Alphandery, Gadonneix will takepart in nominating his deputy, thereby strengthening his authority,though there was no awkwardness between Gadonneix and his formerpresident, as there was under the 'ancien regime' at EdF.Among the names being mentioned for the general manager's post are thecurrent deputy general manager Jean Balazuc, as well as the director ofthe industry ministry's energy department, Claude Mandil.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ITALY UNVEILS PLAN FOR ENEL SALE AND LIMITED DEREGULATIONWith shares in hydrocarbons conglomerate ENI now trading oninternational stock exchanges (EER 488/7), Italy has begun to firm upplans to divest state power utility Enel.The Enel sell-off will not, however, take place as rapidly as some,including budget minister Rainer Masera, had hoped for. Instead,premier Lamberto Dini opted for the more cautious approach favoured byindustry minister Alberto Clo: the privatisation will take place overthe next two to three years and will be accompanied by power sectorreforms.There may be further changes in the Enel sell-off arrangements, notleast due to the uncertain governmental situation, with Dini having -as promised - submitted his resignation at the start of the year onlyfor it to be rejected by Italy's president Oscar Luigi Scalfaro.In the meantime, the administration said the government stake in Enelcould be lowered to less than 51%, even though this was the levelsuggested by parliament.In his losing arguments, budget minister Masera had pushed for speedierand more comprehensive privatisation, saying that the government neededto send "strong and clear-cut signals" to potential investors and thatEnel's fragmented sale would be "a grave error".The government outlined a plan for a three-phase privatisation. Thefirst stage calls for the sale of a certain amount of Enel shares - thefigure of 30% has been mentioned - within the first few months of 1996,coupled with changes in Enel's accounting and management, includingproduction, distribution and transport.The second phase will involve the flotation of a second tranche and anew government policy on electricity. The third part of the processwill see the sale of the last segment of shares to be sold, with thestate losing overall control but hanging on to a substantial interest.Despite its privatisation, however, there seems little doubt that Enelwill continue to be the dominant force in Italian electricity, even ifin private hands. After the necessary go-ahead from the government'santi-trust authority, which is now studying the Enel case, the utilitywill retain certain exclusive rights, particularly in distribution.Despite the proposed liberalisation, the government reaffirmed theprinciple of the "single rate" and, among other guidelines, the"universality of electric services".As for production, this will be open to competition only for additionalenergy supplies deemed necessary, including from abroad "on the basisof reciprocity" and within EU regulations. Other producers can eithersell their energy to Enel or negotiate directly with "qualifiedconsumers", meaning large agencies or concerns.Nationwide, Enel will be designated the 'single buyer' responsible fordistributing electricity from producers to distributors and users. Highvoltage transmission will also be handled by Enel to some 70 municipalutility companies.Enel described such stipulations as "important because, whilesubstantially maintaining the unity of Enel, they open the market tocompetition in harmony with EU regulations."But the plan drew mixed reactions from observers. Some lauded thecautious sell-off approach and the accompanying reforms, while otherssaid the scheme did not go far enough and fell some way short of fullliberalisation. The municipal utilities of the larger cities,accounting for about 7% of electricity consumed in Italy, wereparticularly critical. Enel accounts for about 79% of power used.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COMMISSION HOPEFUL ON POWERThe European Commission is still hoping to reconcile member states to asingle agreed text for deregulating the electricity market.Competition Commissioner Karel van Miert recently told a conferenceorganised by the Les Echos newspaper in Paris that the Commission couldwait to see whether a consensus was possible in the New Year.Elsewhere, Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis insisted that therewas no blockage, and that all contentious questions would be resolved.When member states' industry ministers held their delayed Councilmeeting on 20 December, they unsurprisingly failed to agree, butpromised to restart negotiations in the New Year. Furthermore, theCommission pointedly failed to invoke Article 90-3 of the Treaty ofRome, which allows it to impose directives.The Spanish energy minister, who presided over the meeting, said thatall the difficulties were surmountable, and that all of the conditionswere in place to reach agreement in the coming months.The Commissioners appeared to be taking the view that it was thestrikes and demonstrations in France that were impeding agreement,since the French government needed to prove that it was serious aboutdefending 'public service'.One possible structure of a compromise could be to designate powerdistributors among those consumers allowed to choose where they boughttheir electricity. This should provide a measure of freedom for thesupporters of liberalisation, led by Germany but including the UK andthe Nordic countries, while allowing France enough leeway to leaveElectricite de France largely in control of its electricitydistribution.French industry minister Franck Borotra reiterated his claim thatFrance was happy to let large industrial consumers benefit fromcompetition, provided that it could continue to organise its marketaround the idea of public service, which meant security and continuityof supplies, along with equal prices and equal access.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CO2 TAX SCHEDULE IN JEOPARDYThe resignation of Austria's finance minister Andreas Staribacher on 2January will likely postpone introduction of the country's proposedenergy/CO2 tax on gas, coal and electricity. The tax had been intendedas a companion measure to the levy on mineral oils and fuels which wentinto effect last May (EER 431/8).Staribacher had been under considerable pressure to impose the extendedtax as part of a programme to resolve an unbearably large budgetdeficit projected for this year. State industry minister Viktor Klimahas now been named as his successor.The energy tax concept was originally proposed to reduce CO2 emissionsin line with Toronto targets; when it became clear that the Torontogoals would not be met, the tax as applied to petroleum reverted to ageneral income source.Arguments have been flying back and forth over the amount of the tax tobe applied to gas and electricity (EER 444/9), one factor which hasdelayed extension of the levy to energy sources beyond petroleum.In addition to Staribacher's resignation, federal chancellor FranzVranitzky is faced with the challenge of forming a new governmentfollowing elections last month. That factor, plus the ministerialchange, as well as renewed debate over the size of the tax and itsutilisation - restricted or general - will probably postpone anypossible introduction of the levy until after mid-year at the earliest.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NESTE SELLS SOVEREIGN INTEREST TO UK REC NORTHERN ELECTRICNeste Corporation, the state-owned Finnish oil and gas company, hassigned a letter of intent to sell its 50.5% stake in SovereignExploration to Northgas, a subsidiary of the UK regional powerdistributor Northern Electric, Neste confirmed.In February 1994, Neste and Northern Electric formed an upstream gascompany based on Neste's Southern Gas Basin interests and including theVictor Gas field. As well as Victor, Sovereign Exploration also holdsinterests in the Schooner field, which is scheduled to start productionat the end of 1996.The sale of Sovereign Exploration marks Neste's latest phase indivesting non-essential oil production and exploration holdings. Thecompany had earlier sold its UK oil assets to Sweden's Sands Petroleumin a deal worth FM899m ($207m), as well as its oil and gas explorationinterests in the US.Instead, Neste intends to re-focus on its upstream activities on theNorwegian continental shelf, according to Neste's E&P planning manager,Jyrki Haapio."We will also concentrate on upstream activities in the Middle East andRussia," said Haapio. "This re-focusing of operations will result inNeste moving its international business unit, responsible for ourMiddle East operations, from London to Dubai."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STATOIL PLANS 1996 OUTPUT BOOSTNorwegian state-owned oil company Statoil expects to produce anestimated 480mbbl of oil in 1996, the company's in-house magazineWeekly Status said. Statoil produced 448mbbl in 1995, down from 460mbblin 1994.This year's expected increase was attributed to the Heidrun and Ymefields. Heidrun is now pumping at capacity and Yme will beginproduction in a few weeks, the magazine said. Heidrun produced218,491bbl on 1 January, thus achieving the goal of 200,000bbl/d atyear-end by a wide margin, Statoil added.But the publication said an increase in production at Statfjordsatellites and the start of output at Heidrun in 1995 was not enough tooffset a considerable decrease at the old, giant Statfjord and Gullfaksfields. It said production at Statfjord and Gullfaks would continue tofall in 1996.Norway, which pumped more than 3mbbl/d in November, is second only toSaudi Arabia in the world's league of oil exporters.* Norwegian oil and natural gas liquids (NGL) production hit a newrecord in November, according to analysts Wood Mackenzie. Outputaveraged 3.19mbbl/d, 1,000bbl/d higher than the average level producedin October, Wood Mackenzie said."Output from Heidrun continued to come onstream averaging 87,000bbl/dfor the month and production from Troll oil increased to 187,000bbl/d,"said Wood Mackenzie in its December report on North West Europe. Butproduction from the Snorre, Gullfaks and Statfjord fields, loadedoffshore, fell slightly.Danish oil and NGL production, meanwhile, fell by 4% to 182,000bbl/d inNovember due to lower output from the Gorm and Skjold fields, said WoodMackenzie. Dutch oil and NGL output rose to 45,000bbl/d duringNovember, up almost 10% from October's 41,000bbl/d.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STATOIL REPORTS MAJOR FINDNorwegian oil company Statoil appears to have made the biggest oilstrike in the Danish North Sea sector since the Skjold field wasdiscovered in 1977.Preliminary reports indicate that the Siri-1 field, which lies only 6kmfrom the border with the Norwegian sector, contains as much as 150mbblof oil - sufficient to meet Denmark's oil requirements for three years.The find is worth an estimated DKr15bn ($2.7bn).Statoil reckons production at Siri-1 can start as early as 1998 becausethe oil is in comparatively easily accessible strata. The find was made2,200 metres underground in an area where the sea depth is 60 metres.Denmark's energy minister Svend Auken expressed satisfaction that thefind was made so quickly after the recent granting of new explorationrights in the fourth Danish round of concessions.The interests in the fourth round licence in which the find was made(6/95) are as follows: Statoil (operator) 50%, Enterprise Oil 20%, Dong20% and Denerco 10%.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RECORD OUTPUT PREDICTIONUK North Sea oil figures due for release this month are expected toreveal record output levels, according to the Royal Bank of ScotlandOil and Gas Index. Analyst Mark Shea said figures for November andDecember last year were expected to show peak production.He said oil output for November was likely to have equalled or beat theprevious peak of 2.82mbbl/d recorded in January 1985. But figures forDecember were expected to be even higher.Shea went on: "We are expecting this peak because we know which oilfields have come on stream and what production levels are likely to be.However, we cannot guarantee peak output will be achieved."Shea said the increasing production was down to a number of majorfactors, such as advancing technology and cost-cutting by the oilcompanies. "We are now seeing fields producing oil long after they wereforecast to run dry . . . These figures, despite the current low priceof oil, highlight how healthy the industry is and how important UKinvestment is to the rest of the world."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SPAIN PLANS $200M REFINERY PIPELINE LINK BY 1997A Pta25bn ($203m) oil pipeline will link Repsol's Puertollano andCartagena refineries in 1997, the industry and energy ministry saidlast December.Puertollano, in the central Spanish province of Ciudad Real, is theonly refinery in Spain not situated at a port and is the best placed tomeet rising demand for oil products in central Spain.The 350km link will improve supplies of crude oil to the refinery, andlead to an increase in capacity from 7mt/yr to 7.5mt/yr. The projectwill receive Pta10bn ($81m) from the EU under the European RegionalDevelopment Fund programme.The port of Escombreras, Cartagena, is currently undergoing work whichwill allow it to admit 125,000cm capacity tankers initially intended toallow greater entry of liquefied natural gas to the Cartagenaregasification plant. The link to Puertollano opens up greaterpossibilities for Cartagena as a point of entry for crude oil.* The Banco Bilbao Vicaya (BBV) has increased its interest in Repsolfrom 4.5% to 5.13% to gain fiscal advantages offered to groupscontrolling a more than Pta60bn of share capital in another. The movetakes BBV ahead of Pemex (4.99%) as number two institutional Repsolshareholder behind the Spanish state (21%). Madrid is expected to sellaround 7% of Repsol before the upcoming March general election.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CEPSA SET TO BEAT SALES RECORDCepsa, Spain's largest private oil refiner, is expected to surpass thePta1bn ($8m) sales mark for 1995. Up to November, the company reportedconsolidated sales of Pta960bn, and gross profits of Pta29.18bn, 19.9%up on the same period for 1994.Stronger domestic oil product sales, up to 17.2mt (0.6% up) andimproved refinery margins gave added impetus to a strong chemicalsperformance registered earlier in the year.The company invested Pta46bn over the first 11 months of 1995, with themain priority being the company's RKF and ORD blocks in the AlgerianSahara. The company expects the first of these to produce 12,000bbl/dlater this year, rising to 30,000bbl/d by the start of 1997.Cepsa has countered speculation in local press reports of 600mbbl ofreserves in the ORD block, saying that further research is necessarybefore it can comment on volumes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ESSO SAYS IT WILL STOP LEADED PETROL MARKETING THIS YEARBy mid-1996 demand for high-grade leaded petrol should be so low inGermany that Esso will stop marketing it. The warning came as Essounveiled plans to rationalise its retail petrol network.According to Herbert Kirchhoff, head of the oil company's fillingstation business, the share of leaded super in total petrol sales fellto 6% last year, from more than 30% as recently as 1990. In 1996 itwill reach only 2.5%, Esso says.Kirchhoff estimates that 5% of all cars registered in Germany - justunder 2m vehicles - are still in the market for leaded super. To offerthem an alternative, Esso - like its competitor Shell - has launched anerosion protection additive which must be added to each tankful ofunleaded. Some 70 Esso filling stations are already no longer sellingleaded super.Meanwhile, the concentration process in the filling station businesshas continued unabated in Germany. In the 25 years to 1994, the totalnumber of filling stations plummeted by 60% - from 44,600 in the formerWest Germany to 18,300 in unified Germany, 2,000 of which are locatedin the east.In the case of Esso this means that it cut the number of its ownstations from 5,560 to 1,627. Thanks to the restructuring, averagepetrol and diesel sales per station jumped - from 470,000 litre/yr to2.5m litres/yr.With an 8% share in the German filling station market, Esso accountsfor 12% in total motor fuel sales. The company points out that with3.6m litres/yr per station, Esso's own sales exceed the average annualfigure by one-third, giving a turnover of DM7m/yr ($4.9m/yr) per unit.Due to estimated investments of DM400,000 per station in additionalenvironmental protection measures needed to comply with newlegislation, the total number of filling stations in Germany is boundto shrink further.Esso's own plans foresee the closure of about 250 stations, with theconstruction of 50 new ones, predominantly in east Germany, alsoenvisaged. This would leave the total number of Esso stations at around1,400, with 150 of them in eastern Germany.In its survey of German energy consumption in the past year, Essopoints out that the German refineries are once again losing money. Itcomplains that while crude imports into Germany in 1995 dropped by 4%to 101.9mt, oil product imports rose by the same percentage rate to42.8mt. As a result, average refinery utilisation dropped to 92.2% from95.5% in 1994.Combined with high German production costs, this led to losses in thedownstream sector, surpassing those recorded a year earlier. Thus, tworefineries closed down last year. Consequently, overall distillationcapacity dropped to 111.9mt/yr from 113.1mt/yr in 1994. At the sametime, the sector invested in additional conversion capacity at theremaining refineries which led to an increase of 2% to 47.5mt/yr.With deliveries of 20.7mt, the CIS was Germany's largest supplier ofcrude last year, despite the fact that the volume was down 9% on 1994.A close second was Norway, which upped its crude exports to Germany by4% to 20.3mt, followed by the UK which raised them by 11% to 18.5mt.Deliveries from Libya dropped 3% to 11.4mt. As a result, German crudereceipts from the North Sea (38%) surpassed those from OPEC countries(35%) for the first time.Sales of oil products in the German market were up 1% to 127.3mt lastyear. Petrol consumption rose only 1.7% to 30.3mt, although motorregistration figures showed an increase of 2% to 40.7m vehicles. Salesof unleaded jumped by 1mt to 28.6mt.Thanks to the ongoing construction activity in east Germany, andGermany's increasing role as a transit country, demand for dieselexpanded by 4.1% to 26.6mt. By contrast, demand for LFO continued tofall, despite lower temperatures at end-1995 compared to a yearearlier: sales dropped 2.8% to 35mt.Against that, HFO sales rose 2% to 7.7mt, thus registering growth forthe first time in two years. However, Esso does not see any expansionpotential in this line in the long run, due to ever stricterenvironmental provisions.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996IPIC IN OMV SHAREHOLDER SPATAbu Dhabi's International Petroleum Investment Co (IPIC), a 19.6%shareholder in OMV, and the government's holding corporation OIAG, aresparring over possible changes to OMV's shareholder base.OIAG is seeking to sell off at least 24 percentage points of itspresent 49% OMV stake; unless IPIC boosts its holding, an OIAG sell-offcould trigger clauses in the syndicate agreement running to 2010 underwhich Abu Dhabi bought into OMV in 1994 (EER 412/5). The agreementguarantees government buyback of the IPIC holding should OIAG's sharefall below 30.1%.OIAG to date has failed to convince IPIC to boost its holding to acontrolling 25.1%. At the same time, the Austrian group has failed toagree to an IPIC representative on the OMV board; the syndicatecontract called for two board seats.An alternative further privatisation via public sale on the Viennastock exchange has been discounted by OIAG due to the depressed market.Difficulties on the IPIC-OIAG shareholder level notwithstanding, OMVhas hopes of winning an opportunity to participate in a $1bnpolyethylene plant to be built in Abu Dhabi. The emirate expectsWestern investors to take up 35% of the project.OMV is experienced in polyethylene production through its plasticssubsidiary and rates its chances in Abu Dhabi "at over 50%", accordingto OMV general director Richard Schenz.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HELSINKI TRIGGERS PROTESTS WITH REMOVAL OF PRICE SUBSIDYFinland's largest industrial users of Russian-sourced natural gas arelobbying Neste to maintain prices at 1995 rates this year. The actionfollows the Finnish government move, on 1 January, to discontinue theprovision of subsidies aimed at increasing the competitiveness of gasimported from Russia, and which was worth around FM20m/yr ($4m/yr).The removal of the state gas subsidy, triggered by the ongoingharmonisation of Finnish economic provisions with EU measures, causedan automatic rise in the price of natural gas.With industrial companies opposed to paying the extra charges, Neste isbeing asked to absorb the cost differential left over following theexpiry of the subsidy. The state company has refused to take on theadded cost.The industrial protest group is headed by forest companies Enso,Ahlstrom, Kymmene and the power distribution company Etela SuomenVoima. Gas supplies are handled by Gasum, the joint venture company 75%-owned by Neste and 25% by Russia's Gazprom. Finland imported Russiangas worth FM1.3bn in 1994.The dispute is currently in arbitration and could yet end up in thecountry's marketing court. Obstructing the way to a solution is a 10-year price and supply contract, signed in 1990 and not due to expireuntil the end of the decade.Industrial companies claim that this contract constrains Gasum toadhere to a set price strategy over the 10-year period to 1999. Gasumargues that the 1990 contract did not take into account Finland'smembership of the EU in 1994, which was regarded as a remotepossibility when the contract was signed.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TRANSGAS CANDIDATES MULTIPLYBritish Petroleum Portuguesa and Petrogal, Portugal's state-controlledoil company, have added their names to the list of international energycompanies interested in buying a stake in Transgas, Portugal's naturalgas utility, when it is privatised in a process expected to begin in1996.Petrogal's interest in the acquisition of a holding has reportedly beenwelcomed by Jose Penedos, the secretary of state for energy in the newSocialist government.Penedos has said that the previous government's plans to sell adominant stake in Transgas to a strategic partner are beingreconsidered.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COMPLAINTS OVER 'HIGH' PRICESGerman industry pays more for its gas purchases than industry in anyother EU country other than Portugal, according to the VEA associationrepresenting the interests of industrial energy consumers.According to Eurostat figures for January 1995, the average price ofgas in the EU is 22% lower than average prices in Germany if Portugal,which currently uses only town gas at very high prices, is left out ofthe picture. Industrial customers in the UK pay the lowest prices,followed by Spain, France and Luxembourg.This regrettable state of affairs lays a heavy burden on Germanindustry, says the VEA. Countless jobs have been shifted abroad ongrounds of cost, and if something is not done about reducing the priceof energy to industry, "further considerable damage will be done to thedomestic industrial sector".The VEA puts the blame on lack of competition in Germany. Thedemarcation and concession contracts which give the gas companies theirown monopoly supply areas must be abolished, it demands. At the sametime, the VEA stressed its support for the so-far unsuccessfulproposals for a liberalisation of the energy markets made initially bythe federal economic affairs ministry some two years ago.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EVN SUCCESS IN HUNGARYAmong Austrian bidders for a share in Hungary's gas privatisation (EER449/12), only regional utility EVN managed a successful offer.Jointly with Germany's Bayernwerk, EVN now holds 50% plus one share inKoegaz, a regional gas utility serving about 190,000 customers in asouthwestern region encircling Lake Balaton and extending to theSlovenian and Croatian borders. The consortium joint investment amountsto $67m, up $20m from its first bid.EVN will have few immediate gains from the deal; the service territorydoes not border on Austria, as would have been the case had EVN gaineda hold in other Hungarian gas utilities for which it had bid.Nevertheless, EVN's success is unlikely to induce much pleasure withAustria's state-controlled gas monopoly, OMV, which failed in itsHungarian bids.EVN's deal further strengthens its ties with the German utility, withwhich it shares major stakes in Austria's private gas and oil producerRAG. OMV and the 51% state-owned electricity authority Verbund havefelt themselves threatened by Bayernwerk, which has made offers onseveral Austrian privatisations.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DRAFT DOMESTIC LICENCE DETAILSThe deregulation of the UK's domestic gas market was set to draw a fewconcrete steps nearer as EER went to press with the government expectedto publish the requirements it will impose on interested companieswithin days.With the first, limited stage of the liberalisation to take place inthe West Country from April, the department of trade and industry wasto publish draft proposals for gas supply and shipper licences.Parties interested in competing with British Gas (BG) in the 18mresidential consumer market will require a supply licence, while thosethat want to transport gas through BG's pipeline grid will also need ashipper's licence.The eagerly anticipated licences were expected to offer an insight intothe type of liberalised market the government has in its sights.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN IMPORTERS PREDICT 10% SLUMP IN 1996 SALESThe German coal importers federation says it expects coal sales tosuffer a decline of 10% in 1996.Purchases of fresh coal are expected to be postponed as major consumersuse up the "comfortable" coal stocks which were accumulated during the'Jahrhundert' contract, which expired at the end of 1995. Sales of bothGerman and imported coal are expected to be affected to the samedegree.It is all the more ironic that import coal prices will probably remainat their current low level during 1996, assuming no significant shiftsin currency rates take place - "proof of the continuing value for moneyof imported coal", stresses the importers' association.In the first 10 months of 1995, imported steam coal prices averagedDM76/t ($53/t) hard coal equivalent (hce), while German steam coal costvirtually four times as much at DM291/t hce before subsidies tookeffect.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CDF STRIKE SETTLED QUICKLYA strike by miners at the Charbonnages de France (CdF) subsidiaryHouilleres du Bassin de Lorraine ended quickly after miners obtainedconcessions, notably an increase in wages. The minimum salary for 1995was increased from FFr81,000 gross for the whole year to FFr85,000($17,125), with a bonus of FFr550 per man offered before the end of theyear.Earlier, some 4,000 miners had clashed with CRS riot police in front ofthe company's offices at Freyming-Merlebach (in the Moselledepartment). The miners, armed with pick-axe handles, bolts, and hoses,confronted some 200 CRS officers, and 500 mobile gendarmes. Some 50persons were injured, of whom two seriously.Workers at three of the four mines belonging to the company - Reumaux,Simon and Wouters - went back immediately after the offer. But theHouve mine at Merlebach held out a little longer, the local branch ofthe CGT union not wishing to give the impression of giving in to themanagement too quickly.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RWE VOWS TO FIGHT ON TO BRING MUELHEIM-KAERLICH BACK ON LINERWE Energie, the operator of the 1,300 MW Muelheim-Kaerlich nuclearpower station off-line since 1988, is adamant that it will continue thelegal battle to bring the reactor back on stream (EER 448/17).The dispute has already turned into the longest and most costly battlethrough the courts in the history of German jurisprudence, according toKlaudia Martini, head of the environment department in Rhineland-Palatinate where the reactor is located.The energy concern announced that it has decided to appeal to thefederal administrative court. This is in defiance of a recent verdictfrom the superior district court in Koblenz finding that the firstpartial construction licence for the unit, overhauled in  1990, wasinvalid and that there was no appeal against this ruling.But RWE Energie claims that the oral verdict contained a faulty legalevaluation and that therefore an appeal was justified. Furthermore, adamage claim filed by RWE - which might amount to half the reactorconstruction costs of DM7.8bn ($5.4bn) - is still pending with thefederal supreme court.Martini has, meanwhile, suggested to RWE that it re-equip Muelheim-Kaerlich for electricity generation from another primary energy source.At the same time, she turned down a motion for the opening of formalreactor closure proceedings, tabled by the Greens in the stateparliament.Martini argued that such a step would open a can of worms, with RWEbound to fight every inch of the way for the subsequent partialconstruction licences which were all in force. Martini assumed thatthis state of affairs would not change, even if RWE were granted anappeal and tried, for the third time, to get a "new" first licence. Itwas now up to RWE "to set a sign of reconciliation in the region byrenouncing a continuation of the legal fight for a first partialconstruction licence."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996REACTOR SABOTAGED BY SALTAbout the time of the first moves by French trade unions to defendtheir concept of public service in early December, employees at theBlayais nuclear power station at Braud-et-St-Louis, in the Girondedepartment, were suspected of putting sodium chloride (table salt) intothe secondary cooling circuit of the plant's number three unit.According to the director of the power station, Martine Griffon-Fouco,the act could only have been committed by someone with clearance foraccess to the site. The management asked the local police toinvestigate.The salt did not present any great danger to the plant, but could, indue course, have damaged the cooling circuit. Furthermore, there were anumber of other incidents in preceding days, such as unexpected turbinestoppages. These various incidents were described as "malicious acts",some way short of sabotage.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NORDIC MARKET BEGINS TRADINGThe world's first market in international power trade began operationson 2 January with Norwegian and Swedish players trading electricity forNKr28m ($4.4m), officials said."Volume was relatively good," said a spokesman for Statnett Marked,Norway's domestic electricity bourse company. "A gradual escalation isexpected." The joint power pool is based on the same floor as theNorwegian domestic electricity market, which started regular tradinglast spring.The spokesman said 180 GWh were traded, including 160 GWh by telephoneand 20 GWh by telefax. This compared to 85 GWh on 29 December, beforeSwedish traders entered the market, but dealers attributed the rise tothe prevailing cold spell.Norway and Sweden removed border tariffs on electricity from 1 January,allowing producers and consumers to trade power freely between theneighbouring states. The jointly owned wholesale power pool is seen asa starting point for a much wider market encompassing Finland andDenmark.In 1994, Statnett traded 25% of total Norwegian electricityconsumption, amounting to NKr5bn in turnover. This year trade isexpected to total one-third of consumption.The exchange offers a day ahead, or physical, market, and a weekly orfutures market.Meanwhile, against the backdrop of the liberalisation of Sweden'selectricity market, Finnish state energy company Imatran Voima (IVO)signed an electricity supply agreement with Sweden's TelgeKraft worthFM348m ($80m).The contract covers the supply of 300 GWh over the three-year period1996-1998, with first deliveries scheduled to begin as soon as 24January."The agreement with IVO is significant, and was based on an opencompetition where the best price pitched won," said TelgeKraft's CEOKjell Hasslert.Under the agreement, IVO is contracted to supply electricity producedusing renewable energy resources "whenever feasible". This portion ofthe contract will require IVO to source power supplied to TelgeKraftfrom hydro and biofuel-fired power plants.Founded in 1993, TelgeKraft is controlled by some of Sweden's largestindustrial groups, including Ericsson, Telge Energi, Scania and Astra.The company concentrates on the purchase and distribution of energy toits shareholders, and is forecast to purchase 1.5 TWh of electricityfrom Nordic suppliers in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DISTRIBUTION CONTRACTS DISPUTEDBelgian power utility Electrabel has defended its ongoing negotiationsfor 18-year distribution contracts with local authorities, saying theyare needed to ensure long-term investments and are to the benefit ofconsumers.Freddy Willockx, a Belgian Socialist member of the European parliament,has claimed Electrabel's efforts to tie part-local authority-ownedcompanies to 18-year distribution contracts threaten EU liberalisation.Electrabel restarted talks with local authorities in November over the18-year contracts, which would be made in exchange for the authoritiestaking 5% stakes in Electrabel production units, Willockx said.An Electrabel spokesman said: "The European Commission is interested inthe interests of consumers, and a free and open market is not thebible. The most important aspect is the interest of the consumer.""We pledge ourselves to have investments with municipalities in inter-municipal distribution companies," the spokesman continued, "but wewill not make long-term investments if we are in short-term contracts."Willockx was "blind to the economics of the investment", the spokesmanadded.The Electrabel spokesman confirmed the contracts are linked to themunicipal authorities buying Electrabel shares, which will take placeduring the first half of the year. The 2,577,256 Electrabel shares,representing about 5% of the company's capital, are currently retainedby holding company Tractebel, although they were acquired by Electrabelin 1992 as part of an acquisition, he said.The shares were subsequently transferred to Tractebel, which holds asubstantial stake in Electrabel, to meet demands from the Belgianbanking and finance commission regulator, he said.Under the transfer agreement, Electrabel will receive any capital gainor loss made when the shares are sold to the municipalities, which willbe made at a market price, he said. The shares were acquired at avaluation of BFr5,600 ($188.74), he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GEC, CEGELEC BUY AEG ASSETSFrench concerns GEC Alsthom and Cegelec, both linked to AlcatelAlsthom, have signed a preliminary agreement to buy what remains ofDaimler-Benz's electrical business, AEG. The price was not disclosed.GEC Alsthom is to take over the transmission and distribution (T&D)businesses of AEG, which should boost its turnover in this field bysome FFr7bn ($1.4bn), bringing it to FFr18.5bn/yr. It will also givethe company coverage of 35 countries against 24 previously, and make itthe largest company in T&D, ahead of ABB and Siemens.For Cegelec, taking over AEG's industrial process control business willboost its turnover in Germany to the equivalent of FFr6.5bn from thecurrent FFr1.4bn (which compares with worldwide turnover of FFr16.4 bnfor the whole of 1994).In addition, the takeover will give Cegelec a higher profile in CentralEurope, the Americas (north and south), and in South Africa, as well assome fresh clients in the petroleum industry.AEG will retain 49% in the holding company that is to be established torun these businesses, while GEC Alsthom will get 51%. One consequenceof the restructuring that will follow the takeover is likely to be joblosses. In the meantime, however, Daimler-Benz was still negotiatingthe possibility of contributing financially to some of the changes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EVS/BADENWERK HYDRO TAKEOVERA consortium of seven Baden-Wuerttemberg power suppliers, headed by EVSand Badenwerk, is to take over Neckar, the utility operating 24 hydrostations on the river Neckar between Mannheim and Plochingen.Up to now Neckar has been owned by the federal government (63.5%) andby the state of Baden-Wuerttemberg (35%), which are parting with theirshares "for financial reasons".The consortium will pay DM138.3m ($96m) for 99% of the shares. Neckargenerated 582.7 GWhe in 1994. According to EVS, this is twice as muchas it produces itself from hydro power, and equals 3.7% of its totalelectricity generation.EVS' own power sales reached the record level of just under 21 TWh in1995. This was an increase of 5% against a year earlier. It was duechiefly, according to chairman Wilfried Steuer, to a steep rise inelectricity deliveries abroad - up 33%.EVS also pitched in and helped temporarily with the tight supplysituation of French power giant Electricity de France (EdF), hit by therecent strike. At the time, EVS supplied roughly 5 GWh per day.But it could only generate part of the overall volume itself. For therest it depended on purchases from east German supra-regional powersupplier Veag.However, even without the booming foreign business, EVS sales wouldhave gone up. Power consumption in its own supply area also rose lastyear - by 2.3% against 1994. Due to the flagging economy, Steuerexpects deliveries to EVS' own supply area to increase by 1-2% only in1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HUNGARIAN POWER STAMPEDEFollowing VEW and Ruhrgas' successful entry into the Hungarian gasmarket - via participations in a regional (DDGAZ) and a municipal(Foegaz) gas supplier (EER 449/20) - other German energy concerns havehastened to make sure they will play a role in Hungary's electricityprivatisation.RWE and its junior partner, southern German regional concern EVS,bought 46.15% of Elmu, a distributor serving the greater Budapest areawith sales of 7.8 TWh/yr, and 48.8% of Emasz, serving the northeastwith sales of 4.7 TWh/yr.The grouping also acquired a 38% stake in brown coal producer Matra,consisting of an 800 MW power station and two opencast mines. The groupwas granted the option to increase its stakes in all companies to 50%and one share by end-1997. It is planning to invest around DM1bn($693m), chiefly in Matra, over the next few years.Bayernwerk won a majority stake in southwestern supplier Dedasz (salesof 3.6 TWh/yr), while upper-Bavarian regional utility Isar-Amperwerke -which Bayernwerk is striving to take over - acquired 49.23% of easternHungarian supplier Titasz (sales 3.1 TWh/yr), together with the optionto raise its stake to 50.1% by end-1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RAINS BREAK HYDRO DECLINESpain's plunging hydroelectric production spiral finally bottomed outin November last year after significant rainfall broke the drought.According to figures published in December by Spain's network company,Red Electrica de Espana (REE), the sector registered a fresh recordminimum for daily generating output before mid-month rainfall led tothe first notable production lift since March last year.Rains in the second week boosted the daily producible power figure to154 GW for 16 November, the first time this figure had overcome the 150GW mark since the first week in March 1995. This improvement came justover two weeks after REE reported the new record output low at 13 GW on1 November. This was 2.27 GW lower than the previous minimum set on 22October 1995.Six months of announcing successive record-breaking lows for thecontents of Spain's hydro generating reservoirs also ended in Novemberwhen REE said the water level nationwide had edged above the linemarking the previous November minimum, reaching 26.9% of their totalcapacity.This is the first time for six months that the water level inreservoirs has not set a fresh monthly minimum record, having plummetedsince the end of January 1995.The gap between the median figure and the real amount of collectedwater has been widening steadily since February 1994. Indeed, over thelast three years, the real figure has been higher than the median foronly six months; this was in one single spell from September 1993 toFebruary 1994.The disparity in reserves is echoed in REE's production figures for themonth of November as a whole: the 1. 255 TWh hydro-generated inNovember 1995 was vastly lower than in the corresponding months of 1994and 1993 - 42.7% and 62.9% less respectively.While total production for the month, including all power producingsources except autoproducers, was 3.7% up, coal and nuclear-generatedpower made up the difference increasing output by 19.8% to 6. 97 TWhand 7.5% to 4.65 TWh respectively.The 12.571 TWh total November demand took the figure for the firsteleven months to 138.339 TWh, 3.9% higher than the same period in 1994.Even heavy rainfall in December is unlikely to lift the total hydrogeneration figure for 1995 any higher than the third worst hydroperformance in the last 25 years. The output total to the end ofNovember in Spain reached 19. 583 TWh, already more than Unesa's twolowest readings, 19.511 TWh in 1992 and 18.671 TWh in 1989.Meanwhile, Portugal's five years of drought also appear to be over,according to meteorological officials, heralding a period of increasedhydroelectric production.Rainfall in the southern Alentejo region, the area worst hit bydrought, was greater in November and December than in the previous fouryears and several regions of Portugal continue to risk flooding.Agriculture accounts for more than 75% of all water consumption inPortugal, compared with 14% for industry and 7% for domesticconsumption.* Strike action in France led to strong power exports from Spain toFrance in November 1995, peaking at hourly readings of 1.3 GWh in thelast days of the month, said REE. While Spain's power relationship withElectricite de France (EdF) is hugely weighted in favour of imports,43.65 GWh went to France in November, 72% more than in October.November power imports from France totalled 439.25 GWh. REE signed a"support agreement" with EdF on 1 November which caps Spanish powerexports at 200 GWh, equivalent, said REE, to 400 hours at a maximum of500 MW. The agreement covers the period November 1995 to March 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MADRID IMPOSES TARIFF SQUEEZEMadrid has taken measures to rein in Spain's power sector profits for1996, freezing tariffs for the first time since 1973 and introducingtougher controls on sector income.Acting on advice from the national electricity systems commission(CSEN), the industry and energy ministry said the moves passed on thebenefits of economic recovery and technological advances to theconsumer.Between Christmas and New Year, the treasury's superior pricing boardaccepted the ministry's recommendation for an average "zero increase"in electricity charges, justified by estimates of a 3.5-4% demand liftthroughout the year.This level of confidence foresees a return to the degree of sustainedgrowth last witnessed during the mid-1980s. The "zero increase" is tobe applied to across the board to all tariff scales; domestic,industrial and the large-scale industry rate. Last year, tariff scalealterations produced an average 1.48% increase, well below inflation at4.3%.The decision to freeze tariffs followed approval by Madrid's commissionfor economic affairs of a revised legal framework reducing recognisedcosts borne by the sector by Pta29bn ($236m), 1.42% of the total 1995tariff.These alterations would appear to signal an end to the long-runningdebate between the CSEN, the major utilities and the industrialgrouping which represents their interests, Unesa (EER 448/19).Of the seven alterations to the recognised costs borne by the sector,only two went in favour of the utilities. Worth a total Pta10.28bn,these are increased allowance for costs brought about by the ongoingdrought, and by the enforced changes to billing methods.The new arrangements for adjusting the effects of the drought,calculated in terms of replacing 'lost' hydro-generated power byincreased fossil fuel firing, recognised Pta9.58bn in costs.The remaining Pta702m will pay for a new billing structure intended toshow consumers how much of their electricity bill will go toward payingoff Pta730bn over 25 years to cover assets lost in the now-permanentnuclear moratorium, as well as funds that subsidise the coal industry.These percentages, 3.54% of the bill for nuclear debt pay-off and 5%for the coal industry, will remain the same in 1996.The five considerations on the minus side for the utilities subtractPta39.39bn from recognised costs: this includes some Pta4.159bn less inthe allowance to pay off generating assets; a reduction of 2-3percentage points below the retail price index from operating andgenerating costs reflecting improved efficiency, totalling Pta10.24bnnext year; some Pta23bn deducted from 'structural' costs; and a furtherPta2bn off as the first step in removing the subsidy for the utilities'"employee electricity rate" from the tariff.This is the first time Spanish consumers will not subsidise theemployee rate, a next-to-nothing Pta0.15/kWh, which has remainedunchanged since it was introduced in 1944 when the domestic rate wasPta0.45/kWh.Some 66,000 power sector directors and employees, including retiredstaff, benefited from this rate last year. The CSEN recommendedemployees lose this perk on a gradual scale up to 2001.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ENDESA'S LATIN AMERICA SPREEEndesa, Spain's 65%-state owned utility, announced Pta35bn ($285m) ofinvestment in Latin America at the end of December: Pta15bn in Peru andPta20bn in Argentina.Through its 72.5% interest in the Peruvian company Generalima, thecompany won 60% control of Eetvensa, proprietor of the 200 MWVentanilla power station, close to the city of Lima. Endesa beat off acompetitive bid from American Energy Systems. The remaining 40% ofEtevensa remains in state hands.Endesa will be responsible, through Generalima, for adding another 100MW of generating capacity, installing two gas-fired turbines. Theutility also secured a 30% interest in the Lima and Chancaydistribution company, Distrilima, which has 650,000 customers.In Argentina, Endesa paid some Pta20bn for 19.46% of the Buenos Airesdistribution company, Edenor, lifting its share to 36.46%. Edenordistributes half of the power sold in the Buenos Aires region.Also in December, Iberdrola, Spain's biggest private power utility,bought 100% of two Bolivian distribution companies, La Paz and Oruro,from Compania Boliviana de Energia Electrica and Bolivian Power Systemsrespectively. The investment cost Iberdrola Pta6bn all told, and givesthe Spanish company control of 45% of Bolivia's power distributionmarket.This is the first Iberdrola move outside Spain as a majorityshareholder. It also has a 20% interest in the 250 MW Guemes powerstation project and 26% of the Gas Litoral distribution company (bothArgentina).Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NO NEW CAPACITY BEFORE 2000Madrid has said no new power stations will be commissioned up to theyear 2000. The industry and energy ministry has calculated that none ofthe potential demand scenarios make additional generating installationsnecessary.Instead, the ministry introduced changes to the current national energyplan (PEN) for 1991-2000. Chief among these are move to anglegenerating policy toward substituting fuel oil as a generating inputwith natural gas and biofuels, lengthen the life of existing powerstations, boost renewable energy funding and promote energy savinginitiatives.The first step toward the achievement of these objectives was thepromise of a January invitation to tender for contracts to convert1,400 MW of current fuel oil-fired generating capacity to natural gas-firing. This represents 18.1% of Spain's existing fuel oil-firedinstalled power base.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PORVOO REFINERY POWER PLANNeste's board of directors has approved plans by the Neste oil refineryat Porvoo to invest FM72m ($17m) in 1996 to build two to three 70-110MW gas-fired power plants, Neste Porvoo's general manager JoukoHuumonen said.The plan, which was first proposed in June 1994, would involve thephased development of on-site power generation capacity to supply oiland petrochemical refining units at Porvoo.According to Huumonen, Neste hoped to develop the small station conceptand have plants with a total generating capacity of 500-800 MW on siteby the year 2002. Excess production would be channelled into thenational grid.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996POWERGEN'S REFINERY CHP DEALPowerGen's CHP division has been awarded a contract to supply theelectricity and steam requirements of Conoco's Humber refinery. Thecontract will involve the construction of a new gas-fired CHP unitrated at 24 MWe and over 90 MWth.The #23m ($35m) plant will feature four independent gas turbines withback-up systems to ensure continuous running even when the primary gassupply is unavailable.To coincide with the plant construction, a connection between therefinery and the existing Theddlethorpe-Killingholme gas line will beinstalled by Kinetica, the PowerGen/Conoco joint venture.PowerGen CHP managing director Bob Kennett claimed, "We have broken newground in meeting the requirements of Conoco for efficient but flexibleplant. Both parties can be confident that the energy supply willsupport the refinery's demands in future."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996OFFER AMENDS REC LICENCESUK electricity regulator Stephen Littlechild has published proposals tomodify the licences of regional electricity companies (RECs) SWEB andEastern Group following their recent takeovers.The modifications deal with financial ring-fencing of the electricitybusinesses, restrictions on activities, availability of resources,disposal of assets, and provision of information to Offer. They havealready been agreed by Southern Electric International, now themajority shareholder in SWEB, and Hanson, the majority shareholder inEastern Group, and will be applied to other merged companies in duecourse.Littlechild explained that the "licence modifications will allow me tocontinue to regulate effectively and to ensure that customers continueto be fully  protected."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STEEL AUTOPRODUCER BUYOUTElectricite de France (EdF) and Edison have completed the purchase of75% of the independent Italian electricity producer Ilva ServiziEnergie (ISE) for a total of L370bn ($232m).The deal was initially agreed at the beginning of 1995, but was subjectto conditions which were not met until towards the end of last year.The purchase was made through a joint company called Finel, in whichItalian firm Edison has 60% and EdF 40%.ISE is building a 500 MW thermal power station at Taranto (in Puglia),which will be fired with gases from the blast furnaces of the localsteelworks. It will use combined cycle technology to generate bothelectricity, which will be sold to state power utility Enel, and steam,which will be used by the steelworks.The project is due to come into operation in the second half of 1996.ISE already has overall capacity of some 600 MW, including a thermalpower station at Taranto, two at Piombino (in Tuscany), and a hydropower plant at Terni (in Umbria).EdF commented that it viewed this as an important step in developingcollaborations with other power generators in countries which wanted toencourage independent electricity producers.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HEALTHY YEAR FOR VERBUNDA 3% increase in total electricity consumption as well as high waterflows through hydro generating plants have assured a good year in 1995for Austria's Verbund. At the same time, the federal electricity boardhas noted the impact of two major cogeneration plants which have comeon stream, trimming industrial electricity usage.No specific figures have as yet been released, but the Verbund notes anexport surplus in its electricity trading for 1995. Higher exports toGermany, Slovenia, Croatia and Hungary have been registered, althoughthese in part have been achieved at below-cost prices in order to workdown growing coal stockpiles (EER 449/13).On the financial side, the Verbund experienced costs of some Sch400-500m last year when its long-term borrowings in Swiss francs had to berevalued to reflect exchange rate differences. About a fifth of Verbundbonds are denominated in francs.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TARIFF RULING TO STAY IN PLACEThe Swiss federal government will maintain its SFr0.16/kWh ($0.14/kWh)tariff recommendations for autoproducers, which were due to end on 31December, for a further three years. The move follows an officialevaluation report, which also urges that autoproducers be betterinformed about the federal recommendations and legal situation.After the two and a half years that the federal tariff recommendationshave been in force, the situation is that the recommendations areapplied "almost entirely" by electricity companies in less than a thirdof Swiss cantons (eight).They are followed only in part in nine cantons, while five othercantons refused to provide any information for the evaluation, and therecommendations are entirely ignored in the principal hydro cantons ofGraubuenden, Ticino and Valais, where the difference between theproduction cost of about SFr0.04/kWh and the SFr0.16/kWh recommendedfor autoproducers is simply considered too great.The authors of the evaluation report note that while the promotion ofdecentralised energy production is an objective for the country as awhole, this does not justify forcing the three hydro cantons to acceptconditions which would immediately result in local tariff increases.Martin Renggli, who heads the Federal Energy Office (FEO)'s energypolicy service, told EER that the SKr0.16/kWh average tariff paid toautoproducers who use renewable energy sources is the equivalent of thelong-term marginal cost. "Switzerland is virtually the only country toapply such a tariff, which parliament has limited to non-fossil fuelproducers," said Renggli. "The main beneficiaries are small hydro plantoperators, industrial autoproducers being relatively unimportant in ourcountry".Since the recommendations took effect, 80% of small hydro plants (lessthan 300 kW) surveyed have seen the prices paid for their energy riseand profitability improve.* Switzerland's ombudsman has secured an agreement with five majorregional electric companies for a freeze of tariffs for the next threeyears. The five companies are BKW, NOK, Atel, CKW and EOS. Announcingthe agreement, the ombudsman's office in Berne said it was madepossible by the regional utilities' "good, and in some cases very good,1994 results".Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SWITZERLAND ORDERS REDUCTION IN CAR FUEL CONSUMPTIONA new federal ordinance aimed at reducing the specific fuel consumptionof automobiles came into force in Switzerland on 1 January, despiteobjections by Swiss car importers. The new ruling is designed to reducethe average specific consumption, in litres per 100km, of all newlylicensed automobiles by a total of 15% within five years (1996-2001).The ordinance is designed to make it easier to achieve the objectivesof the federal Energy 2000 programme, and in particular to reduce CO2emissions attributable to automobiles."This reduction rate (of 3% per annum) is technically possible,economically sustainable, and essential from the standpoint of bothenergy and environmental policy," according to a statement by theFederal Energy Office (FEO).The FEO points out that automobiles which consume less than 5 litresper 100km are already available on the market and manufacturers arealready engaged in a process of further improving energy efficiency.German manufacturers have already announced plans to market 3litre/100km cars by the year 2000, the FEO notes.The ordinance makes it mandatory, in particular for car importers whoserole is especially important in Switzerland, to do everything possibleover the next five years to achieve the new "average consumptionthreshold values", and thus to contribute to more economic and rationalenergy utilisation.The FEO says this will require a major marketing effort by Swissimporters, assisted by the federal government. The question of aspecial label to distinguish the most energy-efficient cars in theshowroom is currently under consideration."This will considerably help the federal Energy 2000 programme,"according to the FEO. The E2000 objectives include stabilising theconsumption of fossil fuels and CO2 emissions at their 1990 levels bythe year 2000, and thereafter reducing them.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS-DRIVEN BUS TRIAL IN BRISTOLGreener public transport moved one step closer for Bristol when theUK's first purpose-built gas-powered bus was unveiled by transportminister, Steven Norris.The bus, which has been specifically designed to use natural gas,rather than being converted from diesel power is the result of a fivecompany partnership - FirstBus Transit Developments, British Gas,Cummings, Plaxton Coach & Bus and Dennis Specialist Vehicles - and willbe operated by FirstBus.The spark ignited engine runs off the gas stored in six tanks held in aspecially designed pod on the roof of the bus. The bus will serve theTemple Meads, city centre, Redland and Clifton areas of Bristol.Speaking at the launch, Norris said: "Government is aware of publicconcern about air quality and the introduction of this new gas bus isan excellent initiative to help reduce vehicle emissions in an urbanarea."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996LITTLE CHANGE IN GERMAN INPUTS SEEN BUT CO2 PLANS QUERIEDPrimary energy consumption in Germany is expected to remain more orless constant over the next 25 years, thanks to massive increases inenergy productivity through energy saving and technical progress,according to a report by Swiss consultants Prognos for the Germanfederal economic affairs ministry.The primary energy matrix will only shift marginally during thisperiod, the report states - the shares of coal, lignite and nuclearpower will shrink, to the benefit mainly of gas, which will increase itshare from 16.8% today to nearly 24% in 2020.According to the consultancy, oil should maintain its market position,while renewable energy sources will manage to increase their share fromcurrently 2.3% to 3.6% by 2020 - low prices for fossil fuels willprevent a more significant expansion.CO2 emissions will fall by only around 10.5% by the year 2005 comparedwith 1990 levels, with a further drop of just 3% expected by the year2020.The drop predicted by Prognos is less than half of the 25% reductionwhich the German government has pledged to achieve by the year 2005.Thus the study casts considerable doubts on the ability of Bonn to makeany real progress on climate protection measures.Federal environment minister Angel Merkel criticised the Prognos CO2findings, claiming the effects of new energy and environment policymeasures had been ignored by the Prognos experts.But the consultants have retaliated sharply, pointing out that all thesignificant instruments - such as the new insulation regulations,amendments to heating boiler regulations, small combustion plantregulations, support programmes for renewables and voluntary measuresby industry - were indeed taken into account.Electricity generation in Germany is forecast to continue rising to theyear 2020 by a total of 18% compared with 1992. Gas will play anincreasingly significant role: a net increase in electricity generatingcapacity of 13,500 MW will be necessary over the next 25 years, ofwhich 61% will be gas-fired.At the moment, installed gas-fired capacity totals 18,750 MW; by 2020this will have reached 27,000 MW, says Prognos. Some 3,700 MW of newgas-firing capacity will be constructed in western Germany and 5,100 MWin eastern Germany, mainly by the new municipal utilities which havebeen founded since German unification .Gross electricity consumption will also rise, by 23% between 1992 and2020, with consumption in eastern Germany alone expected to rise muchmore steeply - by 52%. This reflects the recovery and expansion ofindustry now starting to take off after the economic difficultiesexperienced following unification.In western Germany most of the existing power station capacity willhave to be replaced by the year 2020, states Prognos, but theconsultancy finds it impossible to say at this point what the fuelstructure will be.For example, between 2005 and 2009, nearly 6,500 MW of the total 22,500MW nuclear capacity will have to be replaced, assuming a plant lifetimeof 30 years, followed by a further 4,800 MW between 2010-2014 and 9,900MW between 2015-2020.It is currently an open question whether the plant will be replacedwith nuclear power stations and if so, which options will be chosen,says the report - for example, extending the lifetime of old plant, oruse of a new reactor type such as the EPR being developed by Siemensand Framatome.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SPECIAL REPORT - SPANISH GASWith the arrival of natural gas from North Africa now imminent, EERassesses Spain's state of readiness.The $2.6bn Maghreb-Europe pipeline is 160km away from completion,sources at Spain's Gas Natural told EER at the end of December.The news provided an end-1995 boost for the company, already buoyantafter the return to service of the Valle de Escombreras regasificationplant (Cartagena, Murcia) and the announcement of plans to increase itsoutput by a factor of 12.Even with three regasification plants in operation this year, the1,376km pipeline, to be operated by the EMPL venture, will be theleading gateway for natural gas imports to Spain from the secondquarter, providing logistical support for a 24-year, take-or-pay dealwith Algerian state hydrocarbons company, Sonatrach, to import 1,439bnthermies up to the year 2020.Two of the four sections which make up the Algeria-Spain link arecomplete: the Algerian stretch and the seabed link under the Strait ofGibraltar. The 48-inch diameter, 520km Algerian section, laid bySonatrach, runs from the Hassi R' Mel gas field to the Moroccan bordervia the towns of Mecheria and El Aricha.Two parallel, 22-inch, 46km lines, which will take natural gas underthe Strait of Gibraltar, link Cape Spartel, on the Moroccan coast westof Tangiers, and Zahara de los Atunes, on the Spanish coastline west ofTarifa.Pipeline company ownershipEMPL is 27%-owned by the Spanish company Sagane, in turn 91% controlledby Madrid and 9% held by Spain's sole natural gas sourcing company,Enagas. Portugal's Transgas owns the remaining 22% of EMPL.Between the Algerian and Strait of Gibraltar sections, EMPL has laid410km of the total 540km projected for the Moroccan stretch of thepipeline. The 48-inch line will link the Moroccan border city of Ain-Beni-Mathar to Cape Spartel, the two points in the entire pipelinewhere compression stations will be sited.The section running from Zahara de los Atunes to Cordoba, managed bythe Al Andalus company (70/30 Enagas and Transgas), has so far 240km ofthe total 274km, 48-inch pipeline in place. This final sectioncompletes what Madrid's industry and energy terms the "first phase" ofthe Maghreb-Europe pipeline. Initial capacity will allow an annualthroughput of 10bncm/yr.In practice, however, Madrid has put the initial annual volume cominginto Spain at 6bncm/yr, of which 2.5bncm/yr will go to Portugal where,according to Gas Natural, the 371km pipeline linking Setubal and Bragais now complete. The relationship between the two Iberian neighbours isa key element in planned extensions to the regional natural gastransport network in the northwestern quarter of the peninsular.Interconnection with PortugalThe Spain-Portugal 'interconnection', as Madrid terms the plan, isdesigned to allow both countries to benefit from their respectivegeographies. Portugal will receive natural gas from Algeria via the gashub in Cordoba. By extending the northern Portuguese network,meanwhile, Spain will be able to pipe natural gas to Galicia andAsturias, currently without piped natural gas west of Aviles.The new Portuguese pipeline will start in Braga going northwards acrossthe border to Tuy and on to Pontevedra, La Coruna, and Villalba (allGalicia), terminating in Oviedo.The "circuit" in western Spain will be completed by adding a pipelinebranching northwards to Asturias through Extremadura and Castilla yLeon from the $180m trunk line link from Cordoba to Campo Maior closeto Badajoz on the Spain-Portugal border. The Cordoba-Campo Maiorpipeline is the responsibility of the Gasoducto de Extremadura company(51% Enagas and 49% Transgas) and is made up of 192km of 32-inchpipeline and 64km of 28-inch pipeline.The EU's REGEN II Ecu500m finance initiative, aimed at supporting cross-border gas and electricity links between member states, has agreed tosupport the Cordoba-Campo Maior and Braga-Villalba pipeline projects tothe tune of Pta12.72bn ($103m), equal to 40% of the Pta31.8bn totalestimated spend. The Villalba-Oviedo extension is not supported byREGEN II since it is not a border-related link, but it will receive EUfunding under the European Regional Development Fund.In the last quarter of 1995, Madrid reaffirmed four key natural gasinfrastructural initiatives, which as part of the current (1991-2000)national energy plan (PEN) will ensure the arrival of natural gas inthe following regions: Castilla La Mancha, Valencia, Andalucia, Murcia,Castilla y Leon and Extremadura.The most significant is a pipeline proposal termed the 'second phase'of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline. It envisages 36- and 30-inch diameterpipelines, still under study according to Gas Natural, running 320kmnortheastwards from Cordoba, forking at Motilla (Castilla La Mancharegion). One branch is to run 260km northwards to Caspe, Zaragozaprovince, and the other, 150km eastwards to Sagunto, on theMediterranean coast 30km north of Valencia.Possible link to France?The Caspe link is designed to open up possibilities of a connectionthrough Aragon or Catalonia to France. This second phase of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline could lead to the pipe doubling its initial throughputcapacity to 20bncm/yr using the two Moroccan compression facilities.This second phase would involve another major pipeline constructioninitiative from Cordoba to northeast Spain capable of transporting"large quantities (of natural gas) towards northern Europe", theministry of industry and energy said.The other fork at Motilla would take Algerian gas to the 'MediterraneanArc' pipeline (Barcelona-Cartagena) at Sagunto. Both Motilla lineswould offer natural gas to areas of Castilla La Mancha, Aragon andValencia, currently not connected to the natural gas network.Until the Maghreb-Europe pipeline comes into service, Spain willcontinue to depend on its regasification plants to support nationaldemand. LNG produced some 77% of the 81.10bn thermies Enagas bought in1994 and 84% of the 42.77bn acquired in the first half of 1995. Thereopening of the Valle de Escombreras plant at the Mediterranean portof Cartagena, one of the modifications to the original PEN, brings thetotal of regasification facilities in Spain to three, alongside thoseat Palos de la Frontera (Huelva) and Barcelona.Regasification investmentEnagas said it would invest Pta13.2bn in boosting the currentEscombreras output capacity of 50,000cm/h (equivalent to 3.5bnthermies/yr) to 600,000cm/h in five years. The spend is part of theregional gas plan for Murcia announced last spring, with  globalinvestment of Pta38bn. The company is aiming at a target of 50,000domestic and 100 industrial customers in Murcia by the year 2000.Enagas has divided the expansion plan into two phases. The first,scheduled to run up to the middle of 1997 will increase emissioncapacity to 150,000cm/hr, at a pressure of 72 bars using the plant'sexisting storage capacity. The second phase, with two sub-stages, aimsto build two additional storage facilities holding 105,000cm each anddocking structures capable of receiving 125,000cm LNG tankers by 1998.Enagas said the plant would reach its the final output goal of600,000cm/h in 2000.The opening of both the Cartagena plant and extensions to thenorthwestern pipeline network have led the industry and energy ministryto suspend the original PEN project for a new regasification plant atthe port of El Ferrol (Galicia).Basques' separate courseMeanwhile, the autonomous Basque government is still reported to be innegotiations with the US and Japanese gas companies, Enron andMitsubishi, on its proposed regasification plant for the port ofBilbao. The plan, aimed at exclusive supply for the Basque region hasbeen costed at Pta28bn in the region's budget for 1996. None of thiswill come from Madrid, which has emphasised the plan's exclusion fromPEN.Only one other gas aim from the 1991 PEN proposals has yet to becarried out: a 100km pipe-line connecting Aranda del Duero andValladolid.Approved additions to PEN are: a 570km pipeline linking Almendralejo(Extremadura) and Oviedo (Asturias) with a compression station;extending the Aranda-Valladolid line to a junction with theAlmendralejo-Oviedo link at Zamora; and increasing the diameter of theplanned 220km pipeline linking Valencia, Orihela and Cartagena from 20to 30 inches. Enagas has said it is studying a further 175km extensionto this pipeline to Almeria, which would cost an estimated Pta10.32bn.Also in Andalucia, Gas Natural said last November that infrastructuralinvestment in the region would top Pta120bn by the year 2000. This sumincludes laying the Andalucian section of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline,the Cordoba-Jaen-Granada pipeline and pipelines to take Algerian gas toCadiz, Malaga, Jerez de la Frontera and Campo de Gibraltar.It also includes work carried out at the docking facilities at thePalos de la Frontera regasification plant. Gas Natural expectsAndalucia to consume 12.8bn thermies/yr after 2005.Power utility Sevillana has meanwhile awarded a Pta2bn contract to theindustrial group Babcock Wilcox to convert the 540 MW second generatinggroup of the company's Bahia de Algeciras power station to gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SWEDISH ENERGY COMMISSION REPORT ON NUCLEAR PHASE-OUTOne of Sweden's 12 nuclear reactors can be closed before the nextgeneral elections in 1998, but all 12 cannot be phased out before 2010.This is the somewhat unsurprising conclusion of the national energycommission that has been studying the matter.That Sweden can manage on 11 reactors is proven by the fact thatSweden's oldest reactor, the 400 MW Oskarshamn 1, has been standingidle for over three years. But on the very same day that the commissionpublished its report, the Swedish nuclear inspectorate gave Sydkraftthe go-ahead to restart the reactor.The energy commission has not fulfilled its stated task of solvingSweden's nuclear power problems once and for all, but it has produced600 pages of background material for political bargaining on how tofulfil the parliamentary decision from 1980 to phase out nuclear power.Political commentator Anders Isaksson called the energy commission'sdocument "another meaningless report in an over-studied question, apolitically bespoke tailoring that has been run from the government,whose conclusions are based on - for the moment - politically correctassumptions."The last part of Isaksson's comment refers to the fact that, just a fewweeks ago, the commission majority believed that two reactors could beclosed by 1998. The change has been explained by the assumption thatthe government wanted space to negotiate.Political make-upThe political majority of the commission is constituted by theChristian Democratic Party, the Liberals and the ruling SocialDemocratic party. The conservative party is openly pro-nuclear thesedays, while the environmentalists and the leftists are too anti-nuclearfor the agreement.The government also wants the Centre Party to join the agreement, butthere will be a price to pay. The Centre is an anti-nuclear, pro-biomass farmer's party with a long-standing environmental reputation todefend. It does, however, accept slightly increased use of natural gasto make up for the loss of energy production when nuclear power plantsare closed, but the party does not want to abolish 2010 as the finalyear for nuclear, and wants to phase out two - not one - reactorsbefore 1998.The real negotiations are expected to start in March, when the SocialDemocrats will elect a new leader to follow outgoing premier IngvarCarlsson.The only candidate - finance minister Goeran Persson - has declaredthat he has the same views on energy as the current premier, whichmeans respecting the 1980 referendum decision to phase out all nuclearpower by 2010 without harnessing more hydro resources, while keepingCO2 emissions at the 1990 level and maintaining internationallycompetitive electricity prices.Persson says it will be hard to meet these goals. But all his promisesare currently being viewed with doubt, since he was still steadfastlydenying that he would stand as party leader only hours before heofficially accepted the offer from the election committee.Half nuclear, half hydroSweden currently uses 140 TWh/yr of electricity, of which half isnuclear, half hydro. The energy commission contends that Sweden willneed 159 TWh electricity by 2010, and that 15 TWh of the requirementcan be reduced by energy efficiency, while another 10 TWh can becovered by conversion to other forms of energy.Hydro power is projected to account for 64 TWh, roughly the same astoday. Current wind power, cogeneration in industry and districtheating will yield 13 TWh. New wind power and cogeneration plants couldprovide 11 TWh, which leaves 46 TWh of the electricity requirementstill to be covered.Energy minister Joergen Andersson says that natural gas could provide12-30 TWh of electricity and new hydro sources 27 TWh if all streamsand rivers were harnessed, which he himself does not believe to be arealistic possibility.The commission does not see natural gas as a large-scale alternative,and believes that if the gas network is to be expanded from Gothenburg,where it ends today, to Stockholm and on to Finland, it will be becauseother nations have interest in the gas - either to sell Russian orNorwegian gas or to consume it. In fact, Gazprom has offered to build agrid through Sweden, which is seen as a means of securing analternative route for Russian gas to the European market. Sweden onlyuses about 9 TWh/yr of natural gas.It will cost some SKr70-90bn ($10.6-13.6bn) to replace nuclear powerwith natural gas-fired plants, and possibly twice as much if biomass ischosen as a fuel, according to the energy commission, which believesthat electricity prices can increase to an acceptable level if thephase-out is allowed to be a slow process.The free market for electricity introduced from the start of 1996 willkeep prices down, according to the commission. The high voltage pricein Sweden currently is SKr0.20/kWh, while electricity from new naturalgas-fired plants would cost Skr0.25-0.30/kWh and from biomass overSKr0.40/kWh.Three phase-out guidelinesThe commission has set out three main possible guidelines for the phase-out:* 1) a law that would prohibit nuclear power. This could mean payingcompensation to the power utilities and tough negotiations. Theutilities claim they have a right to total compensation and insist thatit should be in the form of new production facilities.* 2) taxation of nuclear power plants. The tax should increase with theage of the reactor. This would make nuclear power less competitivesince the owners also need to invest in maintenance of the plants.* 3) subsidies to energy sources that are favourable for climatic andenvironmental reasons.A cold snap over the Christmas holiday season served to helpconcentrate minds on the matter of electricity supply. Some 24,000 MWwas needed each day between Christmas and New Year, 4,000 MW more thanusual at this time of the year. Sweden's total capacity is over 33,000MW, but grid problems reduce the available capacity to 29,000 MW.The nuclear inspectorate has meanwhile given permission to restartSweden's oldest nuclear reactor Oskarshamn 1, after over three years ofstandstill.Problems at OskarshamnThe inspectorate ordered the closure of Oskarshamn 1 and four otherreactors in September 1992 after a near-accident with the emergencycooling water system in the Barsebaeck 2 reactor. While repairs werebeing made other deficiencies were found and Oskarshamn 1 was given atotal renovation. Only the reactor tank has not been altered. Thereactor was started in 1972.Oskarshamn 1 has been given a provisional permit until summer, when theinspectorate will decide on prolonging the permit, at most until thesummer of 1999.The renovation of the reactor is something of a model for the demandson other reactors when they grow older, according to the inspectorate.New methods for analysis have shown the weakness in some of the olderconstructions, e.g. safety systems against fires and flooding should beimproved. The utilities' ambitions for improvements have not been highenough in earlier plans, says the inspectorate.* Meanwhile, a trade union dispute is taking place at the four reactorsin Oskarshamn. Electricians have refused to be undergo drug tests foralcohol and narcotics: other unions have agreed to random checks, butthe electricians do not believe them necessary for safety reasons.There was no problem in starting tests at the Ringhals nuclear plant.The tests were introduced after a woman was killed: her brother wassuspected of committing the crime and had worked at the nuclear plant,although he had previous convictions for narcotics crime and illegalpossession of weapons.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FORMER EDF HEAD AVOIDS OIL JOBFormer Electricite de France (EdF) president Gilles Menage hassuccessfully resisted the presidency of the Institut francais dupetrole, which was being offered to him as a consolation prize for hissacking. Menage did not have any obvious qualification to head theresearch body, and did not want the post. Indeed, the institute, whichbrings together the French oil companies Elf and Total, as well as Gazde France and the motor manufacturers Peugeot/Citroen and Renault, willbe better off with Pierre Jacquard, who has spent over 25 years inhouse. Jacquard, who has been general manager since 1988, was electedunanimously to be both president and general manager. His electionmarks an effort by the institute to become more independent of thegovernment.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INCIDENT ON AMOCO GAS RIGWorkers escaped injury in an apparent explosion on a North Sea gasproduction platform. Operators Amoco (UK) Exploration Company said aninvestigation was under way into the incident on 49/27/Alpha platform,58km northeast of Great Yarmouth, Norfolk. A spokesman said there was a"circuit breaker trip" - much like a fuse blowing. There was no fire,but some smoke. There was no evacuation after the incident, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BAVARIAN/CZECH OIL LINK ON LINEA 340km oil pipeline from Ingolstadt in southern Germany to the CzechRepublic has just come on stream. The joint Bavarian/Czech venture willbecome fully operational in April this year. The DM725m ($503m)project, dubbed 'Mero', is to help towards making the Czech Republicindependent of Russian crude. It will transport up to 15mt/yr of crudefrom Western to Eastern Europe. Mero is the first oil pipeline linkingGermany with a central European country. At the same time, theconstruction of a 600,000cm oil storage facility near Prague wasconcluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996OMV EYES ADRIATIC RETAIL EXPANSIONNow that a degree of peace has reached the area, Austria's state-controlled OMV energy concern has moved quickly in the Adriatic statesto gain market share before the expected arrival of major multinationaloil companies. Via its 50%-owned distributor Slomin Holding Druzba (EER427/10), OMV last year combined its retail activities in northernItaly, Slovenia and Croatia. From a starting base of 79 fillingstations, the Slomin Holding outlets have expanded to 94, with thenewest station opened in Maribor, Slovenia, last month. Slomin Holdinglast year retailed 560,000t of mineral oil products, with 1995 salestopping Sch2bn ($197m), a gain of 13.2% over 1994 on a 4.5% increase inproduct volume in tonnes. Investments totalling Sch422m are planned for1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN INTEREST IN KAZAKH OIL FIELDGermany's RWE-DEA and Erdoel-Erdgas Gommern have signed contracts forthe joint development of the Akshabulak oil field in central Kazakhstanwith a local partner and the government of the country. The two Germanpartners are each holding 25% and the local oil company Yuzhkazneftegaz50% in the Kazgermunai joint venture set up to undertake the work.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RWE-DEA DETAILS INVESTMENT PLANSThe RWE-DEA oil and chemicals group will invest "far more than DM1bn($693m)" in the 1995/1996 business year (ending 30 June) after DM723m ayear earlier, according to chairman Peter Koch. As he explained in anin-house publication, chemicals would account for 40% of the total, dueto a stake bought earlier in Italian company Enichem Augusta. Of theremainder, one third would be spent on downstream and another quarteron upstream activities.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996WINTER WEATHER EXPOSES BG TO CRITICSBritish Gas (BG) admitted it had been "caught out" by the severity ofthe UK's Christmas weather and had been unable to fulfil its commitmentto all its customers with service contracts. Thousands of people with'Three Star' contracts were reportedly left without heating during theholiday period - some for several days - after engineers failed to turnup to repair central heating faults. Under the "peace of mind" servicescheme, customers are promised that a gas engineer will be despatchedwithin 24 hours of the problem being reported. Spokesman Andrew Davissaid: "In some areas we were caught out . . . We will look at whathappened to make sure that we learn from this next year." He said thatconditions were so extreme in Glasgow, for example, that the dieselfuel in service vans froze.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SNAM GAS SALES ON THE UPMethane gas sales by Snam, a subsidiary of Italian energy giant ENI,rose 11.1% in 1995 to 53bncm from 47.7bncm the year before, the companysaid in a statement. The company said industrial sales climbed 9% to21.8bncm, Methane gas sales to the domestic sector jumped 10.3% to22.5bncm, while sales in the thermoelectric sector rose 16.4% to7.8bncm.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EDP UNVEILS PRICE CUT PROGRAMMEElectricidade de Portugal (EdP), the state power utility, is to cutprices for industrial and commercial users by 5-8% in nominal terms in1996. Taking account of expected inflation, this represents a reductionin real terms of 8.5-11.5%, says EdP. Prices are to be 5% lower duringpeak hours and 8% lower at other times. Prices for domestic consumerswill be held flat in nominal terms in 1996. EdP has also forecast thatits 1995 profits will double from 1994's Esc30.5bn ($203m).Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EAST MIDLANDS OFFER CUSTOMERS REBATEUK regional electricity company (REC) East Midlands Electricity is topay its customers a one-off #6 discount on top of the #50.56 ($77.83)payout following the National Grid flotation, the group announced. TheNottingham-based company said the #6 discount was as a result of itssuccess in reducing electricity purchase costs over the past year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN MINI-CHP INTEREST BOOMSAlthough supplying only a niche market, small unit-type CHP stationsare becoming ever more popular, according to the results of a survey bythe German utilities' association, VDEW. By the end of 1994, 1,577 ofthe mini-CHP plants, owned by industry and municipalities, were inoperation, some 37% more than in 1992. A further 75 were underconstruction and 33 planned. Almost 90% of the plant had an electricitygenerating capacity of under 1 MW. By end-1994, total capacity hadrisen to 872 MWe compared with 577 MWe two years previously.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DENMARK'S 3Q GAS DEMAND UP 9%According to figures released by the Danish national statistics bureau,consumption of natural gas rose 9% to 14.15 PJ in the third quarter of1995, compared to the corresponding period the previous year. Oil salesfell by just under 2% to 72.35 PJ in July-September 1995 while sales ofelectricity were almost unchanged at 7.454 TWh. Meanwhile, biodieselsales increased 8% to comprise 51.5% of total diesel sales in theperiod under review.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-5IA059-000325-B004-72http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey15.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231723 text/html 41427HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:15:15 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:54 GMTContent-length: 41240Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey15.html Sample Issue Copyright FLEETS & FUELS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ||||||||||||||||| CALIFORNIA BACKPEDAL Air Resources Board Favoring Five-Year Delay in ZEV Mandates In Accord with the Voluntary System Proposed by Automakers (171 words) FEDERAL MILLIONS ARPA Largesse Expected for Electric Pickup; $5mm Project by Composite Firm, Partners (328 words) ON LINE AND FOR SALE Westinghouse Launches Manufacturing Of EV Drives, Controllers and Chargers (149 words) POWER CONTROL More Federal Support for SatCon: EV Power Controllers and Flywheels (150 words) IT'S EPIC, BUT WHEN? Everything But the Release Date As Chrysler Promotes Fleet Van (561 words) CHARGER SPLIT Ford, Chrysler Differ with GM On Conductive Versus Inductive (355 words) VOLUME BATTERIES IN FRANCE It's an Industry Now, Say the French, As Saft Sets Up Bordeaux Battery Plant (214 words) VOLUME BATTERIES IN TEXAS $80 Million Seen as Potential Value To Electrosource of Chrysler Order (253 words) |||||||||||||||||||| NEWT GINGRICH TO THE RESCUE? Clinton Administration Ducks the LNG Excise Tax Issue So the NGV and Gas Industry Takes its Case to Congress (175 words) INSIDE TRACK EDO Gets a Leg Up with Japanese OEMs As Fiber Supplier Toray, Sumitomo Buy In (602 words) NGV ECOTRANS GROUP Cardinal's Western Operations to Merge Today With Conversion Business of SoCal Gas Utility (60 words) LNG at LAX RFP in Preparation for Permanent Station (165 words) FIRST-EVER REBATE Payment to New York, New Jersey Port For Three New Vans and a Conversion (156 words) HEAVY HALF DOZEN? Big Rigs May Make Big Year for LNG Half a Dozen Truckmakers Offer NGVs (715 words) CLEAN FUEL CORRIDOR Diverse Groups Team in California For Clean Vehicle Fueling Facilities (129 words) |||||| Ford has turned out the first two prototype (146 words) German postal authorities have kicked off their (119 words) Got a breakthrough? A better widget, perhaps? How (100 words) Toyota has picked a 1,100-acre site in Princeton, (82 words) The city of Palm Desert, Calif. and the SunLine (46 words) Nevada's De Vaux Power is promoting the "engine (56 words) Kentucky's Bachman NGV has a contract to convert (59 words) CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CALIFORNIA BACKPEDALAir Resources Board Favoring Five-Year Delay in ZEV MandatesIn Accord with the Voluntary System Proposed by AutomakersWatch for a delay in zero-emission vehicle sales mandates inCalifornia with two percent in 1998 effectively replaced by10 percent -- in 2003.     CARB has ordered its staff to develop a scheme toreplace the original 1998 deadline for meeting a 2-percentZEV sales mandate.     CARB will instead float a plan to have automakers meeta 10-percent ZEV sales mandate by 2003.     This approach, to be formally proposed by March,effectively gives automakers a five-year breather beforemeeting ZEV sales goals.     But the plan will also encourage ZEV introductions asearly as this year, by giving automakers credits, toward the2003 mandate, for ZEVs brought to market before 1998.Credits will also be given to ZEVs that use advanced batterydesigns.     Automakers, for their part, pledge to have capacity inplace to make 5,000 EVs in 1996 and 1997, and 14,000 peryear from 1998 until 2003's 10-percent mandate kicks in(figures spread over the "Big Seven" -- Chrysler, Ford andGeneral Motors; and Honda, Mazda, Nissan and Toyota).Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FEDERAL MILLIONSARPA Largesse Expected for Electric Pickup;$5mm Project by Composite Firm, PartnersDevelopers of a composite-bodied electric pickuptruck will match expected government funding of$2.5 million, making for a $5-million overalleffort, says Kerry Hitt, president of AdvancedComposite Products, of Harrisburg, Pa., leaddesigner of the vehicle.     ACP is a composite race car developer. Thenew truck is known as the UEV, for utilityelectric vehicle.     Hitt and his partners, including PennsylvaniaPower & Light and other utilities coordinated bythe Pennsylvania Electric Transportation Council(PETC) now await the formal award of money fromthe Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency.Westinghouse Drive     The prototype UEV includes an electric drivetrain from Maryland's Westinghouse.     ACP plans to build three or four UEVs forcrash testing, hoping to take a crash-certifiedfinal design to an OEM -- "preferably aPennsylvania OEM," says Hitt -- for volumeproduction.     The UEV chassis is formed by a rectangulartube structural member which also serves as thebattery storage area. "The reinforcements used inthe chassis area include carbon fiber, chosen forits structural properties, and glass fiber,selected for structural and dielectricproperties," ACP says.     Other composite EV developers, says Hitt,have "merely substituted materials," usingcomposites instead of metals. "We have designedour vehicle around composite materials, aroundwhat they are and what they do," he told F&F.Shown in Atlanta     ACP's competitive edge is highly accurate andconsistent fiber orientation, Hitt says. Thecompany will employ a proprietary fabricationprocess, including resin transfer molding, tobuild the UEV. The RTM-based process, whichinvolves dry fiber preforms that approximate theshape of finished parts, "will cut labor intensityby up to 80 percent." The UEV design employs epoxyresins to consolidate the high-strength fibers andincludes both foam and honeycomb core materials.     The prototype UEV was shown at December'selectric vehicle infrastructure meeting inAtlanta.ACP, Mr. Kerry Hitt (president), 717-232-8237; fax232-5417PETC/PP&L, Ken Quinty, 610-774-5432; fax 610-774-6503Westinghouse, Carl Holub, 410-765-9005; fax 410-765-8281Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ON LINE AND FOR SALEWestinghouse Launches ManufacturingOf EV Drives, Controllers and ChargersWestinghouse says it's begun series production ofelectric vehicle drive trains and relatedcomponents, including chargers.     The company makes 100- and 230-horsepower EVdrives. It numbers Georgia's Blue Bird and China'sYuanwang Bus Group among its customers for thelarger system, and Ford and Chrysler, for Rangerpickups and the new Epic minivan (F&F, October 30;also Chrysler-Epic story on following page of thisissue) for the 100-horsepower system.     The Chrysler and Ford vehicles will alsoemploy a 6.0-kilowatt Westinghouse onboardcharger.     Westinghouse also offers a 135-kilowatt rapidcharge system that uses knowhow from Georgia'sElectronic Power Technology, Inc. (EPTI).     "Existing prototype systems can rechargelarge transit-style electric buses to 80 percentof capacity in under one hour," Westinghouse says.     EV component business is organizationallypart of the Westinghouse defense and electronicsbusinesses that were put up for sale following thecorporation's acquisition of the CBS televisionnetwork.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POWER CONTROLMore Federal Support for SatCon:EV Power Controllers and FlywheelsSatCon Technology Corporation has new federalsupport for its ongoing efforts to perfect powercontrol and flywheel energy storage technology.New funding is coming from the Advanced ResearchProjects Agency and via the ARPA-supportedElectricore, the Mid-America Electric VehicleConsortium.     Massachusetts-based SatCon has a Phase I ARPAcontract valued at $100,000 to develop next-generation modular power controllers for electricdrives and some $200,000 from Electricore forpower management and flywheel-based storagesystem.Leveraging Other Projects     The Electricore contract carries a totalcost-shared value of $427,000, as SatCon can applymatching funds of as much as $227,000 from otherdevelopment projects.     Thermal management is the key to SatCon'spower controllers. SatCon has "developed ways todensely compact these modules and take the heatout," spokesman Bill O'Donnell told F&F, partlythrough the use of advanced materials but also viaproprietary engineering approaches.SatCon, Bill O'Donnell, 617-661-0540; fax 617-661-3373Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IT'S EPIC, BUT WHEN?Everything But the Release DateAs Chrysler Promotes Fleet Van"It's aimed at the fleet market," says Chrysler,and what's more represents "the next logical stepin the development of electric vehicles." Theautomaker said at last month's EV infrastructuremeeting in Atlanta that it is ready to build theElectric Powered Interurban Commuter -- the Epic-- minivan in Canada, with California a primemarket target.     But the timetable is a secret.'Supplier Issues'     "There are several final supplier issues thatneed to be worked through, so we're not ready togive an exact launch date," Chrysler electricminivan program executive engineer Bob Feldmaiersaid in a statement in Atlanta. But "we've made itclear," Feldmeier said, "that this vehicle wouldbe available by the 1998 model year, and that hasnot changed."     Demand is a key factor in establishing aspecific launch date, Chrysler says. "Cost andrange are the two critical market issues that willshape fleet customer demand," the automaker added.It is predicting a modest per-charge range ofabout 60 miles for the vehicle under "idealconditions." The company also says that itsonboard charger will require as much as eighthours for a complete "fill-up."Horizon Batteries, Westinghouse Drive     Chrysler has confirmed that it will use thelightweight Horizon lead acid battery fromElectrosource in the Epic van, and elsewhere atthe Atlanta gathering endorsed an onboardconductive charging system that would allow anelectric vehicle to be plugged in for chargingalmost anywhere. The new EV is also to employ aWestinghouse drive train, with a 100 peak-horsepower AC induction motor, and have a 6.0-kilowatt Westinghouse charger.     Chrysler says it's ready to build the Epicvan at its Windsor, Ont. assembly plant "as partof regular production. No conversion isnecessary." The EPIC model designation will beapplied to both Dodge Caravan and Plymouth VoyagerEV models.     "Because the minivan is by far our mostsuccessful vehicle, and because it has the uniqueability to work as either a commuter vehicle or autility vehicle, this platform made the most senseto us for electric power," Feldmaier said inAtlanta.     "The large flat floor also gives us plenty ofroom to store batteries, and more importantly, tochange battery types as new technologies aredeveloped.     "Right now we're able to get 27 modules atabout 1,600 pounds onboard of the advanced[Electrosource Horizon] lead-acid battery. Weanticipate a range of about 60 miles under idealconditions with that amount and type of battery."     The cost and price of the vehicle have alsonot been finalized, although Chrysler warns that"the low-volume componentry and the cost ofbatteries" will make the vehicle "significantlymore costly than a comparable gasoline minivan."Pricing will not be announced until the releasedate of the vehicle has been established.     Chrysler says it will target fleet andutility customers that have previously purchasedits electric and compressed natural gas vehicles.     The front-wheel drive Epic van will have agross weight of 5,900 pounds with 27 kilowatt-hours of power, enough for 60 miles withoutaccessories (the vehicle will include power brakesand power steering, an AM-FM radio and heat pumpair conditioning and auxiliary electric heatingsystem, and a rear defrost).     The Epic minivan will also have a batterymanagement system and an onboard charging system.Chrysler, Bob Feldmeier, 810-576-2645; fax 576-0929Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHARGER SPLITFord, Chrysler Differ with GMOn Conductive Versus InductiveDetroit's Big Three have another reason to saythat electric vehicles aren't yet ready for market-- Chrysler and Ford have endorsed direct metalcontact conductive charging couplers while GeneralMotors prefers the Hughes-developed inductivepaddle connector now marketed by Delco.     Ford and Chrysler unveiled a prototype metal-to-metal connector in Atlanta, and said they weregiving meeting participants "a look into thefuture."GM Inductive Deal with Toyota     GM, meanwhile, has notched an agreementwhereby Toyota gets a license, includingmanufacturing rights, to the Delco paddle coupler.     Ford and Chrysler say they've taken a steptoward needed standardization in the EV industry."With EV infrastructure, the goal is to avoid theVHS versus Beta problems we saw with early videotape technology," Ford EV program director JohnWallace said in a joint statement.     "We believe conductive charging is safe andthe most efficient and cost-effective method ofcharging," said Chrysler executive engineer BobDavis.     The prototype unveiled in Atlanta wasproduced by SCI Systems, described as "the world'slargest contract manufacturer of electronicassemblies and products." The design, which is toavailable to other charger and couplermanufacturers, is said to have been made to thespecifications of Chrysler and Ford, "five othermajor auto manufacturers," the California AirResources Board and the Infrastructure WorkingCouncil sponsored by the Electric Power ResearchInstitute.     GM-Delco, for its part, claims the supportnot only of Chrysler and Ford but of Honda, Mazda,Nissan and Toyota behind the issuance of aRecommended Practice for Electric VehicleInductive Charging via the Society of AutomotiveEngineers a year ago (F&F, February 6, 1995).'No Plug-and-Socket'     "Inductive charging is known for its safetyfeatures and simple operation," says a Delcorelease. "The inductive charger has noconventional metal plug-and-socket connection.Instead, the user inserts a lightweight,waterproof plastic paddle into a vehicle's chargeport. This simple action transfers power through amagnetic field."     Ford and Chrysler say that their coupler issafe in all weathers, too.Chrysler, Bob Davis, 810-576-0903; fax 810-576-0929     Ford, John Wallace, 313-390-5589; fax 313-390-3251Toyota (communications), Koji Sekiyama, 81-3-5381-1730Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VOLUME BATTERIES IN FRANCEIt's an Industry Now, Say the French,As Saft Sets Up Bordeaux Battery PlantSaft has inaugurated "the world's first plant toproduce electric vehicle batteries in volume" atBordeaux in southwest France.     The big customers for the company's nickelcadmium batteries are the French automakers PSAand Renault for the Citroen AX, the Peugeot 106,and Renault's Clio and Express EVs.     The $20-million plant will be able to producebatteries for 5,000 vehicles per year. "Extensionsare planned to meet market growth," says a releasefrom Saft America (Valdosta, Ga.).     The French car companies and Saft have had anagreement on ni-cads since 1992. Saft claims aservice life of 60,000 miles for the advancedbatteries.     "Ongoing research is focused on nickel-basedbatteries for current generation electric vehiclesand lithium-based batteries for vehicles in thenext century," Saft says. "Incremental increasesin battery capability are planned to increasevehicle range to two-and-a-half times what it istoday."Saft America, Jim Miller, 912-245-2839; fax 247-8486PSA Peugeot Citroen may be plotting a return tothe U.S. market, according to remarks by chairmanJacques Calvet reported in The Wall StreetJournal. "He said Peugeot would consider such amove only if there was a niche his company couldfill," the Journal said on December 19. "[Calvet]declined to say whether that niche could be anelectric car."Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VOLUME BATTERIES IN TEXAS$80 Million Seen as Potential ValueTo Electrosource of Chrysler OrderAn order by Chrysler for its Epic electric minivanwill allow Electrosource to ramp up to full OEMsupplier status, the Austin, Texas-based supplierof Horizon brand lightweight lead-acid batteriessaid in Atlanta.     The Production Purchase Order could lead tobusiness exceeding a cumulative $80 million overthe next three years, Electrosource says. TheChrysler PPO also provides cost and delivery termsfor Horizon battery packs for the Epic van. Thefirst of an expected series of build orders hasalready been filled.     The Horizon battery saves weight by using alead-plated glass fiber mesh in lieu of leadplates. Electrosource claims "the highest peakpower of any battery technology currentlyavailable," noting that independent testing haspegged specific energy at 44.2 watt-hours perkilogram, about 50 percent better than that oftraditional lead-acid batteries.Quick-Charge Capable     And, "with proper equipment, the Horizonbattery can be recharged as quickly as 30 minutes,which effectively extends the vehicle's range,"the company says. Chrysler is believed to favorthe Norvik quick-charge system, though slow-chargewill be standard for the first of the Epic vans.     "Electrosource has met all of the technicalrequirements to qualify the advanced Horizonbattery for use in our electric minivans," BobFeldmaier, a Chrysler executive engineer in chargeof the electric minivan program, said in theElectrosource release.     "Electrosource's technical staff has helpedour program improve performance by contributinginsights into battery management systems andadvanced charging profiles," Feldmaier said.Electrosource, Bill Craven, 512-445-6606, ext 108;fax 512-445-6819Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEWT GINGRICH TO THE RESCUE?Clinton Administration Ducks the LNG Excise Tax IssueSo the NGV and Gas Industry Takes its Case to CongressIt's falling to Congress to save vehicle users of LNG fromtaxes that make the clean-burning fuel more expensive thandiesel. The Clinton administration has refused to go to batfor the NGV industry following an adverse 1995 excise taxruling by the Internal Revenue Service (F&F, October 16).     The American Gas Association and its affiliated NaturalGas Vehicle Coalition are actively working the problem --not via the President, as had been planned, but throughCongress.     "Clinton doesn't want to take on the IRS," says oneindustry observer in Washington. And, he says, the overallgovernment goal of deficit reduction looms as a majorobstacle to reversing the ruling. "The Treasury is notinterested in finding new ways to decrease revenues. TheTreasury wants to tax anything it can get its hands on."     The NGV advocates' sole ace? Clean-burning LNG wouldallow truckers to meet 2004 standards for emissions now, andthe transportation industry could arguably could save moneyby doing so if the tax were readjusted.NGVC, Nancy Etkin, 703-527-3022; fax 703-527-3025Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INSIDE TRACKEDO Gets a Leg Up with Japanese OEMsAs Fiber Supplier Toray, Sumitomo Buy InComposite CNG tankmaker EDO Canada has snatched amajor marketing advantage with the huge Japaneseauto sector. The company has notched a dealmaking Sumitomo the exclusive distributor ofEDO's LiteRider brand tanks to Japanese OEMs,worldwide.     In return, for an aggregate $5,000,000Canadian (some $3.6 million U.S. at current ratesof exchange), two Sumitomo units and EDO's carbonfiber-supplier Toray Industries have taken acombined 16.4-percent stake in EDO's compressednatural gas cylinder manufacturing operation inCalgary.EDO Still Holds the Majority     The deal modifies the EDO Corporation-Province of Alberta 60-40 joint-venture ownershipof EDO Canada to give Sumitomo 6.6 percent andToray 9.8 percent of the company. New York City-based EDO Corporation retains the majority share.     EDO Canada makes LiteRider brand CNG tanksin Calgary, using polyethylene liners overwrappedwith carbon fiber. Its principal fiber supplierhas been Toray for high-strength T-700 material,although EDO is working with at least one othermanufacturer, believed to be Hercules.     [Toray is distinguished in the materialsworld as the supplier of toughened epoxycomposite material, made with T-800 carbon fiber,for the tail and floorbeams of BoeingCommercial's new 777 widebody jet. The 'triple-7'is the first American transport aircraft to bebuilt with composite primary structures.]Japanese in U.S. the 'First Target'     The initial EDO Canada deal with Sumitomomakes Japan's Sumitomo Corporation's OsakaMachinery Department and New York City's SumitomoCorporation of America the exclusive distributorsof LiteRider cylinders to Japanese automotivemanufacturers. Those with car or truckmanufacturing operations in the United States"are the first target," says EDO Corporationpresident Frank Fariello.     Honda, for example, is promising a naturalgas-powered car for the 1998 model year. Andalthough the vehicle is to be built in Ohio,component decisions are expected to be made inJapan.     [Prototype Honda NGVs use a two-tankconfiguration using all-composite cylinders fromLincoln Composites. Honda has indicated that itwill shift to one larger cylinder for theproduction vehicle.]     EDO may eventually grant LiteRidermanufacturing rights to its Japanese partners,although according to Fariello, the establishmentof an NGV industry in Japan awaits regulatorychanges and the building of a fuelinginfrastructure there.     Japanese LiteRider manufacture "is not partof this deal," the EDO chief told F&F. "That issubject to additional negotiations."     "At this time there are no plans forSumitomo to manufacture the CNG cylinders inJapan," says a Sumitomo spokeswoman in New York."However, we are leaving our options open for thefuture."A Tank Technical Task Force Too     The latest arrangement, publicized lastmonth, establishes a strategic alliance betweenEDO, Sumitomo and Toray designed to "accelerateand expand the alliance's presence in the U.S.and international NGV market."     The two Japanese firms get an EDO Canadaboard seat. The Toray deal further --> sets up an EDO-Toray technical task forceaimed at improving composite CNG tanks with theprimary thrust of "increasing the overall cost-effectiveness of NGV fuel storage;" and --> maintains Sumitomo as the sole distributor ofLiteRider cylinders to Japanese OEMs worldwide.     "For years, the principal applications ofcarbon fiber have been in the aerospace andsporting goods industries," Toray AdvancedComposites GM Kichi Fujisawa said in an EDOrelease.     The LiteRider cylinder, Fujisawa said,"presents us with an opportunity to expand theseapplications."     Fujisawa is now a director of EDO Canada.Toray Tokyo, Mr. Kichi Fujisawa, +81-3-3245-5743;fax +81-3-3245-5817Sumitomo New York, Mr. Takahiro Ichino, 212-207-0552; fax 212-207-0638Sumitomo Osaka, Mr. Tetsuro Takeoka, +81-6-220-6690; fax +81-6-220-7763EDO Canada, Tom Laidlaw, 403-569-5400; fax 569-5499Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NGV ECOTRANS GROUPCardinal's Western Operations to Merge TodayWith Conversion Business of SoCal Gas UtilitySouthern California Gas and NGV Systems aremerging their NGV Ecotrans Technology vehicleconversion business with the western operationsof Michigan-based Cardinal Automotive forming theNGV Ecotrans Group effective today, January 1.     The Los Angeles-based Group has 100,000square feet of combined manufacturing space inand capacity for 30,000 NGV conversions a year.NGV Ecotrans GM Russ Reeder, 213-689-1973Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LNG at LAXRFP in Preparation for Permanent StationThe Los Angeles International Airport board hasauthorized LAX to float a request for proposalsfor a permanent liquefied and compressed naturalgas fueling station in support of LAX vehicles.     The turnkey LNG/CNG fueling station onairport property near the intersection ofImperial Highway and Main Street will also beavailable to airport and other fleet operators,and to the public.     LAX has 14 LNG-powered shuttle buses, witheight more expected for delivery beginning inJanuary 1996. The Airports department alsooperates 33 CNG-powered utility trucks, pickuptrucks and sedans.     LNG fuel for the LAX buses is currentlysupplied by a temporary station. CNG comes from aSouthern California Gas station on UnitedAirlines' leasehold.     The new station "will help the departmentmeet California's State Implementation Plan as itapplies to civil airports, which is expected tomirror the federal plan that calls for a majorshift to low-emission vehicles," said executivedirector John Driscoll.LAX, Dave Waldner, 310-646-3263, ext 19; fax 310-215-5399Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FIRST-EVER REBATEPayment to New York, New Jersey PortFor Three New Vans and a ConversionNew Jersey's Public Service Electric & Gas hasdetermined its first natural gas vehicle rebate,a payment of $1,000 per vehicle for four NGVsplaced in service by the Port Authority of NewYork and New Jersey.     The Port has bought three new Chrysler NGVminivans and converted an existing jeep tonatural gas fuel. "The Port Authority's move tonatural gas vehicles is a good business decisionthat will eventually save us money by cuttingmaintenance and fuel costs," says Port projectmanager Sal D'Angelo. The Port will put more NGVsin service this year.     The Port uses New Jersey's first public-access CNG station, a facility put in servicenear the Holland Tunnel to New York City as ajoint venture of PSE&G and Shell (F&F, May 15,1995).     The PSE&G rebate will be available throughAugust 1997.Port, Mr. Sal D'Angelo, 201-216-2368; fax 201-216-2355PSG&E, Jorge Lopez, 201-912-3214; fax 201-379-4369Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HEAVY HALF DOZEN?Big Rigs May Make Big Year for LNGHalf a Dozen Truckmakers Offer NGVsThe current excise tax situation has made foruncertainty (see page 1), but big-rig trucksrepresent one alternative fuel vehicle marketthat may not be dependent on forced fleet buys orfuel subsidies, as operators eye economicadvantages to clean-burning liquefied natural gasfuel.     Nigh-on half a dozen U.S. manufacturers areexpected to offer dedicated natural gas-poweredmedium- and heavy-duty trucks for model year1996.     They include Volvo GM, Freightliner, theaffiliates Kenworth and Peterbilt, and possiblyNavistar. The vehicles will be outfitted withnatural gas engines from Navistar, Cummins andDetroit Diesel.'Products that Have Been Missing'     "These new vehicles will give customers thenatural gas products that have been missing fromour portfolio and will play a pivotal role inboosting NGV industry efforts to moreaggressively target high-fuel-use, medium- andheavy-duty markets," said Gas Research Instituteproduct manager Dan Kincaid.     "The availability of OEM-produced trucks isa significant development for GRI and the gasindustry, which has cofunded development of NGVengines," Kincaid said in a GRI statement.     But "Vehicle manufacturers believe thesuccess of these trucks will depend on definitivelegislation, customer demand, cost acceptance andfueling infrastructure," the GRI man cautioned.NAVISTARNavistar, for one, says it's too early to promiseNGVs or natural gas engines for 1996 due to anabsence of federal standards on fuel systems,particularly for liquefied natural gas. TheChicago-based company has worked with DetroitDiesel on modification of Navistar's T444E enginefor natural gas, but says its Class 6-7 Model4700 truck with a T444NG powerplant isn't quiteready for market. "Right now it's only availablewith the T444E clean diesel," says a Navistarspokesman. "We take a very conservativeapproach," says another company source.     The T444 is available for natural gasoperation through DDC as the 30G engine.     [Navistar is also working with otheralternative fuels, including dimethyl ether,which has been tested in a T444E engine andaccording to Navistar "can eliminate exhaustsmoke and greatly reduce other exhaust pollutantswhile reducing engine noise. Navistar is workingDME with Amoco and with Haldor Topsoe of Denmarkand AVL List of Germany. Topsoe has a process formaking DME from natural gas, coal, or renewables,Navistar says.]Navistar, Bob Carso or Archie Massicotte, 708-865-3484; fax 708-865-3330KENWORTHKenworth Truck Company (Kirkland, Wash.) has theClass 8 Model T800 and the Class 7 prototype T300configured for LNG operation. "After the first ofthe year is when we really expect to make anintroduction," says Kenworth's Evan Campbell.Kenworth, Evan Campbell, 206-828-5758; fax 206-828-5099PETERBILTPeterbilt (Denton, Texas) offers the Model 320and Model 330 trucks with Cummins L10G and B5.9Gengines for LNG operation.Peterbilt, Scott Pearson, 817-591-4239; fax 817-591-4091VOLVO GMGreensboro, N.C.-based Volvo GM Heavy Truck isoffering a refuse hauler, the "Xpeditor," with aCummins L10-300G natural gas engine available inLNG and CNG versions. The NGV Xpeditor wasunveiled in mid-1995 making "Volvo GM Heavy Truckthe first Class 8 truck manufacturer to offernatural gas engines as a factory option."Volvo GM, Dave Schrader, 910-393-2847; fax 393-2277FREIGHTLINERFreightliner Corporation of Portland, Ore. alsounveiled a natural gas-powered vehicle in mid-1995: the FL 60 business class truck with aCummins B5.9G (5.9-liter) engine.     The company now offers an even wider rangeof LNG-powered trucks, including the Class 5FL50, the Class 7 FL70, and the Class 8 FL106,FLD112, FLD112SD, FLD120, and FLD120SD models.     Engine options include the Cummins B5.9G andL10G and the 50G and 60G from Detroit Diesel.     Freightliner Custom Chassis (Gaffney, S.C.)offers the Class 3 Model MT-12FNG with a Hercules3.7-liter or Cummins B5.9G engine.     The MT-12FNG is designed for the postalservice, which according to GRI may buy as manyas 500 of the CNG-powered units this fiscal year.Freightliner, Bill Thomas, 503-735-8896Freightliner Custom Chassis, 803-488-8604CUMMINSBesides the well known L10G and B5.9G, Cumminslate last year promoted its first 8.9-liternatural gas-fueled engine, the C8.3G, withavailability this first quarter of 1996. The 250-horsepower C8.3G is available with torque ratingsof 660 and 750 pound-feet at 1,400 rpm. The six-cylinder engine is aimed at bus and truckmarkets.Cummins, Gary Farrell, 812-377-3747; fax 377-3082Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CLEAN FUEL CORRIDORDiverse Groups Team in CaliforniaFor Clean Vehicle Fueling FacilitiesA California consortium is claiming to be thefirst in the nation to offer private motorists aClean Fuels Corridor stretching across two bigsouthern counties: San Bernadino and Riverside.     Fuels covered at 15 sites include CNG andLNG, as well as electric vehicle charging.     New natural gas fueling sites in Ontario,Riverside, Temecula and Joshua Tree willsupplement some 77 CNG sites, about half of thempublic, currently in service in SouthernCalifornia.     Consortium members include SouthernCalifornia Gas, Southern California Edison,United Parcel Service and local governments.     The project has just under $750,000 invehicle registration funds and nearly $1.2million from private parties including consortiummembers, Applied LNG Technologies, Mesa Pacific,Amendt Oil and Lapis Energy.SoCal Gas (communications) Denise King, 213-244-3030; fax 213-244-8253Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Ford has turned out the first two prototypeFord has turned out the first two prototypeRanger pickup gliders from its assembly line inEdison, N.J. "The purpose of building theseprototypes was to learn how to move a glider mostefficiently through an assembly plant withoutdisrupting normal production," Ford EV marketingmanager Mike McCabe said in a statement. TDMWorldwide Conversions is building a plant inKansas for the installation of electric drives inthe trucks (F&F, October 30). TDM is shooting forQualified Vehicle Modifier status, meaning thatFord will warranty EV trucks from the Kansasplant. TDM has not yet gotten the QVM nod because"until that plant is built, Ford can't audit it,"says TDM project manager Bill Coppola. He notesthat TDM has already secured QVM status for FordNGV conversions. "We've seen the drill," Coppolatold F&F. "We've done it." TDM, Bill Coppola,810-673-6557; fax 673-2337.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996German postal authorities have kicked off theirGerman postal authorities have kicked off theirtest of the zinc-air battery system from Israel'sElectric Fuel, taking delivery last month of halfa dozen EVs and staging a ribbon-cutting ceremonyfor Electric Fuel's zinc regeneration facility inBremen. The Electric Fuel system uses replaceablezinc cassettes in lieu of conventional batterycharging. The test by Deutsche Post, the largestmail service in Europe, will involve 64 vehicles,among them Mercedes-Benz MB410E vans and CorsaCombo pickups from GM Opel. Three of each havenow been delivered. The German postal andtelephone companies may eventually purchase25,000 and 15,000 EVs each, Electric Fuel says.Electric Fuel (Jerusalem) +972-2-322-484; fax+972-2-322-252. Electric Fuel (New York), 212-230-2172; fax 212-230-2173.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Got a breakthrough? A better widget, perhaps? HowGot a breakthrough? A better widget, perhaps? Howabout "the world's most efficient ultra-capacitance fiber nickel metal electric chassisflywheel CNG cylinder"? A photosatifor? Or even abetter Johnson rod? Calstart's Project hatcherywants to hear from you. "Project Hatchery is anincubator for small businesses with big ideas,"the California alternative transportationconsortium says. Project Hatchery promises accessto affordable office and prototype fabricationspace (including computer design systems),marketing via the Internet, help with trackingdown funding sources, and a "knowledge base of140+ private and public participants."Calstart/Project Hatchery, Glen Perry, 818-565-5600; fax 818-565-5610.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Toyota has picked a 1,100-acre site in Princeton,Toyota has picked a 1,100-acre site in Princeton,Ind. -- 21 miles north of Evansville -- as thelocation for its fourth North American vehicleassembly plant. Workers at the new $700-millionfacility are to begin building the T100 truck,which is currently produced in Japan, in the fallof 1998. The Princeton plant will employapproximately 1,300 people turning out 100,000vehicles a year. The T100 will use a new V8engine. Toyota Motor Corporate Services of NorthAmerica, 212-223-0303.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996The city of Palm Desert, Calif. and the SunLineThe city of Palm Desert, Calif. and the SunLineTransit Agency in Thousand Palms have inaugurateda zero-emission electric bus service. The"Shopper Hopper" connects various Palm Desertshopping districts. The Specialty VehicleManufacturing Corporation bus employs lead-acidbatteries. SunLine, Dick Cromwell, 619-343-3456;fax 619-343-1986.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Nevada's De Vaux Power is promoting the "engineNevada's De Vaux Power is promoting the "enginetechnology breakthrough of the century," aninternal combustion powerplant configured toproduce zero emissions, without pollutioncontrols, "by virtue of the amount of dwell weare able to induce." Today's conventional enginesare based on a faulty engineering premise, DeVaux says. Thomas Denner, 702-565-4829; fax same.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Kentucky's Bachman NGV has a contract to convertKentucky's Bachman NGV has a contract to convert47 vehicles at Travis Air Force Base inCalifornia from gasoline to CNG-gasoline bi-fueloperation. The deal marks Bachman's second AirForce conversion job (F&F, October 16). Bachmanalso has a contract to convert 10 vehicles at theUniversity of Southern Mississippi atHattiesburg. Bachman, Bill Calvert, 502-493-9866;fax 502-495-2863.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-6IA059-000325-B004-99http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey09.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231752 text/html 17485HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:16:03 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:50 GMTContent-length: 17298Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey09.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS DAILY via NewsNet MAY 31, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SunShine gets FERC nod to enter Florida market (192 words) NGSA says power study skims over gas benefits (456 words) May, June spot prices stay weak in light trading (249 words) June market leaves many unanswered questions (375 words) Texaco to cut staff at Henry Plant (106 words) Midcoast to build New York pipeline (131 words) TransCanada forms Mexican partnership (189 words) Midcoast to build New York pipeline (106 words) Industry, FERC agree to keep recovery mechanism (351 words) Coastal to sell Argentine operations (92 words) CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994SunShine gets FERC nod to enter Florida market     SunShine Interstate Transmission has received FERC's blessingto build a 145-mile natural gas pipeline into Florida that willinterconnect with a proposed 570-mile intrastate pipeline to bebuilt by its affiliate.     The commission also approved the pipeline's levelized rates. Therates are based on the ultimate capacity of the project, even thoughit will be at only half of its proposed capacity for three years. Sincethe pipeline will be charging only the base rate, the lack ofcapacity for the first few years will result in under-recovery of itslevelized cost of service. FERC will allow SunShine to spread therecovery of the under-recovered costs over the life of the project.     This rate design will provide new pipelines with the opportunityto compete with already established pipelines, CommissionerDonald Santa said. "It's a way to avoid the potentially time-consuming debate on whether future expansion costs should berolled-in or incremental," he added.     The pipeline will serve customers on the Florida peninsula, anarea that  has only one established interstate pipeline, Florida GasTransmission. The increased competition will benefit the Floridaconsumers, Commissioner James Hoecker added.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994NGSA says power study skims over gas benefits     The Natural Gas Supply Assn. (NGSA) has challenged thefindings in a report by a coal industry-backed group that finds coalas the fuel of choice for the next century's new baseload electricitygeneration.     The study "fails to factor in the full costs of technologies thatwould make coal's exhaust stream as clean as gas exhaust andassumes that the current bias in environmental regulations willcontinue to permit higher pollution levels from coal than from gas,"said Bruce Craig, NGSA's director of environmental affairs.     Energy Ventures Analysis prepared the study, "Fuel Choice forNew Electric Generating Capacity in the Next Century: Coal orNatural Gas," for the Center for Energy and Economic Development,a coalition of coal companies and railroads. The report finds thatwhile natural gas-based technologies are the economical choice fornew peaking load power plant capacity, coal is the cost-effectivefuel of choice for baseload capacity units, says a recent study byEnergy Ventures Analysis.     The report determines that natural gas technologies have lowercapital and nonfuel operating costs than coal technologies, but coal-based technologies "offer a significant delivered fuel priceadvantage over its natural gas-based competitors to virtually anypower plant location." For baseload units, fuel costs are the largestelement of operating costs, making coal the most cost-effective fuelof choice, the study says.     Craig countered, "There's no need to make 'either-or' judgementsabout fueling future electricity generation. Gas, oil and coal will allplay an important role." He added that the energy industry shouldfocus on policies that create market incentives for higherefficiency, environmental stewardship and new technologies to keepthis country competitive.     The overall goal, Craig said, should be that consumers get thebest package of fuel, jobs and environmental benefits at the lowestcost.     The study says one reason coal is less expensive is because itsdomestic supply is greater than the natural gas supply. At currentrates of consumption, the United States has about a 250-yearsupply of recoverable coal reserves, which can be commerciallydeveloped at current price levels, Energy Ventures Analysisdetermines. For natural gas, reserves are more limited, possibly a50-year supply, and are increasingly costly to develop, the studysays.     However, NGSA said the study underestimates natural gasreserves and fails to factor in the growing trend toward competitionin the electricity market.     "The study inappropriately assumes that those working in theelectric generating field do not read market signals correctly anddo not use fuel supply, technology or market instruments that otherindustries use," Craig noted.     For an abstract or full text copy of the study, call the Center forEnergy and Economic Development office in Washington at 202-628-5627.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994May, June spot prices stay weak in light trading     Many in the gas industry began stretching the three-day holidayweekend into four days by taking off all or part of last Friday, sotrading was light for both May and June supplies.     May prices in South Louisiana changed little for deals doneFriday morning, but prices in South Texas dropped into the mid- tohigh-$1.50s into Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL), KochGateway Pipeline, Tennessee Gas Pipeline and Trunkline Gas.     Very few deals were reported done Friday for June, but therewere no signs of a recovery in spot prices. One source reported asale into Texas Gas Transmission (TGT) in zone SL at $1.71. The gasis baseloaded from Thursday through the rest of the month.     All three nuclear plants operated by Arizona Public Service arescheduled to be operating by tomorrow, but they will run at lessthan full capacity for the rest of the year.     Palo Verde Unit 3, which has been down for refueling, isscheduled to start up tomorrow. All three of Palo Verde's 1,270 MWplants will then be generating electricity.     But the units won't run any higher than 86% of capacity becauseof potential problems with the tubes that carry steam up throughthe boilers. The steam turns turbines to generate electricity. Smallcracks have appeared in the tubes, said a source at the utility.     During periods of peak electrical demand, the utility will burnnatural gas to generate electricity or buy power from othercompanies, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994June market leaves many unanswered questions     A lot of questions will begin to be answered today and tomorrow,but weather will set the tone for prices throughout the month.     How much gas was sold swing? How many buyers, particularlythe big guys, the LDCs, held off buying until after the first of themonth? How will the nuclear plants near Houston and Dallasperform after being restarted?     Not to mention shut-ins. Is gas being shut in because of price orbecause of no market? Will producers voluntarily shut in enoughgas to have an impact on prices? And lastly, is it ever going to gethot and muggy in Texas?     Beginning with the last question, a couple of sources said TUElectric in the Dallas area is expecting temperatures in NorthTexas to move into the 90s this week and is asking suppliers to beprepared to ship gas. Temperatures in Oklahoma, likewise, areexpected to move into the 90s today, if not yesterday.     TU Electric also operates the Comanche Peak nuclear plant whereUnit Two is out of service to repair cracked welds. A two-weekdelay in the restart date has been penciled in, indicating a restartaround mid-June.     As reported, TU burns nuclear and lignite as baseload and usesgas for peaking needs. But the lignite units are running at maximumlevels now, said one source, which is why TU is preparing to call ongas if temperatures rise.     Unit Two at the South Texas Nuclear Plant near Houston wasrunning at 12% of capacity last Friday morning and was expected toput electricity onto the grid system on Sunday or yesterday. Itcould be at 100% of capacity in the first or second week this month.     Only one June deal was reported on Friday, a large package atthe Katy Interchange on an intrastate pipeline at $1.65, down apenny on the low end from Thursday's range of $1.66-70.     May intrastate prices fell below $1.60 in South Texas and below$1.40 in West Texas. Producers had little fight left in them toquibble over a few pennies for a period of a few days. They wantedgas to flow and were afraid there'd be no market at all over thelight-demand holiday weekend.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Texaco to cut staff at Henry Plant     Texaco will eliminate 32 of 70 jobs at its Henry Plant, nearErath, La., and the Henry Hub, by the end of the year, the companytold Gas Daily.     The reduction in the workforce is required because of changingoperations at the facility, a spokesperson said. Texaco will nolonger be processing liquids at the plant.     The company said liquids extraction is unprofitable in thecurrent low-price environment for natural gas liquids. In addition,gas delivered to the hub usually does not need processing.     Operations at the hub itself are not affected, said Jagit Yadov,president of Texaco's Sabine Pipeline, operator of the Henry Hub.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Midcoast to build New York pipeline     Midcoast Energy Resources is staking out new turf, constructinga natural gas pipeline in Bethlehem, N.Y., to serve the Owens-Corning Del Mar plant.     This 3 million cf system will be the first New York project forMidcoast, a Corpus Christi, Texas-based company that hasprimarily served industrial end-users in the Midwest and GulfCoast.     The system is slated for completion by June 30, and will includeinterconnect facilities with an existing pipeline owned byTennessee Gas Pipeline.     "Midcoast continues to pursue significant opportunities toprovide gas transportation services to industrial customers atsubstantial discounts from their present suppliers," MidcoastPresident Dan Tutcher said.     Fiscal year 1993 revenues for publicly held Midcoast were about$16 million. Midcoast also serves the Owens Corning FiberglassPlant in Kansas City, Kansas.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994TransCanada forms Mexican partnership     TransCanada PipeLines and Corporacion Gutsa, one of Mexico'sleading construction companies, have signed a letter ofunderstanding for joint efforts in a variety of projects in Mexico.     "We intend to work together with Gutsa in the areas of powergeneration facilities and the supply, distribution andcommercialization of natural gas in Mexico," said Gerald Maier,TransCanada's chairman.     The Mexican ambassador to Canada, Sandra Fuentes-Berain, saidthe partnership is evidence of the success of the North AmericanFree Trade Agreement.     TransCanada also has revised its 1995-96 facilities constructionapplication to the Canadian National Energy Board (NEB). Thepipeline is seeking approval to build 16.8 miles of line in Ontarioand Manitoba and a 28 MW compressor in Ontario.     This is in addition to the 17.3 miles of line and 42.3 MW ofcompression included in the earlier application. Total cost of allthe projects is estimated at C$189.3 million.     If approved by the NEB, TransCanada plans to begin constructionin 1995 and put the facilities into service by Nov. 1 next year.     The new facilities would add 88.8 million cfd of firm, long-haulcapacity to the pipeline.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Midcoast to build New York pipeline     Midcoast Energy Resources is staking out new turf, constructinga natural gas pipeline in Bethlehem, N.Y., to serve the Owens-Corning Del Mar plant.     This 3 million cf system will be the first New York project forMidcoast, a Corpus Christi, Texas-based company that hasprimarily served industrial end-users in the Midwest and GulfCoast.     The system is slated for completion by June 30, and will includeinterconnect facilities with an existing pipeline owned byTennessee Gas Pipeline.     Fiscal year 1993 revenues for publicly held Midcoast were about$16 million. Midcoast also serves an Owens Corning FiberglassPlant in Kansas City, Kansas. LMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Industry, FERC agree to keep recovery mechanism     Industry and FERC apparently see eye-to-eye about keepingintact the pricing differential mechanism that pipelines use torecover gas supply realignment (GSR) costs.     Industry participants assembled at a technical conference inWashington last week to voice general approval of the recoverymechanism. FERC commissioners seemed to agree that the two-yearrecovery program should not be altered.     Order 636 required pipelines to reform their contracts tomarket levels or terminate them altogether. The rule provided forrecovery of the costs associated with realigning the bundled-salescontracts. The commission determined last year, in various cases,that it would permit pipelines to collect the difference between themarket price and the price established in their contracts as arecovery mechanism for the GSR costs. The mechanism has been inplace for only 11 months of its proposed two-year period.     Customer complaints that pipelines were taking advantage of thepricing mechanism prompted the commission to take a look at theGSR recovery option, despite Commissioner Donald Santa's concernthat the commission was considering a "mid-stream change." Thecustomers were concerned that pipelines were getting windfallprofits through the mechanism.     But many of the complaints were squelched before theconference took place, after pipelines helped their customersrealize that the pricing differential recoveries would cost them lessthan federally ordered buyouts of the contracts.      Many of thecustomers simply didn't realize the trade-offs that the pipelineshave made on their costs, a representative of the Natural Gas SupplyAssn (NGSA) said. Some pipelines have eaten many of theirtransition costs, the representative added.     Nicholas Bush, president of NGSA, said the pricing differentialcosts are part of larger compromise agreements negotiated betweenpipelines and their customers. "Altering these compromises wouldupset the balance of interests achieved in those original settlementagreements," he said. "A change in course before the expiration ofthis limited period, as some have suggested doing, would send aconfusing signal."     Many of the pipelines noted in comments on the issue that mostof their contracts would be terminated by the end of the two-yearperiod.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Coastal to sell Argentine operations     Coastal is selling its 23.33% interest in five producing oil andnatural gas fields and related facilities in Tierra del Fuegoprovince of Argentina for $68 million plus contingentconsiderations.     The sale will be to other joint-interest owners in the venture,Coastal said. The transaction is subject to certain approvals andwill be completed next month.     "This sale gives Coastal an attractive return on its initialinvestment," said David Arledge, Coastal's president and COO. "Atthe same time, it provides additional funds for other opportunitiesthe company currently has under review."Back to Headline List WT03-B35-7IA059-000325-B004-145http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey08.html 205.156.212.5 19970114231910 text/html 85776HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:16:42 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:49 GMTContent-length: 85589Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey08.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNet NOVEMBER 8, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Intrastate Price Survey (97 words) Anadarko buys Hugoton reserves (86 words) MONTHLY CONTRACT INDEX (485 words) WEEKLY PRICE SURVEY (622 words) NYMEX GAS FUTURES TRADING (179 words) PG&E pursues first regional electronic hub (794 words) Buyers position themselves for cold weekend (705 words) First day of Order 636 operation seen as smooth (591 words) Centran creditors could be repaid this year (433 words) Indiana utility fights 20-year cap (198 words) SoCal gets active in refinancing (108 words) Gulf Coast indexes up 5-10 cents for November (224 words) FERC commissioners get up to speed on GISB (364 words) Mining company doesn't get rights (451 words) Curtis nominated by president (184 words) Suncor discovers new fields (91 words) LIG moves offices in Houston (93 words) Amoco sets up trading room in Houston (282 words) Sluggish demand expected to slow 1993 growth (469 words) U.S. Natural Gas Supply and Demand -- 1993 Forecast Producers target SoCal fee (366 words) Arcadian, Southern agree to settle on bypass (482 words) U.S. attorney seeks court order against Iroquois (529 words) Santa cites signficance of gathering in policy (329 words) Canada eyes NYMEX pricing (319 words) DOE outlines status of energy law (392 words) EBB hooks up traders at Alberta's AECO C hub. (343 words) Edisto to focus on domestic reserves (257 words) Oklahoma sets proration meetings (102 words) Washington Energy hawks E&P unit (213 words) Fires disrupt SoCal service (71 words) New York project gets permits (83 words) El Paso criticizes comments made about case (343 words) Williams introduces electronic gas trading system (346 words) Columbia finds new LNG partner (217 words) People (146 words) Order 636 didn't startle hedgers (287 words) CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Intrastate Price Survey         Gas Daily's survey reflectswhat was paid most recently for 1million cfd or more on a dry $ permillion btu basis into pipelines for30-day contracts.                  Oct.Delivery         Index         Oct.         Nov.TexasValero            1.84         2.05-06       1.96-2.01MidCon Texas      1.92         1.96-97         2.02-04Houston Pipe Line 1.92         2.06-08         2.00-05Lone Star         1.86         1.82-87         1.90-94Houston Ship Channel 2.04      2.00-05         2.08-13Katy              1.96         2.08-12         2.06-09OklahomaTransok           1.67         1.64-69         1.70-75Enogex            1.74         1.70-75         1.75-80LouisianaIntrastates (combined) 2.03    2.04-06         2.08-13Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Anadarko buys Hugoton reserves         Anadarko Petroleum has signedan agreement to purchase deep producingoil and gas properties in the Hugotonarea of southwest Kansas.         Anadarko would not say who itwas purchasing the properties frombecause of an agreement with theoperator, but the $20 million deal isexpected to close by June 15. About 60%of the reserves are crude oil.         Anadarko expects average netproduction of about 1.4 million cfd ofgas and about 500 barrels of oil perday, to be marketed under short-termcontracts.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993MONTHLY CONTRACT INDEX     Monthly contract index prices areweighted average costs of gas based onvolumes and prices for spot deals doneduring the week before pipelinenomination days. Prices are in $ permillion Btu on a dry basis.                    November     OctoberDelivery             index       change      indexTexas--West WahaEl Paso               1.80         --         1.80Transwestern          1.79         -1         1.81East Texas--Carthage areaNGPL (G8)             2.00         +7         1.93Tennessee             2.00         +12        1.88Texas Eastern (ETX)   2.07         +8         1.99Texas Gas             2.07         +9         1.98Koch Gateway (United) 2.02        +16         1.86East--Houston--KatyFlorida Gas           2.06         --         2.06NGPL G4               2.00         +7         1.93Tennessee             2.00         +12        1.88Texas Eastern (STX)   2.05         +7         1.98Transco Z2 St. 45     2.12         +7         2.05Trunkline             2.06         +8         1.98North--Texas PanhandleANR                   1.90         -1         1.91KN header             1.86         -1         1.87NGPL A8ii             1.88         -1         1.89Northern              1.81         +3         1.78PEPL                  1.90         -1         1.91Transwestern          1.77         -1         1.78South--Corpus ChristiFlorida Gas           2.05         +1         2.04NGPL G1               1.99         +6         1.93Tennessee             2.00         +12        1.88Texas Eastern (STX)   2.04         +6         1.98Transco Z1 St. 30     2.09         +6         2.03Trunkline             2.05         +10        1.95Koch Gateway (United) 1.95         +9         1.86Louisiana--Onshore SouthANR                   2.09         +3         2.06Columbia              2.11         +7         2.04FGT Z1                2.06         --         2.06  Z2                  2.11         +3         2.08  Z3                  2.13         +2         2.11Henry Hub             2.14         +7         2.07HIOS                  2.08         +4         2.04NGPL G5               2.07         +10        1.97Sonat                 2.05         +10        1.95Tennessee             2.03         +10        1.93Texas Eastern (WLA)   2.08         +5         2.03Texas Eastern (ELA)   2.10         +6         2.04Texas Gas SL          2.08         +11        1.97Transco  Z3, St. 50, 62, 65  2.16         +5         2.11  Z4, St. 85          2.14         +4         2.10Trunkline             2.08         +9         1.99Koch Gateway (United) 2.00         +9         1.91OklahomaANR                   1.90         -1         1.91Arkla Transm.         1.97         +6         1.91El Paso               1.79         --         1.79NGPL A9               1.87         -1         1.88Northern              1.81         +3         1.78ONG                   1.88         +2         1.86PEPL                  1.90         -1         1.91Williams              1.83         -1         1.84New Mexico--San Juan BasinEl Paso               1.77         --         1.77NW (Ignacio plant)    1.72         -1         1.73Transw. SJ            1.78         -1         1.79Transw. Central (St. 8)* 1.81      -1         1.82RockiesCIG (N. syst)         1.72         -2         1.74D-J Basin             1.72         --         1.72Kern River            1.79         +1         1.78KN mainline           1.73         -3         1.76Northwest (U.S. gas)  1.73         -3         1.76Questar               1.71         -1         1.72Canadian GasIroquois              2.24         +5         2.19NW-Sumas              1.79         +7         1.72NOVA                 C2.18         +41       C1.77PGT (Kingsgate)       1.82         --          --Tenn. (Niagara)       2.32         +15         2.17Viking (Emerson)      1.85         +13         1.72AppalachiaCNG                   2.37         +11         2.26OthersCal. border to utils  2.03         -13         2.16  to end-users        2.06         -11         2.17  Malin (via PGT)     2.08          --         --  Wheeler Ridge       2.06         -7          2.13Chicago (NGPL-LDCs)   2.29         +9          2.20KN mainline           1.73         -3          1.76Michigan  Con Pwr large       2.23         -2          2.25  MichCon large       2.24         -1          2.25Midwestern            2.21         +9          2.12MRT (Pryvl, La.)      2.09         +7          2.02MRT (West Leg)        2.06         +6          2.00Northern Border (Ven) 1.88         -1          1.89Northern (demarc)     1.88         -1          1.89Tex. Eastern (ETX) (Ark.) 2.07     +8          1.99*At the zone boundary.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993WEEKLY PRICE SURVEY         Extensive daily coverage byGas Markets Week's survey team reflectsprices last week for 5 million cfd drypackages on a Btu basis into thepipelines indicated for 30-daycontracts or less. Small packages arefor 1 million cfd or less. Changecolumn indicates changes from lastweek. Year-ago prices are reported inthe left column.November         11/1-11/5     11/1-11/4         Change      SmallDelivery         1992           1993                         PackagesTexas--West WahaEl Paso         2.15         1.96           +19 cents         1.98-2.00Transwestern    2.14         1.94           +16         1.96-98East Texas--Carthage areaNGPL (G8)       2.28         2.12           +14         2.14-16Tennessee       2.24         2.10           +13         2.12-14Texas E. ETX    2.26         2.17           +16         2.19-21Texas Gas       2.29         2.19           +16         2.21-23Koch Gateway (UGPL) 2.22     2.12           +19         2.14-16East--Houston--KatyFlorida Gas     2.22         2.20           +26         2.22-24NGPL G4         2.27         2.12           +14         2.14-18Tennessee       2.24         2.10           +13         2.12-14Texas E. STX    2.26         2.16           +16         2.18-20Transco Z2 St. 45  2.31      2.20           +18         2.22-24Trunkline       2.24         2.16           +22         2.18-20North-Texas PanhandleANR             2.11         1.96           +12         1.98-2.00KN header       2.00         1.92           +12         1.94-96NGPL A8ii       2.06         1.94           +11         1.96-98Northern        2.05         1.87           +14         1.89-91PEPL            2.13         1.97           +6         1.99-2.01Transwestern    2.08         1.88           +13         1.90-92South--Corpus ChristiFlorida Gas     2.28         2.17           +24         2.19-21NGPL G1         2.25         2.12           +14         2.14-16Tennessee       2.22         2.10           +13         2.12-14Texas E. STX    2.26         2.16           +16         2.18-20Transco Z1 St 30 2.28        2.18           +18         2.20-22Trunkline       2.24         2.16           +22         2.18-20Koch Gateway (UGPL) 2.22     2.13           +20         2.15-17Louisiana--Onshore SouthANR             2.27         2.14           +14         2.16-18Columbia        2.31         2.23           +18         2.25-27FGT Z1          2.29         2.20           +26         2.22-24    Z2          2.32         2.23           +26         2.25-27    Z3          2.35         2.26           +27         2.28-30Henry Hub       2.34         2.26           +18         2.28-30HIOS            2.21         2.13           +15         2.15-17NGPL G5         2.30         2.17           +16         2.19-21Sonat           2.28         2.12           +19         2.14-16Tennessee       2.26         2.13           +12         2.15-17Texas E. WLA    2.26         2.22           +17         2.24-26Texas E. ELA    2.28         2.24           +17         2.26-28Texas Gas       2.28         2.23           +21         2.25-27Transco  Z3, St 50, 62, 65  2.32    2.25           +13         2.27-29  Z4            2.35         2.26           +12         2.28-30Trunkline       2.23         2.18           +20         2.20-22Koch Gateway (UGPL) 2.23     2.16           +20         2.18-20OklahomaANR             2.11         1.96           +12         1.98-2.00Arkla Transm.   2.02         2.04           +13         2.06-08El Paso         2.13         1.95           +19         1.97-99NGPL A9         2.04         1.93           +11         1.95-97Northern        2.05         1.87           +14         1.89-91ONG             2.01         1.95           +15         1.97-99PEPL            2.13         1.97           +6          1.99-2.01Williams        1.97         1.75           +2          1.77-79New Mexico--San Juan BasinEl Paso         2.15         1.94           +18         1.96-98NW (Ignacio plant)  --       1.75           +19         1.77-79Transw. SJ      2.16         1.94           +18         1.93-98Transw. central* 2.17        1.95           +14         1.97-99RockiesCIG (N.syst)    1.81         1.75           +19         1.77-79D-J Basin       1.83         1.75           +20         1.75-77Kern River      1.85         1.82           +17         1.84-86KN Mainline     1.78         1.70           +14         1.72-74Northwest       1.78         1.74           +11         1.76-78Questar         1.68         1.74           +11         1.76-78Canadian GasIroquois         --          2.23           +12         2.25-27NW-Sumas        1.48         1.78           +21         1.80-82NOVA           C1.44         C2.18          +43         C2.20-22Tenn. (Niagara) 2.63         2.31           +14         2.33-35Viking (Emerson) 2.66        1.87           +15         1.89-91AppalachiaCNG             2.92         2.42           +21         2.44-46Columbia        2.68         2.33           +13         2.35-37OthersChicago, LDCs, large end-users 2.47        2.44           +26         2.60-85KN mainline      1.78        1.70           +14         1.72-74Midwestern       2.39        2.36           +26         2.38-40MRT (Pryvl, La.) 2.29        2.14           +24         2.16-18MRT (West Leg)   2.26        2.12           +24         2.14-16Northern (Ventura) 2.18      1.98           +13         2.00-02Northern (demarc)  --        1.98           +13         2.00-02Tex. E. ETX (Ark.) 2.28      2.01           +6          2.03-05*At the zone boundary.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993NYMEX GAS FUTURES TRADING     This table shows the closingprices for active gas futures in thefive trading days before press time.The last column on the right shows theopen interest in each contract atpress time.                  OpenClosing Prices         Interest          10/29/93   11/1/93   11/2/93   11/3/93   11/4/93   11/4/93December  2.368      2.434     2.407     2.441     2.446     19,173January   2.382      2.435     2.412     2.434     2.436     17,593February  2.230      2.265     2.254     2.259     2.265      9,701March     2.150      2.172     2.167     2.169     2.178     10,653April     2.110      2.122     2.122     2.122     2.130      9,300May       2.107      2.117     2.117     2.114     2.125      6,310June      2.107      2.115     2.115     2.111     2.120      6,035July      2.107      2.112     2.112     2.108     2.115      6,361August    2.130      2.137     2.132     2.130     2.137      5,729September 2.152      2.162     2.154     2.155     2.157      4,611October   2.222      2.232     2.228     2.225     2.227      4,520November  2.322      2.338     2.328     2.330     2.337      6,826December  2.457      2.482     2.468     2.474     2.486      7,564January   2.467      2.487     2.473     2.479     2.491      3,712February  2.327      2.337     2.323     2.329     2.341      2,418March     2.260      2.262     2.248     2.252     2.264      1,783April     2.245      2.232     2.218     2.219     2.231      1,552May       2.238      2.232     2.218     2.219     2.236      210Source: NYMEXBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993PG&E pursues first regionalelectronic hub         SAN FRANCISCO -- In whatcould develop into the first regionalelectronic marketing hub, Pacific Gas &Electric (PG&E) is pursuing thedevelopment of an electronic energymarketplace (EEM) by as early as 1996that would allow all segments of theindustry from Alberta to the Southwestto come together and conduct businesson one electronic system.         "It's in the conceptualizationstage," Kenneth Hamkik, PG&E's directorof strategic planning, told Gas MarketsWeek. "That means what we're trying todo is look at the long term in relationto what's happening in 1993 with theimplementation of Order 636 and FERCtrying to push standardization," hesaid.         "It's a marketplace," saidHamik, "and a marketplace implies thatyou have multiple players that can cometogether on a single log-in, in thiscase, and have the ease of use to beable to do business in a number of newways," he said.         Along with Southern CaliforniaGas and San Diego Gas & Electric, whichboth agree with the concept of an EEM,according to Hamik, PG&E may bestarting what could be called a localdistribution company (LDC) revolutionin the gas industry.         Hamik said with all thecompetition going on in the pipelinesegment of the industry with theirproprietary electronic bulletin boards(EBBs), seeds are starting to be sownwith the LDCs to make sense of thechaos. He said LDCs want to get infront of EBB developments and form anelectronic marketplace where they getfull benefit of the businessopportunities out there.         He said it will probably haveto start on the regional level and "theLDCs should at least have a heavy-handed influence to help shape this."Hamik said pipelines won't be excludedin the process, but LDCs will benefitthe most from regional EEMs.         Hamik said the EEM will gobeyond the traditional posting systemsof EBBs, "Technology is not thebarrier," Hamik said, "There's a lot ofvendors that have already started topresent Windows-based products whereyou don't have to know boo aboutcomputers," he added.         And one of those vendorsworking on the West Coast EEM isInteractive Images, headed by theformer manager of Enron's informationsystems Robert Hadlow. Hadlow said withthe free market environment evolvingfrom Order 636, the West Coast naturalgas industry is going to need an EEMthat will serve as a common electronichub through which all segments of theindustry can conduct their dailybusiness. He said the system will needto be quick, easy to use and usersshould be able to work across multiplecompanies.         Hadlow said the EEM willdiffer from EBBs in that it willinitiate and approve transactionsthrough the entire daisy chain oftransactions on behalf of all thecustomers it serves. Through the EEM,Hadlow said, from producer to end-user,including futures and secondary marketplayers, all users will be able toconduct business across multiplecompanies as if those companies wereone.         He said the EEM will notreplace each industry segment'sinternal proprietary systems, but itwill replace their EBBs with a single,common system for the West Coastmarket.         PG&E's Hamik said the firstphase of developing the West Coast EEMwas identifying the landscape. "Whatare the baby steps or maybe even someof the big leaps we need to starttaking now in order to bridge thefuture with the present?"          Hamik said when developingthe scenario for the implementation ofthe EEM, PG&E looked at the banking andairline industries as an example of howfast the EEM could be developed.         He said one company can't makethe EEM happen. It will have to be aconsortium. "The marketplace has to beopen or it's not going to work," saidHamik. He said PG&E has talked to 20 to25 different companies and the answerit's received have been "yes" to theEEM, but opinions differ on how it'sgoing to happen. Hamik said somecompanies are "bearish" on the issue ofhaving the EEM up and running by theend of the decade.         "I don't get involved inprojects that don't happen within thedecade," was Hadlow's response. Hadlowalso said he is in the process ofestimating the cost of the project butno firm figures are available yet.         Hadlow proposed a possibletimeline for the implementation of theWest Coast EEM:         % 1994: PG&E's systemoperational for transactions;         % 1995: Multi-company accessavailable;         % 1996: Some cross-companytransaction capabilities;         % 1997: West Coast EEM fullyoperational;         % 1998: Links to otherregional EEMs achieved;         % 1999: North American EEMfully operational.         For more information on theWest Coast EEM, contact Hadlow at 415-885-0278.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Buyers position themselves forcold weekend         Prices were up everywhere onThursday -- Gulf Coast, Midcontinentand West Texas -- as buyers wanted toensure they had a supplier for what wasexpected to be a winter-like weekend.         Sellers limited sales to oneday only in most cases, playing formore time and more threats of chillingtemperatures to push prices up anotherfew pennies Friday through Monday.         The exception was West Texaswhere California buyers are having tocompete with gas going to Texasintrastate markets and gas headed northinto the mouth of the cold front.Buyers and sellers were negotiatingdeals for Saturday through Tuesday, buttalks were in a very narrow range forboth swing and four-day deals.         Sellers asked $2.02 and buyerstried to keep the lid on at $2.00 even,up from $1.91-95 Wednesday. A marketerbought a four-day deal at $2.00, whileanother marketer sold Saturday onlypackages at $2.00-01 and was working onwrapping up some four-day deals.         Gulf Coast Louisiana pricesranged from $2.32-34 for most salesinto Columbia, with a high of $2.35, upfrom a high of $2.30 the day before.There was only a penny spread betweenequity sales and marketers' resales,said one source.         Texas Eastern at EastLouisiana was $2.30-33. A marketer sold5 million at the Transco Station 65pooling point at $2.30. A marketerbought 50 million cfd on Texas Gas SLat $2.35, up from a high of $2.30 a dayearlier.         Midcontinent prices jumped to$2.05-09 on Panhandle Eastern forpurchases, while sales topped at $2.10.Wednesday's Panhandle gas topped out at$2.02. One buyer turned back Panhandlegas at $2.10, however, while a buyer onArkla resisted a $2.10 price and gotthe seller to come down to $2.07.Marketers bought a range of $2.06-09 onArkla, up from $2.04-08 the day before.         Houston Ship Channel pricesjumped to $2.28 Thursday up from $2.22-25 earlier in the week. Katy prices,which had moved up earlier, stayed flatat $2.20-24 Thursday, with one pricereported at $2.25.         South Texas prices ranged from$2.15-22 on Texas Eastern on the mid-Gulf Coast. A package of 10 million cfdwas sold into Koch Gateway in the samearea at $2.24, competing with pricesinto Houston Pipe Line at $2.19-20, upfrom a previous high of $2.17. Apackage in deep south Texas went for$2.15, and packages were was sold intoTejas Natural Gas near Agua Dulce at$2.17-18.         Meanwhile, Permian and SanJuan basin prices rebounded on at mid-week from a low Tuesday of at least$1.84 back to $1.90 and above forFriday deals.         Swing prices into El PasoNatural Gas had dropped last Monday andTuesday for a combination of reasons. APacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) gas-firedpower plant went down early in theweek, causing some loss of gas demand,although two smaller gas-fired unitswere brought on line by the utility,said a source, PG&E did cut 100million-140 million cfd.         The utility also picked upsome cheaper supplies out of Canada,displacing more supplies out of thePermian and San Juan. Another sourcesaid PG&E had to turn back 70 millionof baseload gas because of anoperational problem. SouthernCalifornia Gas (SoCal) also cut about80 million of swing last Monday, said asource.         But all that turned aroundWednesday, PG&E will be bringing thebig power plant back on line Saturdayand the baseload supplies will beflowing again tomorrow, said amarketer.         A California utility onWednesday was trying to buy gas in thePermian to flow Thursday throughTuesday at $1.90 into El Paso. Thecompany apparently was trying to do thefive-day deals to lock up suppliesbefore a predicted cold front wasexpected to swoop into Texas this pastweekend. A supplier said his company'sweather report had predictedtemperatures would drop to 35 inHouston Sunday.         "The smart seller will sellhis gas one day at a time starting at$1.90-92 for Friday," said a supplierlate last week. "Then he'll get betterprices for Saturday through Tuesday."RK/MR/DGBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993First day of Order 636 operationseen as smooth         A number of pipelinescompleted the transition to operatingunder Order 636 last week and officialswere generally saying "so far, sogood."         Officials at Koch GatewayPipeline, Pacific Gas Transmission,Mississippi River Transmission,Columbia Gas Transmission, ColumbiaGulf Transmission and NorthwestPipeline all said the transition wasgoing smoothly. Others scheduled toimplement Order 636 yesterday includedNorthern Natural Gas, Viking GasTransmission, Southern Natural Gas,Texas Gas Transmission and ANRPipeline.         "Considering the number of newservices and the magnitude of thechanges that we've had to implement,we've been pleased with the initialmonth's nominiations process andpleased with our first day operatingunder Order 636," said a Columbia Gasofficial. "We are experiencing thetypical minor bugs and startup problemsthat you would expect under such a bigchange, but there's nothing that we'reoverly concerned about, that we won'tbe able to work out," he added.                  Joe Pollard, directorof transportation services for GreatLakes, said the pipeline began itscapacity release and flexible receiptand delivery point programs today, andthere's been no major trouble. Therehave been a number of assignments,releases and conversions as part of thetransition, but everything has gonesmoothly, he added.         Pacific Gas Transmission (PGT)had the fullest plate yesterday, as itbegan operations under Order 636 andbegan transporting expansion volumes.According to a spokesperson, thepipeline also started its electronicbulletin board and had its firstcapacity releases.         The expansion allows PGT totransport more than 2.4 billion cfd tothe Pacific Northwest and California.Total PGT volumes were running about1.6 billion cfd yesterday, and thecontracted expansion volumes of about900 million cfd were about 70% full,the spokesperson said. About 340million cfd of the total system volumeswere moving under interruptiblecontracts, he added.         "We're very pleased to havereached our goal on schedule," saidStephen Reynolds, PGT president andCEO. "Getting from blueprints toreality on a project of this magnituderequired an incredible amount ofgroundwork and follow-through."         On a related note, Alberta &Southern Gas ceased buying and sellinggas yesterday after more than 30 years.Alberta & Southern transported about9.5 trillion cf of gas through a long-term contract with PGT to California.         San Diego Gas & Electricreported no problems so far early lastweek getting its first volumes from thePGT expansion.         San Diego is getting about 54million cfd of gas off the expandedline from four Calgary suppliers: BowValley Industries, Canadian HunterMarketing, Summit Resources and HuskyOil Operations.         The contracts range from eightto 11 years, with prices indexed to themarket. According to SDG&E's latest 10-K, future minimum payments under theCanadian deals are forecast to be $6million in 1993. $36 million in 199,$38 million in 1995, $40 million in1996, $42 million in 1997 and $281million thereafter.         For the remainder of its spotgas for November, San Diego receivedmore than 180 bids from 45 companiesfor a total 1.8 billion cfd.         The utility accepted 15 bidsfrom 11 companies for a total of about160 million cfd. About 85 million ofthat came from the San Juan Basin on ElPaso Natural Gas, 27 million was boughtinto Transwestern Pipeline in thePermian Basin and the central zone atstation 8. Another 48 million wasbought at the border, and 10 millioncfd of spot gas came from Canada.         As of the end of October, SanDiego's storage allotments were full,the buyers added.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Centran creditors could be repaidthis year         The old Centran has a newname, a new parent and a new balancesheet, and creditors of theMinneapolis-based marketer might bepaid part of what they are owed by theend of the year.         Northern States Power (NSP)christened the marketer "Cenergy" latelast month after acquiring most of theassets Oct. 1. Cenergy "has had capitalinfused" by the new parent, explainedVice President Bruce Hoffarber, butotherwise has its own relationship withregional bank Norwest.         It appears the financing ofCenergy will have to be separate fromits parent. In general, publicutilities in Minnesota are not allowedto finance their unregulatedsubsidiaries, explained Bob Harding, arates analyst at the state PublicUtility Commission.         NSP's creation of Cenergy andacquisition of Viking Gas Transmissionwill be examined by the commission inthe future, Harding added.         Hoffarber said Centran wasmarketing about 70 million cfd inOctober, and Cenergy is doing 100million cfd of business in November. Headded that Cenergy cannot do businesswith NSP Gas.         Meanwhile, the creditorscommittee of Centran has hired aliquidator, Jim Bartholomew, to disposeof the estate of what is now a paperentity. And sources said a plan todivide the remaining assets is expectedto be filed with the federal bankruptcycourt in Minneapolis by next week.         The assets would include thepurchase price of $2.2 million paid forCentran, another $235,000 from the saleof a gathering system, revenues fromthe sale of a coal company and a grainelevator and other cash. Also, NSP willpay another $250,000 on Jan. 17 as partof a "holdback" in the deal.         Bartholomew's job is tocollect any accounts still receivableby Centran and eventually makedistributions, said Charles Hofer,credit manager at Trident NGL andchairman of the creditors committee.         Creditors and a judge have toapprove the plan before anydisbursements, but Hofer said heexpects most of the funds to bedistributed at year's end, some inMarch 1994 and some a year later.         He told Gas Daily that heexpects creditors to get 20-30 cents onthe dollar. "We did not leave thedecisions to the lawyers," he said. "Wewere very aware of the costs that couldeat up a  bankruptcy and tried to limitthe administrative expense."         One of the smaller creditorsthat wasn't involved on the committeesaid it expects to get $50,000 to$60,000, but is not optimistic aboutgetting it soon.         Centran was the first of anumber of marketers that filed forcourt protection from creditors thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Indiana utility fights 20-year cap         FERC's order refusing TexasGas Transmission's proposed 10-year capon contracts with its customers isunlawful, according to Indiana Gas.         A cap maximizes the number ofyears specific types of contracts canbe bargained for. The commission choseto keep Texas Gas customer contractscapped at 20 years.         Indiana Gas said last month'sorder is "unwise" and "highlycontradictory" considering commissioncomments in a previous FERC order.         FERC stated in July, "Webelieve the 10-year cap proposed byTexas Gas is a reasonable compromisebetween the 20-year maximum and thethree to five-year caps proposed by thecommentors."         The utility said thecommission's final decision was"unsupported by substantial evidence ofrecord" and that 20 years is an"excessive time period given thedynamic nature of the gas market whichexists today."         Indiana Gas noted that onlyone commentor, Fuel ManagersAssociates, opposed the 10-year cap,and, to the best of Indiana Gas'knowledge, no member of the associationis currently a Texas Gas customer. "Itwould be unreasonable to shackle TexasGas customers with a 20-year contractcap simply because someone allegespotential future customers desire alonger term."  (RS92-24).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993SoCal gets active in refinancing         Holders of SoCal Gas' Series Xfirst mortgage bonds will have toaccept a lower yield if they decide tosell them back to the utility in anoffer announced last week. But the highcoupon bonds may have a limited lifeanyway, since the utility can call themDec. 1, 1995.         SoCal Gas will buy any and allof its $120 million of 9.75% firstmortgage bonds due 2020, but the offerexpires Nov. 10. The purchase price forthe bond will be determined by using ayield to the maturity of the U.S.Treasury 5.125% notes due Nov. 15,1995, plus 0.15% and accrued interest.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Gulf Coast indexes up 5-10 centsfor November         Gas Daily's Monthly ContractIndexes for November along the GulfCoast were up 5-10 cents while mostMidcontinent indexes dropped a penny,setting the stage for what many sourcesare expecting for next month -- higherafter-market prices.         The November index forsupplies into Texas Gas Transmissionjumped 11 cents over the October indexto $2.08, the biggest increase thismonth in south Louisiana. The index forsupplies into Columbia GulfTransmission finished at $2.11, up 7cents.         November indexes forMidcontinent volumes into ANR Pipeline,Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line and NaturalGas Pipeline of America (NGPL) eachfell a penny. The Panhandle and ANRindexes finished at $1.90, while theNGPL was $1.87 in Oklahoma. The indexfor volumes into Northern Natural Gasin the field climbed 3 cents, while theindexes into Northern at Ventura and atthe demarcation point each dropped apenny to $1.89. Firm transportationrates under Order 636 allowed buyers topay higher prices in the field whilegetting lower prices at Ventura and atthe demarcation point, sources said.         The November index forsupplies into El Paso Natural Gas inthe Permian Basin was unchanged fromOctober to November, remaining at$1.80. Those who sold baseload suppliesduring bid week were probablyregretting that by the end of last weekas swing prices climbed above $2.MRBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993FERC commissioners get up to speedon GISB         Industry officialsrepresenting the Gas Industry StandardsBoard (GISB) took a seat before theFERC commissioners yesterday to answersquestions on the board's progressbefore its debut next September.         The panel said the scope willprobably be narrow at first and thetarget date for an up and running GISBis Sept. 1, 1994.         After a general rundown ofdevelopments so far of GISB, FERCCommissioner Donald Santa asked therepresentatives to explain thejurisdictional tie between thestandards the board may come up withand FERC's responsibilities under theNatural Gas Act.         Marvin Clifton with MobilNatural Gas answered they didn't knowthe answer to that question but theboard's attorneys could provide FERCwith the answer.         On the same track as Santa,FERC Chair Elizabeth Moler said issuesthat GISB proposes to take up in itssecond generation such as thedefinition of gas day, noticerequirements, nominations and systemsbalancing "are all directly FERCjurisdictional items and will requirechanges in FERC tariffs."         "To the extent the FERC hasjurisdiction over something and thepipelines are required to make tariffchanges obviously they would proceedand FERC would act accordingly," saidConsolidated Edison's Steve Salese.         "We hope that what we would bedoing though is coming to thecommission with something that theindustry has said 'This is going towork for us' just like we've done inthe working groups," said Salese.         When asked by FERCCommissioner Vickey Bailey about themake up and management of GISB, MikeBray with Panhandle Eastern Pipe Linesaid the board has gotten past theinitial criticism of its make up. ChuckLinderman with the Edison ElectricInstitute said if anyone feels left outof the process, the question should beasked of them, "Where were you?"         Another criticism Bailey saidwas being voiced is that GISB is justanother level of regulation for the gasindustry.         Mobil's Clifton said, "If thatis true, then I would like to withdrawmy support for GISB." He said thepurpose of GISB is to get the industrytogether to develop industry solutions.Clifton stressed that GISB is not meantto add regulation to the industry.TCBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Mining company doesn't get rights         The Alabama Supreme Courtruled recently that the rights to drillfor gas in coalbeds do not belong to amining company.         In a blow to the alreadyfinancially strapped mining company,Jim Walter Resources is not entitled todevelop and sell the coalbed methanegas that accumulates in an area of themine that houses mining refuse, ruledthe Alabama Supreme Court.         The court said Jim WalterResources (JWR) may develop the coalbedgas that is within the coal seam,which, in any event, must be ventilatedfor safety reasons. But once thecoalbed gas migrates out of the coalseam and into the gob -- undergroundcoal dumping area -- the gas thenbelongs to the holder of the gasestate, the court ruled last month.         The gob methane gas productionrepresents 70% of the gas captured fromthe operation, which is then sold.         The case stems from twoappeals to gain title to coalbedmethane gas on property in TuscaloosaCounty, Ala. JWR sought title to thegas it has been selling in apartnership with Sonat Coal Gas andothers. The company sued NCNB NationsBank of Texas to gain title of themethane gas, and the bank counter-sued.         The land that JWR is mining issubject to 1953 and 1954 deeds, whichconveyed the property owner's interestto the coal to what is now JWR, butreserved the property owner's interestin "all gas." NCNB is the trustee ofthe estate, and owns a 22.5% interestin all the gas reserved by the deed.         The court had to decidewhether the deed, which conveyed all ofthe coal and connected mining rights toJWR, but reserved the rights to all ofthe gas to the property owner, alsoreserved the rights of the coalbedmethane gas to the property owner.         In a jury trial, the lowercourt determined that all of the gasproduced from the property was coalbedgas and that none of the gas resided ina non-coal area before mining.         The court said the language inthe deeds in this case is unambiguous.The deeds specifically reserve "all ofthe oil, gas, petroleum and sulphur in,on and under" the areas where JWR minesto the property owner.         Neither JWR nor the bankdispute that the coalbed gas is "gas,"and the court said it could find "noscientific or legal basis to supportthe proposition that coalbed methanegas should be treated as a resourceseparate and distinct from othernatural gas."         However, the court added thatproperty law cases indicate that theownership of the gas depends upon thelocation of the gas at the time it iscaptured or located.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Curtis nominated by president         The first chairman of FERC,Charles Curtis, will get the tap asunder secretary of energy, PresidentClinton said.         If confirmed, Curtis will bein charge of science and technologyprograms, waste cleanup, nuclearweapons programs and energy policy.Thomas Grumbly, assistant secretary forenvironmental restoration and wastemanagement, has been acting undersecretary.         "There are few Americans whocan match Charles Curtis' governmentalexperience, or his knowledge of energypolicy," the president said in hisannouncement.         At FERC, Curtis solidified areputation as scholarly and fair.Curtis had served as chief counsel tothe House Energy Committee for fiveyears when President Carter nominatedhim to be the last chairman of theFederal Power Commission (FPC) in 1977.         Under a separate nomination amonth later, Curtis became FERC's firstchairman. The new commission took overall the FPC tasks, with the addition ofoil pipeline rate regulation anddeciding appeals from price controlhearings in the Energy Dept. He hasworked at the Securities and ExchangeCommission,  and is now a partner inthe Washington law firm of Van Ness,Feldman & Curtis.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Suncor discovers new fields         Suncor, a Canadian integratedoil and gas company, has discovered newoil and gas fields in the GrandePrairie area of west-central Alberta.Preliminary estimates indicate provedand probable reserves of 10 millionbarrels of oil equivalent, includingoil, gas and natural gas liquids.         Development plans includenominating gas plant processingcapacity of 38 million cfd in a newfacility to be built by 1995. Oil andnatural gas liquids production from thearea is forecast to exceed 1,000barrels per day, and Suncor is alsobuilding oil producing facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993LIG moves offices in Houston         Louisiana Intrastate Gas hasmoved from its offices at FirstInterstate Plaza in downtown Houston toBP Plaza, where parent firm EquitableResources is housed. Equitable acquiredLIG on June 30 for $191 million.         The acquisition was part ofthe Pittsburgh-based firm's effort toextend and diversify operations on theGulf Coast. The phone number forLIG/Equitable is 713-597-9979, and theaddress is 200 Westlake Park Boulevard,Suite 900, Houston, Texas 77079. BudElkins is transportation director,Chuck Headington is marketing managerand George Matthews is gas supplymanager.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Amoco sets up trading room inHouston         Amoco is hoping to have itsnew gas trading room operating inFebruary, the major's new natural gasvice president told reporters lastweek.         "We may not be first but wehope to have the best" gas tradingroom, Rebecca McDonald, AmocoProduction's natural gas vice presidentsaid. Amoco has learned from themistakes of others, she added, whichhave already set up trading-type roomsat other companies, including Tenneco,where McDonald headed the marketingdivision before coming to Amoco.         About 80 out of the gasdivision's 200 employees will work inthe Houston trading room where futurestraders, cash traders, transportationrepresentatives and gas control peoplewill be centralized, said McDonald.         The trading room is a resultof customer meetings initiated byMcDonald seeking to expand the servicesoffered by the major.         The customers wanted morecreative solutions to contracting withfinancial hedging instruments somethingsome wanted Amoco's help with, McDonaldsaid.         McDonald's hiring signifiesthe "cultural change" at Amoco, whichhas realized that the business ofnatural gas is different than thebusiness of oil, according to BillBenham, Amoco's vice president ofregulatory affairs.         Amoco wants to make sure itgets the most for its natural gasassets, Benham added, with a shift togas marketing signifying the commitmentthe major now sees for natural gas.         She added that Amoco plans tobuy even more gas from third partiesthis winter and next year. Amoco nowbuys about 250 million cfd to 300million cfd from independents to add tothe major's portfolio. Amoco is askingsome producers to "double and triple"their sales to it, contending thatselling to Amoco adds value to theindependents' gas.          DMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Sluggish demand expected to slow1993 growth         NEW ORLEANS -- Producershave now lowered their expectationsthat gas demand will again be strongthis year, with the IndependentPetroleum Assn. of America (IPAA)predicting gas use will rise only about1% to "just kiss 20 trillion cf."         Gas demand has risen for thelast couple of years by about 3% a yearwith the expectation by most in theindustry that gas use would continue togrow at those levels this year as well.         But IPAA's latest short-termsupply and demand outlook releasedyesterday at its annual meeting showsthat gas demand may not even rise by 1%this year, with the outlook onlyslightly more optimistic for next yearwhen demand is expected to increase1.4% and finally top the 20 trillioncf/year level not seen since 1979. Gasdemand last year was 19.78 trillion cf.         Increased electric generationusing hydropower and nuclear power wasthe biggest factor for lower gas demandthis year, members of IPAA's supply anddemand committee told reportersyesterday. IPAA's forecast shows thatgas use for electric generation thisyear will likely fall by 4.7% and ispredicted to drop another 1.4% in 1994.IPAA uses figures released from theEnergy Information Administration forthe first two quarters of this year asa basis to predict gas demand for theremaining half of the year.         In addition, oil prices,including residual fuel, weresignificantly lower than expected andindustrial fuel-switching customerschose resid over gas this year, IPAAsaid. Higher natural gas prices thisyear also contributed to the lower thanexpected demand, said Larry Hilgers,market and risk assessment manager forOryx, the committee's chairman.         IPAA had predicted last yearthat demand would be up as much as 3%this year. Despite "limited" gas demandgrowth, demand for coal is expected torise by 3% this year even with theMississippi River floods and strikes.Hydropower use is seen rising by 5%this year and nuclear poweredgeneration is also expected to be up by2% in 1993, according to IPAA.         "As soon as gas demand lastwinter didn't materialize, we began tosuspect that we may have been toooptimistic last year," said Hilgers.         Increased use of hydropower inthe Northwest and the West probablytook about 200 billion cfd and 300billion cfd of gas demand away, Hilgersadded.         Gas imports from Canada areexpected to slow this year to only a 5%increase over last year to about 2.2trillion cf/year. Canadian gas importsincreased by about 10% last year. IPAAattributed the slowing Canadian importgrowth to increased competition drivingthe market.         IPAA also predicted slowed gasexports to Mexico by 11% to 192 billioncf this year due to the change in therelative price between gas and fueloil.          DMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993U.S. Natural Gas Supply and Demand-- 1993 ForecastProducers target SoCal fee         More major producers arecalling Southern California Gas'(SoCal) fee to access one of itspipeline interconnections "illegal anddiscriminatory."         Shell, Mobil, Texaco, alongwith Pacific Gas & Electric, are just afew of the new supporters of UnionPacific's original allegations ofillegal fees.  The originalcomplaintants were Union Pacific Fuels,Amoco Energy Trading, and Petro-CanadaHydrocarbons.         These shippers/producers areasking FERC to either declare this feenull and void requiring a refund, orregulate SoCal as an interstatepipeline.         Union Pacific claims the feeis an intrastate rate designed torecover costs associated with certainSoCal downstream compressionfacilities. And, the company said,SoCal is charging this rate to shippersdelivering upstream of the intrastatefacilities.         Union Pacific added that ifSoCal is permitted to collect this kindof fee, there is nothing to preventother utilities from imposing tolls.The fight appears to be yet anotherextension of the ongoing jurisdictionfight between FERC and Californiautilities.         Union Pacific and supportersallege SoCal has "implemented anillegal and discriminatory incrementalaccess fee" charged to interstateshippers delivering to SoCal's WheelerRidge interconnection. This connectsSoCal with Pacific Gas and Electric,Transwestern Pipeline, El PasoPipeline, and the Kern River Gas-Mojavesystem.         Union Pacific said the fee isa "burden on interstate commerce thatviolates the constitution."         SoCal admits the fee is anintrastate rate designed to recovercosts from intrastate compressionfacilities, and that it has been onlycharging the fees to interstateshippers and not intrastate shippers.         In fact, it gives fuel creditsto intrastate shippers. It alsoadmitted it has told shippers that ifthe fee is not paid, delivery of gasinto Wheeler Ridge will not bepermitted.         What SoCal is denying is thatthe fee is in any way illegal or inviolation of federal law. And it firmlymaintains the fee is approved by theCalifornia Public Utilities Commission.         SoCal explained the WheelerRidge facility was built for interstatepurposes and that some opponents onthis issue rejected the constructionopportunity.          SoCal also asserts this issueis not under FERC jurisdiction and thatno precedence exists which addressesjurisdiction over of an LDCinterconnection charge.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Arcadian, Southern agree to settleon bypass         Arcadian Corp. and SouthernNatural Gas are hammering out asettlement that's expected to end muchof the regulatory and legal proceedingssurrounding the forced bypass ofAtlanta Gas Light (AGL) by Southern toArcadian's Augusta, Ga., plant.         FERC last year reversed adecision on rehearing and forcedSouthern to provide a direct link tothe Augusta fertilizer plant, bypassingAGL, which is Southern's biggestcustomer. FERC found that Southern wasacting in a discriminatory manner whenit refused the Arcadian link afterproviding a similar bypass for an AirProducts & Chemicals plant in NewOrleans. Arcadian started getting gasdirectly from Southern in January, andestimates the connection will save itabout $4.4 million per year.         Southern, AGL and othersappealed the FERC decision in the 11thCircuit Court of Appeals, but the casehasn't been decided.         Before FERC granted the link,Arcadian filed an antitrust suitagainst Southern and AGL in U.S. courtin Georgia, charging them with a"conspiracy" to protect thedistributor's "monopoly" hold on itsservice area. Arcadian asked fordamages of $45 million plus courtcosts. That case is still pending aswell.         Announcement of the deal byArcadian last week was forced by thecompanies' pending quarterly reports,which mention the settlement, accordingto Randall Saint Aubyn, Arcadian's vicepresident, gas department.         The settlement will result inthe withdrawal of all regulatory andcourt action by all parties, to theagreement, Saint Aubyn indicated.         "The settlement also willenable us to avoid the costs anduncertainties associated with theantitrust lawsuit and relatedlitigation and to establish abeneficial, long-term commercialrelationship with Southern," said DougCampbell, president and CEO ofArcadian.         James Cleary, vice presidentand general counsel at Southern, saidthe pipeline's position would be knownonce the settlement is filed at FERC,which is expected to happen in the nextweek.         Some sources close to Arcadiansuggested there will likely be somecash payment or discounted services bySouthern involved as well, but it maynot be disclosed by the companies. Thesettlement also may address payment oftransition and take-or-pay costs toSouthern for which AGL is liable fromserving the Augusta plant.         Another obstacle Arcadianstill faces is action by the GeorgiaPublic Service Commission (PSC) earlierthis year, which asserted jurisdictionover negative imbalances on Southern'ssystem. The PSC, acting on a suggestionfrom Atlanta Gas Light, contends thatany imbalance gas sold to Arcadian as aresult of an imbalance on Southern'ssystem is actually a retail sale andsubject to state jurisdiction. If thePSC were to press the issue, it couldorder Southern to stop transporting gasto Arcadian until it applies for statecertification of such "sales." SaintAubyn said Arcadian expects thisproblem to be resolved soon, since ithas asked for a summary judgement ofthe issue.         SGBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993U.S. attorney seeks court orderagainst Iroquois         A federal prosecutor hassought to block Iroquois GasTransmission from taking testimony froma long-time pipeline foe in a contractdispute in order to protect the ongoingfederal criminal investigation.         Craig Benedict, assistant U.S.attorney for the Northern District ofNew York, is seeking a court order froma U.S. district court judge to preventIroquois from taking a deposition fromAnne Mueser in a case brought by L.A.Topsoil Co. seeking damages against thepipeline. The disgruntled contractorwants more than $3 million for failureto pay for work contracted.         Benedict is heading theinvestigation that is a result of araid by the FBI on Iroquois' officelast year.         Mueser has been the head theGASP coalition, a group of landownersoriginally opposed to Iroquois, and isnow working for a constructioncontractor which helped build thepipeline. As a long-time participant inthe environment and regulatory review,she was in a position to know whetheror not permits were in compliance withfederal and state laws. She was witnessto some of the work performed by thedisgruntled contractor.         The subpoena issued by thecourt on behalf of Iroquois asks Mueserto reveal her discussions with a listof federal offices including theJustice Dept. and the FBI, which havenothing to do with the civil contractdispute, the federal attorney told thecourt.         Benedict argues that Iroquoisis using the disposition to try touncover information in the ongoingfederal investigation into whetherIroquois violated environmental laws inthe construction of the pipeline. "Itis important for the court to considerwhether the real motivation behind therequested civil discovery is to obtainimproper criminal discovery," Benedicttold the court.         In the motion seeking a courtorder, Benedict also admits that thecase against Iroquois is now before agrand jury.         Benedict noted that thefederal government is not asking toblock all testimony in the civil case,"only the prohibition of the taking ofa single disposition." Maybe theparties "can resolve their contractualdisputes without impinging upon thefederal criminal investigation,"Benedict added.         Iroquois said yesterday thatBenedict's motion is just the firstvolley of what is expected to be anumber of procedural legal motions inongoing suits against the pipeline.         "There is nothing reallyatypical to the action by Mr.Benedict," an Iroquois official said.         Mueser told the court thatbesides the subpoena from Iroquois fora disposition scheduled Wednesday,Iroquois has asked to see allinformation Mueser has accumulated onthe pipeline in the last seven years --about 50 file boxes of materials.         These boxes are now in the"custody of the government," Muesersaid, and going through them forIroquois would be time-consuming.         "Iroquois' tactics are atransparent effort to seek informationthat might be helpful in a pendingfederal criminal investigation, as wellas an exercise calculated to harass andcause undue hardship to a non-partywitness who successfully opposed thiscompany," Mueser told the court. Alegal assistant to the district courtjudge said that a decision in the caseis likely by the end of the month.DMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Santa cites signficance ofgathering in policy         How FERC handles the gatheringissue should be indicative of how theentire range of "second-tier" Order 636issues are dealt with at thecommission, said FERC CommissionerDonald Santa.         FERC's determination on howmuch regulation is needed in areaswhere competition can be shown --possibly in the gathering issue, Santasaid.         He said his preliminary notionabout gathering is to be as light-handed as possible and realize thatgathering is not simply an extension oftransmission with its own set ofproblems.         "We ought to acknowledge thishalf-slave half-free nature ofgathering" Santa said. FERC hasscheduled a technical conference inFebruary to discuss the gatheringissues. Santa outlined at the NaturalGas Roundtable in Washington yesterdaythe issues he sees as critical toresolving the gathering issue.          "First, let's get the factsstraight," Santa said about pointnumber one. "The commission does notknow much about gathering," Santa said."The first step is for the commissionto understand how gathering works inreal life."         Santa noted the primary reasonfor the upcoming public conference inFebruary is so the commission can "makesome well informed policy decisions,based on fact."         Second, the commissioner said,FERC must find an "answer to thethreshold question; whether gathering,nationally or locally, is a competitiveenterprise. Is regulation needed toremedy market failure, and converselydoes the existing regulatory schemecreate a marketing failure?"         Santa said the third basicobjective is to determine thedifferences between pipeline, affiliateand independently owned gatheringsystems, and why or if they should beregulated individually.         The commissioner noted thatthe pending Tenth Circuit Courtdecision on Williams Gas Processing vs.FERC, an argument of FERC jurisdictionon gathering, may define "thecommission's ability to make somedistinction between pipeline- owned andaffiliate-owned gathering."         The fourth point, Santa said,is to answer the question, "does thecommission really need to regulategathering in order to satisfy itsstatutory obligation?"          RRBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Canada eyes NYMEX pricing         Canadian marketers face thesame decision that their statesidecounterparts have already tackled: howto use the NYMEX when it does notreflect local fundamentals.         NYMEX-based pricing crept intoone-year deals that started Nov. 1, andmany suppliers use it in at least a fewcontracts. The next step, traders say,would be to use it for monthly anddaily pricing.         The NYMEX has manifesteditself in swap quotes at Empress.Dealers and large marketers offered tofix prices there for a year at levelsup to C5 cents higher than cash,sources said.         These parties need thatpremium to cover their basis risk atEmpress, where the swap market isilliquid, a marketer said. If theycan't find a counterparty to lay offthe basis, the dealers have to hedge onthe NYMEX, which may not reflectAlberta prices.         Using Gas Daily's monthly Novaindex for the past 12 months, addingC20 cents for transportation toEmpress, and converting it to U.S.dollars at C78 cents to U.S.$1, thecorrelation to the average of the lastthree days of futures settlement pricesis 77.7%. The conversions fromgigajoules to mmBtus were also made.         "Physical players in theprovince are not taking this basisrisk," the marketer said.         This lack of correlation maywork in a supplier's favor at times,because the swap quotes affect thephysical price quotes. Another marketerwas surprised that Empress prices fellto $C2.25 per gigajoule this fall, sohe bought some gas at that level.         And while those contemplatingfixed price swaps are wary about a lackof correlation with the NYMEX, thebasis risk acceptors are unsure abouttrade publication indexes at Empress,showing risk for both sides of thetrade.         A third kind of risk is creditrisk, which a Canadian analyst saidprevents swaps more than a year induration from being done at Empress.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993DOE outlines status of energy law         The Energy Dept. (DOE)requirements under the Energy PolicyAct of 1992 (EPACT) will have littleimpact on the natural gas industry ifDOE's latest implementation statusreport is any indication.         In fact, under the natural gassection of EPACT, DOE's only duty is toautomatically approve certain gasimports and exports. As far as thestatus of that, DOE said it is "workingwith [FERC] to ensure implementation ofthis provision."         There are other itemsscattered throughout the EPACTImplementation Status Report that couldbenefit the gas industry, such as anumber of cost-shared gas technologyprojects planned for 1994. The projectswill cover drilling, atlases anddatabases, low permeability formations,fracture technology, upgrading lowquality gas and secondary gas recovery.         DOE also plans to assist GasResearch Institute efforts to improvecoalbed methane recovery. Otherprograms include a five-year researchand development program to increase therecoverable natural gas resource baseand another five-year R&D program onadvanced natural gas supplytechnologies. DOE is also assisting theInterior Dept. with an EPACTrequirement to amend various leaseagreements and permits for oil and gasproduction.         DOE does have a number ofrequirements under the alternative fuelvehicles (AFVs) section of EPACT,however, which includes natural gasvehicles. For example, in 1994, DOEmust establish data collection by theEnergy Information Administration onalternative fuels, AFVs and how AFVsare currently used.         Some of the AFV programs havebeen delayed. DOE was supposed to issueguidelines to federal agencies tomeasure the percentage of alternativefuel use in dual-fueled vehicles by theend of October, but that has beendelayed, awaiting action by the Officeof Management and Budget.         DOE must also issue guidelinesto federal agencies for measuring thepercentage of alternative fuel use, andissue regulations establishingguidelines for state AFV incentives andplanning. That was scheduled to becompleted in October as well, but hasbeen delayed as well. Another plan toestablish a low interest loan programfor businesses that own or operatefleets for conversion or purchase ofAFVs also scheduled for Octobercompletion has been pushed back toDecember.         DOE has made some progress inits AFV requirements. The departmenthas arranged for the purchase of morethan 5,000 AFVs for the federal fleet,and provided AFV training to federalemployees.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993EBB hooks up traders at Alberta'sAECO C hub.         Alberta Energy kicked off itselectronic bulletin board (EBB)yesterday when dedicated computerterminals in the offices of five largecustomers were used to nominate gas atthe AECO C hub in southeast Alberta.         Another 35 customers will getthe terminals later this week, saidGwyn Morgan, president of AEC Oil andGas, and another 40 early next year.AECO C is a large storage facility andhub at Suffield, Alberta, where dailytrading occurs.         The hub is on the Nova systemand is a C10-13 cents haul fromTransCanada PipeLines at the Empressborder station with Saskatchewan.Morgan said more than 80 companies arecustomers there, trading at least 1.7million cfd.         Customers using the new AECOLINK system can make nominations andcommunicate with other players at thehub via the EBB. The system alsoprovides a record of trades and theirstatus at the hub.         "For the exchange of title,you would get a confirmation backelectronically," Morgan said. "It savesthe telephone tag."         AECO LINK also allowscustomers outside of Alberta to arrangefor transportation after buying gas atthe hub. A balancing service providedby Alberta Energy is also part of theEBB.         The terminals are installed atno cost to Alberta Energy's customers,and the system is supported by about 15people on the marketing staff. Hedeclined to comment on the cost of thesystem, which was developed in-house.         While players can post if theyare short or long on transportation andgas, AECO LINK is not yet an electronictrading network, Morgan added. Asupplemental service is being developedwherein traders can electronicallyinform accountants at Price Waterhouseabout their deals, which would go intoa price index for AECO.         Traders that participated thatday would have access to the index,Morgan explained.         Other companies in Canada,such as Williams, WestCoast and DirectEnergy  are trying to create electronictrading networks. Morgan said AlbertaEnergy is having discussions with themabout tying into AECO LINK. "The moreservices the better," he said.DGBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Edisto to focus on domesticreserves         Edisto Exploration &Production, a unit of Edisto Resources,acquired a new, more flexible creditline of $30 million which will be usedto acquire domestic reserves, expandpipeline operations and attempt toincrease the market share of its gasmarketing operations at Vesta Energy.International and certain other assetsare being sold.         In line with increasing marketshare, Edisto is pursuing acquisitionsof gas marketing companies to enhanceits Vesta activities. The focus onmarketing shows strong support forVesta, which has been the subject ofindustry rumors that it would be soldfollowing Edisto's filing forbankruptcy and subsequentreorganization in June. The company hasalways denied it.         Vesta again made headlines inAugust when Debbie Branch, president ofthe Tulsa-based marketer, left thecompany, as well as Robert Davis,president and CEO of Esco, parentcompany of Vesta Branch subsequentlyformed her own company and took anumber of Vesta officials with her.         Newly elected Chairman and CEOMichael McGovern reviewed Edisto'sassets following its reorganization.          In addition to focusing onmarketing, Edisto plans to increasedomestic reserves through developmentof existing properties and throughacquisition. Edisto also wants toexpand transportation on its 214-mileMissouri intrastate pipeline.         International activitiesoffshore Tunisia are up for sale,following the previous sale of onshoreproperties in Tunisia and offshoreproperties in Malaysia.         The Multifex Internationaloperations also are up for sale.Multiflex is a manufacturer andsupplier of hose bundles and subseawell control umbilicals.         Edisto acquired an 80% equityinterest in March 1990.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Oklahoma sets proration meetings         The Oklahoma CorporationCommission has scheduled meetings toconsider production limits for thefirst quarter of 1994.         The first one is an informaltechnical conference to be held Nov. 5at 10:30 a.m., in the auditorium of theOklahoma Historical Society Building inOklahoma City. A public hearing is thenscheduled for Nov. 30 to considerproration recommendations.         The production ceiling in thefirst quarter of this year was set atthe greater of 1 million cfd or 40% ofopen flow. Prorationing limits in thefourth quarter were the greater of 1million cfd or 45% of open flow.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Washington Energy hawks E&P unit         Washington Energy isconsidering selling some of the assetsof its subsidiary Washington EnergyResources (WER), in an effort toconvert some of the exploration andproduction company to cash.         Washington Energy is alsolooking at possible mergeropportunities and a public or privatestock offering. This doesn't mean anoutright sale of WER, a companyspokesperson said. It's an effort tosee what value the marketplace puts onWER, she explained.         WER holds reserves of 33.9million barrels of oil equivalent as ofJune 30, and has interests in 248producing wells. WER holds an equityinterest in additional reserves andinterests in another 45 wells throughits investment in an unconsolidatedaffiliate. The company also brokers gasfor third parties and provides gasmanagement services.         Washington Energy said itsefforts to monetize WER are unrelatedto a recent rate case whichsubstantially reduced the annualrevenues of its largest subsidiary,Washington Natural Gas. WashingtonNatural requested a 9.98% overall rateof return, but the Washington Utilitiesand Transportation Commission approveda rate of 9.15%. As a result,Washington Natural filed rates lastmonth to reduce annual revenues by$16.9 million.         This also prompted theWashington Energy board of directors toreduce the company's quarterly dividendfrom 35 cents to 25 centsBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Fires disrupt SoCal service         Southern California Gas(SoCal) will waive gas bills for thosecustomers left homeless by last week'sfires in the southern part of thestate.         A SoCal spokesperson said thecompany had about 2,000 customerswithout service last week. About 1,100of those customers were in the LagunaBeach area. More than 300 were withoutservice in the Altadena area, but manyAltadena customers shut off their ownmeters, the company noted.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993New York project gets permits         After it recently obtainedstate and local approvals, U.S.Generating moved forward withconstruction on a natural gas combined-cycle power plant in Wallkill, N.Y.         Wallkill Generating, anaffiliate of U.S. Generating, receivedenvironmental permits from the stateDept. of Environmental Conservation andapprovals from the town of Wallkillwhich allow the company to develop the$150 million plant. The project willsupply 150 MW of power to Orange andRockland Utilities and other utilitiesin the mid-Hudson region.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993El Paso criticizes comments madeabout case         A high-ranking official of ElPaso Natural Gas took issue withstatements last week about allegationsby an independent marketer against thepipeline.         Rick Baish, senior vicepresident of marketing, rates andregulation for the pipeline, said hecouldn't comment on charges made byWindward Energy & Marketing against thepipeline, Meridian Oil and BurlingtonResources.         He said the charges  "areunproven allegations to try to avoidjudgement on the claim that we madeagainst [Windward] on the money theyowe us. That's pending before a federalcourt in Tulsa.         "It's obviously not pleasantfor us to read about that [in GasDaily], but beyond that we had a realconcern that someone ... would think itappropriate to argue the merits of thepending case in the newspapers whenit's before a federal judge," Baishsaid.         The stories published in GasMarkets Week last weekwere taken frompublic documents, and the accuserswouldn't comment to Gas Markets Week onthe case. An attorney's commentsappeared at the end of the story.         Baish was critical of theattorney who was quoted anonymously inthe story about Windward's charges. Theattorney said that the gathering issuewas especially ripe since FERC wasconsidering how to handle gatheringjurisdictionally in the post-Order 636environment.         Baish asked that the anonymousattorney be identified in any futurestories "so your readers can judge forthemselves what that person's agendamight be." He found the attorney'sstatements "grossly offensive."         He thought the attorney may berepresenting someone who would have aninterest in the outcome of the FERCdeliberations on gathering policy. "Infairness, readers ought to be able tomake their own judgements about whatthat person's agenda might be," Baishsaid. "I thought what that person saidwas entirely improper if not unethical.I'm hard-pressed to be gentlemanlyabout it. I find it hard to understandhow an attorney could make statementsobviously trying to influence FERCbased on allegations that he knew orshould have known [but which] have notbeen proven."         MRBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Williams introduces electronic gastrading system         Williams Energy Venturesushered in the new era of electronicgas trading last week with all theglitz and glamour that used to beassociated with the oil boom of thelate-1970s.         The theme of the show was"It's a jungle out there" in today'sgas trading business. A showroom andmultimedia presentation carried out thetheme with the message that Streamline,as Williams calls its electronicsystem, will turn the jungle into amaster planned community of orderlytrading.         Unlike the unveiling of theNYMEX-EnerSoft electronic tradingsystem on Oct. 20, also in Houston,several computers had been set up todemonstrate how buy and sell orderswill be posted, transacted andnominated to pipelines.         The few threads laid bare bythe unveiling were caused bydemonstrators who knew far more aboutcomputers than they did about naturalgas trading. While they could dasharound with ease from window to windowin the colorful displays, they couldn'tanswer certain detailed questions.         Industry people attending theshow were forgiving, however, willingto concede that electronic trading isthe future. As one trader joked to hisgroup, does this mean he won't able tohide his big margins any longer?         Streamline will one dayprovide cash discovery at hubs aroundthe country if it's as successful asWilliams envisions. The system isavailable now for installation andtraining.         The first hub, at Carthage innortheast Texas, is expected to haveenough customers to become operationalby Feb. 1 or by the end of the firstquarter. Carthage ties in to sixinterstate and eight intrastatepipelines that supply 1 billion cfd.Plus, hub operator East Texas GasSystems recently began operatingAmerican Pipeline, which has nearbyinterconnects with Natural Gas Pipelineof America, Tejas Natural Gas (formerlyExxon Gas Systems) and Texoma/HoustonPipe Line. East Texas Gas is amajority-owned affiliate of UnionPacific Fuels.         An Intra-Alberta Hub, locatedon Nova Pipeline, is scheduled to be inplace early next year. A WestcoastEnergy subsidiary will put that systemon line.         RKBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Columbia finds new LNG partner         To meet the need forelectricity in the Washington, D.C.,area and comply with the Clean Air Act,Potomac Electric Power (Pepco) willjoin Columbia Gas system in a jointventure to restart the liquefiednatural gas (LNG) terminal in CovePoint, Md.         Columbia LNG and Pepco willalso seek FERC approval this week toprovide peak-day load-shaving servicesto local distribution companiesstarting with the winter of 1995-1996.         A pipeline extends from CovePoint to Loudon, Va. Pepco's interestin Cove Point is to secure a reliableand cost-effective source oftransportation to its Chalk Pointgenerating station via the pipeline.         Columbia LNG will contributethe terminal and pipeline in exchangefor an equity interest in thepartnership, and Pepco's subsidiarywill invest up to $25 million in equityand debt. Pepco's investment will beused to recommission parts of theterminal, which has been shut down formany years, and build a newliquefaction unit.         Cove Point, built in the mid-1970s, is one of four terminals in thecountry designed to receive deliveriesof LNG by ship. Currently, only aterminal in Boston has enough demand tojustify operations.           At one point last year,Shell LNG was going to buy Cove Pointfrom Columbia, but the deal fellthrough.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993People         Texaco Gas Marketing hasappointed Scott Potter vice presidentfor trading and transportation. Potterwas with Aquila Energy. Randy Curryhas been named vice president for long-term sales at Texaco Gas Marketing andSteven Baker has been named vicepresident for fuels management.          ENSERCH elected DianaNatalicio, president of the Universityof Texas at El Paso since 1988, to itsboard of directors.         George Bush has resignedfrom Harken Energy's board of directorsand his position as consultant "inorder to devote his time to othermatters," which are expected to includerunning for public office in Texas.         William Smith, who willcontinue as Sonat's executive vicepresident, became vice chairman ofSonat Exploration. James Moylan,currently Sonat's vice president andcontroller, will become president ofSouthern Natural Gas. Richard Bates,currently executive vice president ofSonat Exploration, will becomepresident of Sonat Energy Services.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Order 636 didn't startle hedgers         Order 636 hardly affected thehedging plans of traders that Gas Dailytalked to this week, and brokers alsoreported no changes in customeractivity. But lower temperatures andmore pipeline constraints in theunbundled environment might have apronounced impact later, sources added.         Spot cash prices have beenshooting up for the past week as fallturns to early winter. Spot volumesavailable for incremental needs seem tobe dwindling. A trader reported aseller sought, but didn't get, aDecember NYMEX equivalent for Novembergas at Station 65 into TranscontinentalGas Pipe Line.         December futures have beenvolatile enough this week for differentbrokers to talk about reaching $2.50 orfalling to $2.35. And at times gasfutures seemed to be trading insympathy with the rest of the energycomplex on the NYMEX.         "The Merc will latch on towhatever it needs to, and now thestrongest thing is cash," a buyercountered.         Order 636 went in place forthe bulk of pipelines during atransition from a weak to strongfutures market, explained Tom Lord ofMorgan Stanley. "How do you sort out636 from a change in market psychologyin the last two weeks?" he asked.         Over the medium term, a tradersaid "there's the possibility that ifwe do get severe weather, there will beenough uncertainty about supply that wemight get more volatile price spikescompared to last year."         With pipeline sales gas gone,Order 636 changes the way storage isfilled, said a trading manager at amarketing affiliate. "Wall Street feelsstorage is the biggest factor in themarket," he said. "You'll probably seegreater efficiency in the use ofstorage, and hedging to make it work."Back to Headline List WT03-B35-8IA059-000325-B004-187http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey05.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232015 text/html 59961HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:18:03 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:47 GMTContent-length: 59774Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey05.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNet MAY 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Injections amounted to bulk of demand in spring (497 words) EIA revises data to reflect NGPL reclassification (549 words) American operates unique single complex facility (1050 words) Entre to develop first offshore gas storage field (306 words) ANR seeks rehearing on market-based rate plan (475 words) Alberta Energy to expand storage at hub (220 words) Changing industry means team approach to development is needed (770 words) Potential Indiana storage project considers hub (256 words) Richfield requests waiver of an EBB standard (385 words) SoCal to provide storage to off-system customer (225 words) Officials see storage release market down the road (528 words) LDC wants gathering line added to Jackson Prairie (304 words) Design problems for existing cavern and bedded salt cavern construction (1257 words) Amoco Canada adds partners to planned storage hub (223 words) PG&E storage decision delayed (192 words) Market molecules (426 words) Enron files for section 311 service (110 words) RG&E releases storage on CNG (148 words) Cayuta open season nearing end (142 words) Canadian board rejects InterCoastal pipe conversion (223 words) Avoca asks FERC for permission to drill test wells (193 words) CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Injections amounted to bulk of demand in spring     Gas bought for injection into storage in April and May was theonly thing that propped up prices which would have been wellunder $1.50, sources were saying this week.     Storage injections amounted to the only demand out there, saidone producer. Heating degree days from the end of Februarythrough April were far lower than normal, he said, and this Mayhasn't seen any cooling degree days in Texas.     In April, some sources were wondering if the American GasAssn.'s (AGA) estimates showing strong net injections each weekwere accurate because prices weren't soaring above $2.00.  Onetrader said injections were the only thing that kept April prices upnear $1.90.     AGA estimated that net injections for the month of April totaled214 billion cf. That would be a record for April injections, based onhistorical data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA).See table on page 12. The previous high in net injections was inApril 1985, when net injections were 117 billion cf. This April'snet injections should be well above last April, when net injectionswere 112 billion cf.     April storage data compiled by Gas Storage Report supports theAGA estimate, and even indicates that net injections may have beena little higher for the month. Just looking at the 10 largest storageoperators on page 6, net injections total more than 150 billion cf.With strong injections in April, working gas storage levels arecloser to normal now. Gas Storage Report's ballpark estimate ofworking gas in storage at the end of April is about 1,177 billion cf.     May injections have also been strong, but they may not reach therecord set in last May of 462 billion cf, one storage operatorpointed out. However, one analyst countered that May injectionsmay come close because distributors and marketers are likelytaking advantage of May prices, especially since June prices shouldbe higher as demand for air conditioning increases.     A producer that moves gas on Northern Natural Gas said heexpects June prices to rebound. Distributors on Northern don'tstart injecting until June, he said, and that should have an effect onprices on Northern Natural. He also expects gas demand for airconditioning in the Southwest to heat up in June. Another reason hethinks prices are headed up in June is that a number of end-userswere looking to lock up one-year deals in May. " Prices areprobably going to rebound from here."     One buyer for a pipeline said he isn't counting on a hugerebound in prices. He said last year was an anomaly because theLDCs were trying to lock up long-term supplies to back up theirtransportation contracts after the pipelines restructured.Producers were taking spot gas off the market to offer under firmcontracts, and at the same time, large amounts of gas were going intostorage, he said. That all combined to keep prices over $2.00 inApril and May, he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994EIA revises data to reflect NGPL reclassification     The Energy Information Administration (EIA) has revised itsaggregate storage volumes for January through July of 1993 toreflect the changes that Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL)made to its working gas volumes due to reclassification.     In August 1993, NGPL received FERC approval to reclassify aportion of its working gas to base gas for accounting purposes. Thepipeline filed revised FERC Form 8s and EIA Form 191s back toNovember 1992. The reclassifications also reflect the operationallevels of the pipeline's working gas, NGPL said.     EIA's monthly storage table on page 9 shows the changes inworking gas and base gas for 1993. An EIA official explained that1992 doesn't include the changes because the agency had alreadyissued final numbers for 1992.     Most of the changes resulted in a shift of about 215 billion cf ofworking gas into the base gas column. With these revisions, EIA'smonthly numbers for 1994 are more comparable to last year's. Theonly reclassifications that would have to be factored in are forSouthern Natural Gas and KN Interstate Gas.     The agency also revised its January and February 1994 storagefigures, as well as releasing actual data for March. January'sworking gas level of 1,578 billion cf is almost 40 billion cf lessthan what EIA initially reported for January.     With those revisions, the American Gas Assn.'s estimates fromJanuary and February move closer to EIA's actual figures. AGA'sworking gas estimate for the week ending Jan. 28 was 1,624 billioncf. AGA's working gas estimate for the week ending Feb. 25 was1,074 billion cf, compared to EIA's final February working gaslevel of 1,089 billion cf.     While AGA's estimates are still somewhat lower than EIA'snumbers, they are much closer after the EIA revisions than theywere in the winter. One storage tracker said a number of peoplewere questioning the accuracy of AGA's January and Februarynumbers in the winter, but " after all is said and done, they'llprove pretty good."     In fact, this source said, " AGA's estimates are doing what theywere meant to do: Gauging storage activity over a week."  For a lookat AGA's most recent estimates, see the table at right.     Working gas in storage at the end of March was 957 billion cf,the data show, which brings working gas in line with last March'slevels, when the two reclassifications are considered.     March had injections of 105 billion cf and withdrawals of 239billion cf, for net withdrawals of 133 billion cf, EIA said. The netwithdrawals for the month were much lower than past Marchs' netwithdrawals. March 1993 saw heavy net withdrawals of 303 billioncf due to the " storm of the century"  that hit the eastern half of thecountry.     Those heavy withdrawals brought March 1993 working gas to1,028 billion cf, according to the revised data which include'sNGPL's reclassification, the lowest March level in 12 years. Thispast March's working gas would be about the same if theunaccounted-for reclassifications, i.e., Southern Natural and KNInterstate, are factored into the 957 billion cf. Adding SouthernNatural's reclassification of about 21 billion cf and KN's shifting of55 billion cf, working gas would be 1,033 billion cf. That's 5billion cf more than March 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994American operates unique single complex facility     Behind the WesTex gas storage facility's novel approach tocombined cavern storage, vertical well reservoir storage andhorizontal well reservoir storage is American Gas Storage'sdetermination to provide customers with greater market access andhigh deliverability service.     At the recent American Gas Assn. operations conference, JayEvans, American Oil & Gas' manager of reservoir engineering,described American's planning and construction involved todevelop the first gas storage complex to integrate cavern andreservoir storage.     The WesTex facility, located in Gaines County, Texas, about 60miles southwest of Lubbock, plans to offer section 311 service.American is close to filing a FERC application, said James Lytal,vice president of business development.     WesTex consists of three fields:     %  Salado Gas Storage Project, a bedded salt cavern with 3 billioncf of working gas capacity. This is the first facility in the UnitedStates constructed in bedded salt exclusively for the storage ofnatural gas.     %  Loop Gas Storage, a vertical well reservoir with 9.4 billion cfof working gas.     %  North Felmac Gas Storage, a horizontal well reservoir with 5.6billion cf of working gas.     As integrated into one facility, WesTex will have working gascapacity of 18 billion cf and withdrawal capability of 600 millioncfd and an injection capability of 300 million cfd, Evans said in hispresentation. But Lytal said the working gas capacity may be alittle less depending on the services provided to customers. DirectWesTex pipeline interconnects allow receipts and deliveries withEl Paso Natural Gas, Northern Natural Gas and Red River Pipeline.     Lytal said American expects to offer about 7 billion cf ofworking gas and 200 million cfd of maximum withdrawal capacityunder seasonal storage service; 5 billion cf of working gas and 140million cfd of maximum withdrawal capacity under the firmenhanced seasonal service; and a peaking service from the saltcavern. The first 1 billion cf of working gas in the cavern should bein service in November, he said.     Evans described the capacity of each field and how it wasconverted to storage.     He explained that bedded salt is found throughout much of thePermian Basin of West Texas, and specifically, the Midland sectionof the Permian contains up to 900 feet of gross salt. Evans said thecaverns were constructed in the lower " dirty"  section of thePermian Salado Salt beds. Well tests indicated that salt cavernscould be constructed in the beds as an acceptable container fornatural gas.     " The acreage was presently being used for gas storage in thedepleted Loop Yates reservoir, so the existing injection andwithdrawal facilities would be used to handle surface gasoperations,"  Evans said.     Three cavern wells have been completed and are presently beingsolution mined. The first cavern well was converted to gas storagein November 1993, but was placed back into the solution miningmode in February 1994, Evans said.     American started injections into the first cavern in November1993 at a rate of 60 million cfd. A total of 550 million cf of gas wasinjected up to Dec. 6, 1993. Evans said a ledge fall and subsequentshearing of the tubing string prevented complete fill-up of thecavern. The cavern was used for storage and injections andwithdrawals up to Feb. 12, 1994, and then returned to solutionmining mode in anticipation of total completion in November 1994.     Loop is a converted depleted reservoir in the Yates Sand at 3,350feet. The field produced 12.24 billion cf of gas from a reservoircontaining 13.25 billion cf. The field was converted to storageoperations in 1981 with the addition of six new wells, theworkovers of four existing production wells and compression andmetering facilities, Evans said. The facility exhibited a totalworking gas capacity of 4 billion cf at that time, he said.     American performed a reservoir evaluation of the storage fieldto resolve the discrepancies between what the facility exhibited asexpected storage operations and the past history of primarydepletion performance.     " After numerous simulation runs of the primary and storageperformance operations, a validated working model of the reservoiremerged. It was determined that the storage field actually containedtwo separate reservoirs, which were separated by a four-foot lowpermeability layer,"  Evans reported.     American expanded the facilities in 1991-92 by drilling andcompleting 16 new injection/withdrawal wells and workover of eightoriginal wells. The company added metering and dehydrationfacilities to handle the increased volumes. The facility now has 9.4billion cf of working gas capacity and the withdrawal capability is200 million cf, up from 50 million cfd.     This is a reservoir facility in the depleted Felmac (Yates) field.During primary depletion, the 3,360-feet Yates Sand produced 8.4billion cf of the 9.24 billion cf capacity. Evans said only one of theoriginal producing wells exists. American converted the well to apressure observation well.     American performed a numerical simulation study of the field todetermine the most economic development plan for converting thefield to storage. Both vertical and horizontal well completions wereconsidered while evaluating storage performance, Evans said. Theanalysis determined that the most effective and economicdevelopment of the field was by using horizontal well technology.     Specifically, two in-line horizontal wells with a wellborediameter of 6 and 1/2 inches and an open hole extension of 2,000feet were recommended, Evans said. " It was determined from thenumerical simulation results that the storage reservoir would haveworking gas volume of 5.6 billion cf and a withdrawal capacity of200 million cf,"  he reported.     The company drilled the first horizontal well in October 1993 ata vertical depth of 3,500 feet. The well had a horizontaldisplacement of 500 feet at 90 degrees and it was drilledhorizontally to a total of 2,000 feet. The facility has a withdrawalcapability of 140 million cfd and an injection capacity of 150million cfd. Injection of gas began in March at a rate of 50 millioncfd, Evans said.     American decided to integrate the facilities into a singlecomplex to provide greater market flexibility and access. Thecompany tied in gas piping, measurement, dehydration, control andcompression from each of the subject projects. American alsoconstructed a 22-mile, 20-inch pipeline to the Red River Pipeline.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Entre to develop first offshore gas storage field     Independent producer Entre Energy plans to develop the firstunderground natural gas storage facility located entirely inoffshore waters.      Entre filed an application with FERC earlier this month toconvert an existing gas producing reservoir located in theChandeleur area, Block 29, offshore Louisiana, into the Chandeleurstorage facility. The proposed facility will have an initial workingcapacity of about 26 billion cf and injection/withdrawal rates of300 million cfd, Entre said. The company bought the Chandeleurblock from Chevron in early 1993.     The facility could be expanded to an ultimate working gascapacity of 75 billion cf and injection/withdrawal rates of 850million cfd. The field connects to Texas Eastern Transmission'sEast Louisiana (ELA) pipeline system.     One source said Entre's location is a good one, even though theLouisiana storage market is competitive. The source said TexasEastern customers that take no-notice service from the pipelinehave to pay it back within 48 hours at ELA or pay a penalty. In thewinter, this often pushes prices up pretty high in ELA, the sourcesaid. Customers could replace no-notice with a storage service.     Entre has proposed a market-based rate structure in its FERCapplication. The company is presently negotiating agreements withcustomers for long-term contract storage service. Entre will alsohost an open season for available capacity, said Stephen Kelly, vicepresident of Entre.     Kelly said the company plans to form a marketing subsidiary toaggressively market the facility.     The facility should be offering limited service for the 1994-95winter season, assuming FERC approves Entre's application by mid-summer. TCW Asset Management has provided the principalacquisition and conversion financing for the project. Kelly said theoffshore reservoir is no different to convert to a storage reservoirthan one onshore. They both use the same technology to convert.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994ANR seeks rehearing on market-based rate plan     ANR Pipeline has repackaged its argument that it lacks marketpower in its request for rehearing on FERC's decision to reject thepipeline's market-based pilot programs.     ANR challenges the commission's finding in ANR's rate case thatthe pipeline " failed to file data demonstrating that it lacks marketpower in the relevant markets (GSR 3/94)."  ANR says it haspresented in its rate filing the rationale for its three market-basedrate proposals and the rationale meets the standards fordetermining market power.     The pipeline points out in its rehearing request that it has madethree proposals for market-based rates on three different services." The appropriate evidence for meeting a market power test isdifferent for each ANR proposal and furthermore varies from theevidence that was appropriate in some instances where thecommission has approved market-based pricing,"  ANR says.     The three proposals seeking market-based rates are limited andconditioned, the pipeline says. One proposal is for declinedtransportation capacity, which refers to any firm transportationcontracts that an existing customer declines to renew. ANR wouldpost the available capacity on its electronic bulletin board and if itreceives no bids at the maximum rate, it could then attempt tocharge market-based, negotiated rates.     The second proposal is for any new storage services, whichmeans services that become available after existing contractsexpire. The third proposal is for released transportation capacityand it would allow customers with firm transportation capacity torelease it at market-based rates.     ANR stresses that it hasn't proposed to change its basicunbundled services, and all its open-access services are now, andwill continue to be, cost-based in its tariff. ANR's proposals formarket-based pricing are limited to three " narrowly prescribed"circumstances, in which ANR either lacks market power or wouldprovide protective conditions of service, the pipeline says.     The pipeline also argues that no single test applies to marketpower analyses. ANR contends its three proposals satisfy a relevantthreshold test of lack of market power when the three proposals areconsidered separately, and all definitions and conditions areconsidered. For instance, ANR says it has 0% of the market in itsmarket for new storage services, because there are no customers forthese new services yet, so the customers can't be captive to ANR.ANR adds that plenty of alternatives to its new storage servicesalready exist.     Also in its filing, ANR requested rehearing on the commission'sorder to the pipeline to eliminate its optional repackagedtransportation and gathering service. The pipeline argues that itoffers an unbundled transportation service without embeddedgathering costs and it also offers this repackaged bundledtransportation and gathering service. " By offering both theunbundled and repackaged service options, ANR has satisfied bothcommission policies of unbundling and maximizing shipperoptions,"  ANR says (RP94-43-003).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Alberta Energy to expand storage at hub     Alberta Energy plans to expand the AECO-C Hub natural gasstorage facility by 500 million cfd of withdrawal capacity and 25billion cf of reservoir capacity, or 38.5% more than the storage unitcan hold and deliver now.     On completion of the expansion, withdrawal capacity will be 1.8billion cfd, or about 13% of Canadian daily wellhead capacity. Totalworking storage would be 90 billion cf.     Alberta Energy President and CEO Gwyn Morgan said thecompany currently is soliciting expressions of interest frompotential customers. " Because of our low incremental costs, we areable to provide our customers with high-quality service atcompetitive rates,"  he said. " Our studies indicate that dailystorage requirements within Alberta could be as high as 3 billioncf, and AECO-C has further potential to meet those needs."     A portion of the $40 million expansion at the Suffield, Alberta,facility would be available for the upcoming winter season. The fullexpansion will be operational by April 1995. Potential clients arebeing asked to confirm their interest by June 15, 1994.     Morgan said the expansion is part of Alberta Energy's growthstrategy and is consistent with decisions taken by the company toparticipate in the Ten Section Hub in Bakersfield, Calif., throughits Alenco Resources subsidiary and to list AECO-C Hub on theNYMEX trading network.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Changing industry means team approach to development is needed     The growing competition in the natural gas storage industry, andthe need for technology transfer to develop facilities, will make theteam approach to storage development a necessity, say two UnionGas officials.     " Competition among utilities and others for additional storagehas resulted in the need to become proactive in pursuingdevelopment alternatives,"  say William Fay, manager of storageprojects for Union Gas, and James Egden, Union's manager ofgeology. Fay presented their paper at the American Gas Assn.'soperations conference in San Francisco earlier this month.     In addition, they say, costs to develop storage have increased asthe better-quality reservoirs have already been developed.Deregulation of the gas industry has also changed the marketplace,and utilities are realizing they need to develop markets external totheir franchise areas, Fay and Egden say. More and more, utilitiesare turning to storage and transportation, they add.     " To meet these changes, multi-disciplinary teams have become anecessity within the new market environment,"  the officials stress.     The concept behind multi-disciplinary teams is for a company toempower workers on the team with the tools to make the necessarydecisions. This eliminates time-consuming meetings wheremanagement officials are filled in on technical details about aproject so they can make decisions. The tools consist of the goals,restrictions and parameters -- especially financial -- of a project.Within this framework, the team can make all of the pertinentdecisions on the project, Fay told Gas Storage Report. " As long asthey are moving toward the goals, there shouldn't be a problem,"  hesaid.     The multi-disciplinary teams that Union has used have grown toinclude external service companies and consultants from theplanning stages through the final project evaluation, Fay said. "Evolution of the team approach has resulted in faster, more costeffective and detailed project completions,"  Fay and Egden say intheir report.     But, they warn, Union's transition to the team approach wasn'tnecessarily a smooth one since changes were being made in " anextremely traditional and conservative environment."     Fay says companies moving to the team approach to projectdevelopment probably can expect some resistance from uppermanagement. That is not unusual, he says, since most organizationshave traditionally operated in a hierarchical-type, filter-downmanner. Senior management may feel they are losing control, Faysays. The key is to ease senior management's concerns by keepingsenior officials in the loop throughout the life of the project, hesays.     " You may need to do a number of projects to convince them thatthis system works,"  Fay says. Once senior officials see that costswere kept under control and less time is spent on meetings anddecisions, they'll consider multi-disciplinary teams a benefit, headds.     Fay says the team approach is still evolving at Union and is farfrom complete. However, he presented case studies that show someimprovements in communication and time using the team approach.For one thing, in the past, two central departments in thedevelopment of storage projects, geology and storage planning,reported to separate vice presidents. " Focus on these two groupswas significantly different resulting in poor communication andconflicting corporate objectives,"  Fay and Egden say.     As the regulatory environment changed, companies wererequired to file reports with regulatory agencies, which also wereholding more formal hearings. Union realized it would need toimprove communication between the geology and storage planningdepartments. The utility restructured so that geology, reservoirservices, storage planning and storage administration all fell underthe storage development department.     " The emergence of the storage development department was anattempt to provide a team environment,"  the authors say. Fromthere, multi-disciplinary teams for individual projects could beformed, they add.     Fay says he sees team development growing in the future sincemost new storage projects will consist of partnerships made up oftwo or more companies. He said the recent announcements of hubdevelopment are examples of partnerships in the development andownership of storage projects.     However, Fay suggests that companies beware of the pitfalls ofteams, or what he calls " the growing pains of moving from atraditional way of operation."  First of all, senior management mayresist. Also, team members may be prone to second-guessingdecisions. Another issue is the need for more training ofemployees. Employees need to be trained both technically and inthe team approach, Fay says, and that can be costly.     Finally, he says, the team approach may not work for allprojects. " If the company doesn't know what its goal is, then that isnot a good place for a team,"  he says.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Potential Indiana storage project considers hub     A potential storage project in Indiana is getting noticed lately asits developers have been divulging bits and pieces about it atconferences.     The Blackhawk field in Vigo County, Ind., is an aquifer field thatowner Hamilton Natural Gas has been shopping around as apotential storage facility, sources say. Hamilton officials didn'treturn phone calls by press time.     Indianapolis-based Hamilton bought the field from Texas GasTransmission in 1989 for $300,000, according to papers madeavailable at recent natural gas conferences. Based on early tests byTexas Gas and Hamilton's tests of the Blackhawk field, the companydetermined the field is ready to be developed as a " good storagefield,"  the papers said.     Sources said five or six pipelines are in the vicinity of the field,including Texas Gas, Texas Eastern Transmission and MidwesternGas. The field is located about 13 miles southeast of Terre Haute,Ind. Sources also said they think Hamilton is trying to get a directconnect into Texas Gas.     The papers say total delivered gas from the field will be 5.275billion cf over a 120-day withdrawal cycle. That averages about 44million cfd. The injection cycle will be for 209 days maximum, thehandouts indicate.     Not surprisingly, Hamilton has talked about developingBlackhawk into a hub, a couple of sources said. With its proximityto a handful of pipelines, it can serve the Midwest market area, theysaid. Another source added that the success of Northern IllinoisGas' Chicago Hub may also be contributing to the hub talk.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Richfield requests waiver of an EBB standard     Richfield Gas Storage Systems has asked FERC for an exemptionfrom the provision of Order 563 that requires interstate operatorsto provide electronic file downloading (EDI) on their electronicbulletin boards (EBBs).     As part of Order 636, the commission required interstatepipelines to set up EBBs to facilitate the trading of capacity byshippers. Order 563 requires pipelines to provide standardizedinformation about service on their systems. Interstates mustcomply with Order 563 by June 1.     Richfield, a small interstate storage operator in Kansas, pointsout that the commission stated it will allow for small pipelines tobe exempt from portions of 563. Richfield seeks partial exemptionor a waiver of the requirement to provide EDI because it is a smallcompany and its storage field is fully subscribed under long-termcontracts.     Further, Richfield says, it provides transportation only inconjunction with its storage service. Since Richfield's smallpipeline system and storage field are located in Stevens and Mortoncounties, Kansas, they aren't an integral link in the movement ofgas through interstate commerce, the company said.     Richfield says that in its first year of service, it has received nocustomer messages on its EBB and no inquiries on it concerningservice. No customers have offered to release their storage capacity,although it isn't surprising since the market for storage is morelong-term than transportation, Richfield says.     " Computer communication capability is not necessary or evennecessarily desirable on Richfield's small system, especially sinceRichfield's storage service is provided at confidential, market-based negotiated rates,"  the company said in its filing.     Finally, Richfield argues that the cost to comply with EDI is "prohibitively expensive."  The company said its EBB operator hasdetermined that EDI will cost $400 per month in addition to the$200 per month cost to upgrade the EBB as required by Order 563.Richfield said it can't pass these costs on to customers because ithas market-based rates already in place with customers.     The National Registry of Capacity Rights has filed a motion tointervene, asking FERC to grant a 120-waiver while it holds atechnical conference on the issue. The registry would like Richfieldto come up with an alternative to EDI which would allow shippers toreceive capacity release information through files they candownload (RP94-235).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994SoCal to provide storage to off-system customer     Southern California Gas will provide storage service toWashington Water Power's new peaking power plant in Rathdrum,Idaho.     The California Public Utilities Commission approved the six-year contract, which calls for SoCal to provide firm inventory of480 million cf, with injection on an as-available basis.     Washington Water will pay an intrastate transportation rate of22.5 cents/dth upon injection and no transportation charge uponwithdrawal. Gas withdrawn from storage will be redelivered to theplant in the upper panhandle of Idaho via backhaul on the PacificGas & Electric/Pacific Gas Transmission system.     Washington Water Power isn't new to natural gas storage. It is aco-owner of the Jackson Prairie storage facility in Washington,which is operated by co-owner Washington Natural Gas. NorthwestPipeline is also a part owner of the facility.     The CPUC approval on this contract is consistent with thecommission's ruling on an earlier agreement between SoCal andSouthwest Gas. The commission told SoCal it had to include atransportation rate in its storage service to Southwest since itsoriginal agreement didn't have a transportation charge in it.     For independent storage operators the one-way transportationcharge could prove to be a competitive challenge. Some interstateindependents have complained that pipelines that charge only oncefor gas to and from storage make it difficult for independents tocompete.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Officials see storage release market down the road     The storage capacity release market is a huge opportunity forthe industry, said a marketer at the American Gas Assn.'s (AGA)annual operations conference here earlier this month.     Kevin O'Toole, vice president of transportation for marketerCatex/Vitol, said there is a " monstrous market"  for storagecapacity releases and swapping even though only a few deals havebeen done. O'Toole pointed to Northern Illinois Gas' Chicago Hub asan example of where swapping would be effective.     Richard Rushton, general manager of gas storage for NIGas, saidhis company is approaching storage capacity releases cautiously. "We won't be real aggressive,"  he said, because the IllinoisCommerce Commission has determined that ratepayers should sharethe benefits of the hub, but shareholders will assume the risks.     Another speaker on the panel, Steve Schoening, manager of loadand supply for Wisconsin Natural Gas, said Wisconsin Natural isstill looking to lease storage " close enough to home"  so it couldeliminate the need to nominate transportation from storage on apipeline. So far, the LDC has been unsuccessful because the closeststorage is in Illinois or Michigan.     The panel members discussed how the industry operated thiswinter under Order 636 and extreme weather. The panel praised theindustry's successful effort and communication this past winter,but they also said communication needs to improve in order to makesure the natural gas system can meet future challenges.     Distributors need to have a contact at the pipelines to call whocan give them the capacity information they need right away,Rushton said. He explained that NIGas encountered that problemthis past January when it was trying to find out how much capacitywas flowing on the pipelines that service it.     Rushton said it turned out that often there was only one personat the pipeline who could give the distributor capacity informationand by the time that person got back to NIGas, it was midday. Also,he urged pipelines and suppliers to find a better mechanism forsecuring supplies on the weekends. Some of January's coldest daysin NIGas' northern Illinois service area fell right on the weekends.     Schoening agreed, saying LDCs still need to be able to pick upthe phone and talk to someone, no matter how good a pipeline's EBBis. He said pipelines need to understand the problems LDCs havewith nominating a day ahead of time.     John Kelly, director of transmission technical services forPanhandle Eastern Pipe Line, defended pipelines' efforts, pointingout that " communication is a two-way street."  He said there areother elements of the industry that need to keep in touch, not justpipelines and LDCs, but marketers and producers as well. Inaddition, customers need to keep pipelines abreast of what they aredoing with their storage volumes so the pipelines can keep track ofvolumes and supplies.     Kelly added that pipelines' bulletin boards will only improve asthey move toward electronic data interchange and they work closelywith customers. Rushton and Schoening agreed that all the toolsweren't in place this winter and the system still managed to operateeffectively. But the system needs to improve, and communication isthe key, Rushton said.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994LDC wants gathering line added to Jackson Prairie     Washington Natural Gas has asked FERC to let it amend anearlier application to expand its Jackson Prairie storage facility soit can add a 4,800-foot gathering line.     The company explained that the gathering line is needed torelieve a shortfall in the anticipated delivery capability that theexpansion project was going to add. Washington Natural expectedthat its expansion would bring seasonal working gas to 15.1 billioncf, an increase of 2.3 billion cf. The work would also increase thefirm delivery rate to 450 million cfd. The expansion work wasexpected to cost a total of about $4.4 million.     FERC approved Washington Natural's application in a March1991 order that allows the utility to do well recompletions on sixwells, add two dehydration and two cooling towers and a meteringstation. Washington Natural has determined that the well workoversdidn't result in the projected increase in deliverability that it hadanticipated.     Due to this performance shortfall, the project cannot achieve thecertificated seasonal working gas quantity of 15.1 billion cf, thedistributor said. That leads to a difference between the certificatedcontract demand level and the actual withdrawal rate that can beachieved at the facility.     Washington Natural says it can fix this shortfall and bring theexpansion project's performance up to its certificated capacitylevel by constructing a 4,800-foot, 16-inch gathering line. Theconstruction is expected to cost $655,000 which the three owners ofJackson Prairie will bear. The other owners of the facility areNorthwest Pipeline and Washington Water Power.     The gathering lines will connect some of the existing wells withthe compressor station and will reduce the pressures against whichthe withdrawal wells have to work during the withdrawal cycle. "This arrangement will effectively increase the deliverability of thewithdrawal wells,"  Washington Natural contends (CP94-534).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Design problems for existing cavern and bedded salt cavernconstruction     By Michel Dussaud     Gas storage in salt caverns is becoming popular as evidenced bythe fact that many of the new gas storage projects, 16 out of 40, or40%, are in salt caverns. A larger percentage of these new storagecaverns will be converted from existing caverns to storage (40% ofnew projects), and more caverns, about 25% of new projects, will bein bedded salt. This is due to the search for the best location withregard to pipeline interconnects, especially in the market area,where no domal salt is available. Also, competition among storagedevelopers is contributing to the popularity of salt cavernconstruction.     Most of the existing gas storage facilities in salt caverns in theUnited States and Canada are in salt domes, with only 15% of themin bedded salt. A few of the existing gas storage caverns, 20%, areconverted brine or liquid storage caverns. Only one of theseconverted caverns is in bedded salt.     The industry may find it more economically attractive to convertan existing cavern into storage than developing a new cavern.However, the storage industry is facing new problems of design intwo areas:     %  How to convert existing caverns safely and efficiently.     %  How to develop safe and economic gas storage caverns inbedded salt.     Salt caverns may be developed by conventional miningtechniques or by solution mining for the purpose of salt extraction.They also may be developed to store liquids. When considering aconversion project, some problems have to be carefully addressedbecause these caverns were not initially designed for this purpose.     The first problem is the tightness of the wells connecting thecavern with the surface. In the case of conventional salt mine, it iseven more critical. Internal and external (cement bond) tightnessmust be checked and the usual procedure is the MechanicalIntegrity Test (MIT) using nitrogen. An apparent leak rate of 250bbls/year (bottom hole conditions) is generally accepted for gascaverns. However, a more lenient requirement is usually acceptedfor brine production or liquid storage, such as 500-1,000bbls/year.     Second, the problem of roof span and roof protection needs to beaddressed. It is common to develop caverns with a very extendedflat roof when producing brine in order to maximize the extractedsalt, especially when the cavern is developed by using a two- ormulti-well technique. In most cases, the brine producer owns thesurface, and no third party is affected in case of a partial roofcollapse resulting in subsidence or even sinkhole formation. In thecase of bedded salt, salt may be solution mined at the roof of thecavern for the same purpose of maximizing salt extraction, and noprotection is left, leaving the cap rock exposed to the caverncontent.     These two circumstances may be very dangerous for gas storage.If the roof span is too large, more gas will have to be kept in thecavern at the end of withdrawal to maintain cavern stability. If nosalt is left at the roof of the cavern to maintain a barrier and avoidcap rock exposure, then a lower maximum pressure may be requiredto mitigate migration risk.     Communication between caverns or migration out of the cavern isa third problem. This may happen when the solution mining processhas not been very well controlled. Then, dissolution abnormalitiesmay occur, especially at the roof if the blanket material level hasnot been well monitored. This may also result from the presence ofa potash seam, for example, which may be dissolved even with saltsaturated brine. Caverns may then communicate through such achannel which is sometimes very difficult to see by sonar. The samecircumstance can also make the cavern communicate with theoutside of the dome, or with the cap rock in the case of bedded salt.Such risks are sometimes very difficult to identify and quantify.Pressure testing is not, in most cases, sensitive enough to detect asmall leak outside the cavern, especially with large caverns.     Fourth, cavern separation sometimes may not be large enough forgas storage. Again, because the brine producer's objective is toextract as much salt as possible, and because brine caverns aremaintained at a relatively constant pressure resulting from theweight of a brine column, they may use a small separation betweencaverns. When converting these caverns into gas storage, higherminimum pressures may be needed so as not to maintain cavernstability or control creep closure.     Finally, in some instances, when contemplating a bedded saltcavern conversion, the problem is to use the space left between therubble in the cavern, when salt is very impure. Depending on therubble size and nature, dewatering this part of the cavern may notbe feasible.     Designing caverns in bedded salt requires addressing somespecific points as well. The first point is the aspect ratio, definedas the ratio of the cavern height to maximum diameter. It is usuallyacknowledged that an oval-shaped cavern, or one with an arc-shapedroof with an aspect ratio close to one, are the most stable. When thisratio becomes lower than one, the vertical component of stress isreduced at the roof of the cavern. Ultimately, it may becomenegative, which means that the rock above the cavern is thensubjected to vertical tension. However, even weak verticalcompression may endanger cap rock stability. This situation mayoccur with large caverns with extended flat roofs and weak caprock. Then, a higher minimum pressure is required to maintaincavern stability, and more base gas has to be used.     In some bedded salt layers, there are in situ stresses which arenon isotropic. For instance, because of tectonic thrust, thehorizontal component of the stress may be 5-20% more than thevertical component. This must be taken into account when designingthe storage cavern. Usually, a higher minimum pressure will berequired.     Insolubles can be a problem as well. If insoluble content is toohigh, for instance above 20%, this may make cavern constructioninfeasible, because the pile of rubble will take all the spacedeveloped by salt dissolution. If there are massive and thickinsoluble layers within the salt bed to be dissolved, this also canmake the cavern difficult or unfit to construct.     Finally, if no salt is left at the roof of the cavern and the caprock is exposed to gas under pressure, it is very important toevaluate cap rock tightness to gas, and identify potential gas trapsor loss zones in permeable horizons above the cavern.     In conclusion, most of the projects involving cavern conversionor bedded salt cavern construction are probably feasible providedthe relevant problems are carefully addressed during the designstage. Some principles of design for underground excavation havebeen given by Professor Bieniawski from Pennsylvania StateUniversity. Two of these principles are particularly suited tostorage cavern design. The first of these is the principle ofminimum uncertainty. All parameters relevant to the design mustbe properly evaluated. If one can't be assessed properly, such as asmall migration path out of the cavern not seen by sonar and noteasily detected by pressure testing, then the corresponding riskcan't be controlled. The second principle to consider is the state-of-the-art design. If extrapolating beyond the usual way of designis needed for a project, then this move must be evaluated carefullyin order to check if the usual assumptions made are still valid.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Amoco Canada adds partners to planned storage hub     TransCanada PipeLines and Alberta Natural Gas have bought intoAmoco Canada Petroleum's storage project as the companies haveteamed up to create a major new natural gas storage hub nearCalgary.     The Amoco storage project is estimated to cost close to $80million and is scheduled to come on line Nov. 1.     TransCanada will take 40% and Alberta Natural will get 20% ofthe project as a result of a joint venture announced by the threeCalgary companies. Amoco retains a 40% share and will continue inits role as operator of the project, which will store 40 billion cf.The companies will set up a separate business to oversee thefacility.     The storage facility is being developed near Amoco's EastCrossfield natural gas plant, about 20 miles north of Calgary. It issituated between TransCanada's mainline east and AlbertaNatural's mainline west. The project is expected to compete withAlberta Energy's AECO-C Hub near Medicine Hat, Alberta.     Although the Amoco storage facility will offer less storagecapacity than Alberta Energy, the project's organizers think it willprovide them with an advantage in the increasingly competitivestorage market. The facility will allow the owners to provide betterservice to their customers, TransCanada said.     TransCanada is also a partner in the Washington 10 storageproject in southeast Michigan. That project is awaiting regulatoryapproval.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994PG&E storage decision delayed     The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) decided at itsMay 4 meeting to hold off on a decision on Pacific Gas & Electric's(PG&E) unbundled storage program until May 25.     The commission is reviewing PG&E's plan and a preliminarydecision from an administrative law judge (ALJ) (GSR 4/94). PG&E'sstorage program proposal unbundles storage capacity into itsseparate functions and it would allow customers to contract for theseparate services.     The ALJ recommended for the 1994-95 season that 150 millioncfd of injection capacity and 32.1 billion cf of inventory beavailable to core customers, just as PG&E requested. The ALJsuggested the utility make available to the core 1,055 million cfd ofwithdrawal capacity, somewhat less than the 1,235 million cfd thatthe utility requested.     Another major issue the CPUC will decide is whether the core ornoncore customers should get expanded capacity at PG&E's mainstorage facility, McDonald Island.     The decision on PG&E's plan also affects the utility's electricfuels department's request for proposals on storage service. Some ofthe proposals, including that by PG&E's gas group, will be affectedby the CPUC decision, an official had said previously.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Market molecules     %  Arkla Energy Resources, now NorAm Gas Transmission, toldits shippers earlier this month that it is nearing maximuminjection rates into storage. The pipeline once again remindedshippers to make sure their physical supplies match their markets.Also, the pipeline won't be able to accept any incremental supplieswithout matching physical markets until the system oversupply isresolved.     %  During June, Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL) said itwon't be able to schedule more than 30% of the total firm storagerights, including no-notice rights, from points sourced on theAmarillo system. NGPL anticipates that interruptible storageinjections from Amarillo sources will remain at zero. If June issimilar to May, NGPL expects about 300 million cfd of Amarillo-sourced injections would be unable to be scheduled.     %  Columbia Gas Transmission said until further notice, it can'taccept storage in transit, SIT, injections on weekends or holidays.SIT injections can only be made on weekdays.     %  Williston Basin Interstate Pipeline offers a discountedsummer storage program. The interruptible service allowsinjections from April 1 through Sept. 30, and all gas must be out ofstorage by March 31, 1995. The rate for storage only is 12.5cents/dth and with transportation, the rate is 42 cents. For moreinformation, call John Childers, transportation services manager, at701-221-1254.     %  Northwest Pipeline encouraged shippers to keep imbalances asclose to zero as possible since its balance at the Jackson Prairiestorage facility, of which it is a co-owner, is near its maximumallowable level. Also, the pipeline doesn't have relief at Questar'sClay Basin storage facility, where Northwest leases space, toincrease injections there.     %  NorAm Gas Transmission is the new name of Arkla EnergyResources. The company received FERC approval to change its name.NorAm says the name more accurately reflects the regions itoperates in. The tables on pages 6 and 7 reflect the change.Affiliate Mississippi River Transmission hasn't changed.     %  Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL) is asking FERC forpermission to modify its S-1 rate schedule so it can provideinterruptible no-notice injection rights to balance actual takes atNGPL's delivery points. As S-1 is presently written, S-1 isn'tavailable on a no-notice basis to balance actual takes during theinjection period, May 1 through Oct. 31. NGPL's S-1 shippers saidthey would like to be able to use S-1 and S-2 to inject gas to helpbalance a delivery point when the actual takes at that point are lessthan the confirmed delivery nominations.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Enron files for section 311 service     Enron Storage last month filed for FERC approval to providesection 311 service from its Napoleonville storage facility inLouisiana.     Enron also requested market-based rates for the section 311service, which allows the company to move gas from storage out ofthe state of Louisiana.     Napoleonville is a salt dome facility in Ascension Parish, La.,with a working gas capacity of 4 billion cf and a maximumwithdrawal rate of 400 million cfd. Enron plans a second phase atthe cavern and it will add 3 billion cf of working gas.     FERC hasn't yet set a date for hearing on Enron's request for 311service and market-based rates.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994RG&E releases storage on CNG     Rochester Gas & Electric (RG&E) has released more storagecapacity on CNG Transmission, but not nearly as much as itreleased earlier this spring.     The utility released 720 million cf of storage on CNG at awithdrawal rate of 12 million cfd. Public Service of North Carolinapicked up all of the capacity for a one-year term from April 1through March 31, 1995. The demand rate for the transaction is$1.95/mcf.     In March, RG&E released a total of 3 billion cf of storagecapacity on CNG Transmission (GSR 4/94). Three companies took thecapacity: Virginia Natural Gas, Washington Gas Light and CNGServices.     RG&E said it has released storage capacity because it has takentransportation capacity on Empire Pipeline, which came on line lastyear. This has freed up some of the utility's storage andtransportation capacity which it has released on electronic bulletinboards.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Cayuta open season nearing end     The Cayuta Natural Gas Storage project has a few days left in itsopen season for available capacity and deliverability from itsplanned salt cavern facility in upstate New York.     The open season closes May 31 on Cayuta, the second project bythe partners of the nearby Avoca Natural Gas Storage. Cayuta isexpected to have a working gas capacity of 2 billion cf in its firstphase and 320 million cfd of withdrawal capability. The second andthird phases will have 2 billion cf and 1 billion cf of capacityrespectively.     Avoca is willing to negotiate bids and enter into preliminaryagreements with any party interested in the 3 billion cf of capacitythat will be available in the second and third phases.     For more information, call James Driscoll of J. Makowski,developing partner of both projects, at 617-720-7678.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Canadian board rejects InterCoastal pipe conversion     ANR Pipeline won't soon be connecting its system to InterCoastalPipe Line's at the Canadian border nor will ANR tie in withConsumer Gas' Tecumseh storage project.     The National Energy Board denied InterCoastal Pipe Line'sapplication to convert a Canadian oil pipeline to gas, which wouldhave had the capacity to move 133 million cfd of gas to markets ineastern Canada and the northeast United States.     ANR Pipeline planned to build almost 12 miles of new pipe toconnect InterCoastal with its system at the border, as well as toOntario utility Consumers' Tecumseh Gas Storage project nearSarnia. Another 12-mile lateral would have extended from theborder to ANR's existing system in Michigan. ANR has anapplication for construction of this pipeline at FERC.     The board said safety concerns prompted its decision. While itwas satisfied with many aspects of InterCoastal's proposal, " theboard had reservations about several features of the detaileddesign. These include the integrity of the existing pipe, localizeddepth of cover problems, minimum design temperature, hazardassessment and setback requirements."     InterCoastal, jointly owned by Interprovincial Pipe Line (IPL)and ANR, planned to convert about 130 miles of existing crude oilpipeline owned by IPL, which extends from IPL's Sarnia, Ontario,terminal to a point near Toronto. InterCoastal had signed ConsumersGas as the project's anchoring customer.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Avoca asks FERC for permission to drill test wells     Avoca Natural Gas Storage has asked FERC for an exemption fromthe temporary certificate requirements so the company can installand test three production and five monitoring wells withoutdelaying its project.     The company explained to FERC in its filing that theSusquehanna River Basin Commission (SRBC), which has jurisdictionover the withdrawal of water from the river, is requiring Avoca toprovide actual production well data to support its application forwater withdrawal. The Susquehanna commission won't consider testdata, even though Avoca has included the test data in itsapplication to SRBC, Avoca said.     Since Avoca isn't authorized to develop and construct productionwells prior to receiving FERC approval on its application, thecompany can't drill the wells, it said. This threatens the January1996 in-service date that Avoca has told customers duringnegotiations, especially since the SRBC meets every other month,Avoca said.     Avoca has requested the commission grant it an exemption fromthe temporary certificate requirements to allow it to construct therequired production wells. The company said it has offered proofthat no additional permanent environmental damage will resultfrom the construction of the wells (CP94-161).Back to Headline List WT03-B35-9IA059-000325-B004-216http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey17.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232034 text/html 26818HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:18:46 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:55 GMTContent-length: 26631Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey17.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNet April 22, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FRONT PAGE NEWS SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS DISCLOSED FOR OREGON POWER PROJECT (663 words) NEW CANADIAN-GAS CONTRACTS (104 words) NO CHANGES DETECTED IN INDUSTRY'S USE OF DERIVATIVES (584 words) PRICE MMS SENDS FEDERAL ROYALTY PAYERS SCALED-DOWN INFORMATION REQUEST (339 words) WEEKLY SNAPSHOT OF CASH PRICES AT HENRY HUB, LA. (66 words) STRATEGY STANDARD CONTRACT HAS ALTERNATIVES FOR SITUATIONS OF NON-PERFORMANCE (1889 words) BACK PAGE NEWS--NEWS BRIEFS GRANDS LACS MARKET CENTER WILL BE DEVELOPED IN S.E. MICHIGAN (84 words) HNG STORAGE ACQUIRES NORTH DAYTON GAS STORAGE FACILITY (87 words) CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS DISCLOSED FOR OREGON POWER PROJECT     The gas-supply arrangements for a planned cogeneration facilityin Oregon were among several new transactions disclosed in export-license applications just filed with the Canadian National EnergyBoard.     Two producer-marketers, Chevron U.S.A. Inc. and Canstates GasMarketing, separately requested Canadian government approval to exporta combined total of 35,000 MMBtu/day for use in the HermistonGenerating Co. L.P. combined-cycle plant to be constructed atHermiston, Ore. Chevron U.S.A.'s supply would be acquired from ChevronCanada Resources Ltd., its north-of-the-border affiliate. Canstateswould buy its gas at wholesale from Home Oil Co. Ltd.     In other developments, Renaissance Energy Ltd. of Calgary filedfor authorization to sell and export gas to Bay State Gas Co. and BayState's parent company, Northern Utilities Inc. of Westborough, Mass.Also, Western Gas Marketing Ltd. disclosed that it has scored a newtransborder deal with the Michigan Gas Utilities unit of UtiliCorpUnited Inc.     Officials with Hermiston Generating did not respond to requestsfor information. However, a project description submitted to the NEBsays it consists of two side-by-side combustion turbines that willutilize gas as their primary fuel.Big new plant     The plant's nominal primary output will be 300 Mw, dividedequally between the two combustion units. Hermiston submitted a copyof a long-term agreement to sell electric power produced by the plantto PacifiCorp, an electric utility based in Portland, Ore.     A source familiar with the project says as of now, it is notintended to be a "qualifying facility" cogenerator for purposes of thePublic Utility Regulatory Policy Act; however, the source says, alocal agricultural-products company will purchase waste energy fromthe plant.     The Feb. 28 contract between Chevron and Hermiston specifies amaximum volume of 20,000 MMBtu over a 15-year period commencing in thesummer of 1996. Transportation to the international border will becarried out by NOVA Corp. of Alberta and Alberta Natural Gas Co. Ltd.Carriage downstream of the border will be by a combination of PacificGas Transmission Co. and Cascade Natural Gas Corp. The latter mustconstruct a delivery tap to serve the power plant.     The gas price is a netback formula set to start at (U.S.)$1.61/MMBtu at the wellhead, with annual 5.5% escalators every Nov. 1.     The April 7 contract between Canstates and Hermiston calls for15,000 MMBtu/day over the same term as that of the Chevron contract.Canstates will buy the gas from Home Oil at a point on ANG's system.Pricing is similar to the terms of the Chevron agreement.     A Canstates official reports that Canstates's biggest existingexport business is a long-term relationship with Transco Gas MarketingCo. under which TGMC receives about 120,000 Mcf/day at the NiagaraFalls border interchange. Canstates, which is controlled by ANG,inherited most of the TGMC supply deal from Sulpetro Ltd., theofficial adds.Other proposed exports     Renaissance is proposing to deliver 6,423 MMBtu/day to Bay Stateunder a 10-year contract commencing Jan. 1, 1995. The delivery pointwould be Niagara Falls or upstream on the system of TransCanadaPipeLines Ltd., depending on which entity's firm capacity is used.     NU would get 990 MMBtu/day over a 10-year term commencing Nov. 1,1995.     In both contracts, the gas price would consist of monthly demand,reservation and transportation charges on TransCanada and NOVA plus acommodity charge for gas based on an index of price reports in threeindustry newsletters.     According to its NEB filing, Western Gas wants to sell a maximumof 7,241Mcf/day to MGU at two locations under a 10-year contract retroactiveto Nov. 1, 1993. The contract price would consist of a demand charge,inventory charge and commodity charge based on a published index.(Hermiston Generating, 415-291-6417; Canstates, 403-264-1134; WesternGas Marketing, 403-269-4535; Renaissance Energy, 403-750-1338;Chevron, 403-234-5643)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994NEW CANADIAN-GAS CONTRACTSBUYER: Bay State Gas Co. (Northern Utilities)SELLER: Renaissance Energy Ltd.START DATE: January 1995TERM (years): 10VOLUME: 6,423 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Hermiston Generating Co.SELLER: Chevron U.S.A./Chevron Canada ResourcesSTART DATE: July 1996TERM (years): 15VOLUME: 20,000 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Hermiston Generating Co.SELLER: Canstates Gas Marketing/Home Oil Co.START DATE: July 1996TERM (years): 15VOLUME: 15,000 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Northern UtilitiesSELLER: Renaissance EnergySTART DATE: January 1995TERM (years): 10VOLUME: 990 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Michigan Gas UtilitiesSELLER: Western Gas Marketing Ltd.START DATE: January 1993TERM (years): 10VOLUME: 7,241 Mcf/dayBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994NO CHANGES DETECTED IN INDUSTRY'S USE OF DERIVATIVES     There has been no significant slowdown in the use of derivativefinancial products by gas marketers, judging by the comments ofofficials contacted by GAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT.     Of four major marketers contacted, two, Tenneco Gas Trading Co.and Coastal Gas Marketing Co., say they have taken no recent actionsto limit or restrict derivatives usage. Officials with the other twocompanies, who declined to speak for attribution by name or company,also say they haven't put any new trading policies in effect.     The reason for official reticence is what one source described as"political concerns" stemming from Congressional and administrativescrutiny of derivatives usage. In a related event, the FinancialAccounting Standards Board on April 14 issued a proposed rulerequiring more complete disclosure of a company's use of derivatives.Gas business `a major beneficiary'     Brian McLaughlin, director of Tenneco Gas Trading, is adamantabout the benefits of derivatives in the gas business and bullish onthe growth outlook for derivatives such as swaps, options, futures andmore exotic hedging instruments. "In a word, no," was his responsewhen asked whether the company has reined in its hedging practices orderivatives employment.     ***********************************************************     WHAT'S A `DERIVATIVE' DERIVED FROM?          Derivatives "are complex financial securities whose     values are derived from other underlying securities," says     Richard George, a Charlottesville, Va., portfolio manager     and editor of a newsletter on derivative risk. He divides     derivatives into three broad types: exchange-listed, over-     the-counter and structured/hybrid. Exchange-listed deriva-     tives include futures and options tied to futures, stock and     currency exchanges. Examples of OTC derivatives are swaps,     options and forwards. Structured/hybrid derivatives include     mortgage securities, bonds with warrants, "convertibles" and     many more newly emerging instruments.          To date, gas marketers have relied primarily on     exchange-listed and OTC derivatives. Industry insiders say     the use of more-exotic hybrids and custom-structured     derivatives has been limited so far to a small group of the     industry's most sophisticated traders.     ***********************************************************     McLaughlin would not comment about the losses from derivativetrading reported by companies outside of the gas industry. But hethinks that derivatives -- based on standard agreements "with slightmodifications and negotiations among counterparties" -- are just whatthe gas market needs to keep growing and avoid the distortions of thepast.     "The gas business has been a major beneficiary of the use offutures and other derivatives," he says. "We see the operations of thefinancial side of the industry as a benchmark for the physical side,"especially by pointing the way toward greater precision in terminologyand standardization of procedures.     He concedes that derivatives bring greater risk -- and the risk isgrowing as traders attempt to make ever-longer derivative-basedtransactions. The key to avoiding fiascos of the type that recentlybefell MG Corp., Procter & Gamble Co., Marion Merrill Dow Inc. andothers is to cover all foreseeable risks with appropriate hedges, hesays, and if none are available, "don't be in there half-covered."CGM likes ERMA     Venita Ferguson, Coastal Gas Marketing's risk manager, reportsthat her company is continuing its practice of hedging priceuncertainties with  offsetting derivative products. CGM makes frequentuse of a modified version of the Energy Risk Management Association'smaster energy price swap agreement, she says.     CGM has put no new restrictions on derivatives usage in recentweeks, Ferguson says. That part of the company's business is growingwith its portfolio of long-term sales, she adds. (FASB, 203-847-0700;Tenneco Gas Trading, 713-757-2131; Coastal Gas Marketing, 713-877-1400)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994MMS SENDS FEDERAL ROYALTY PAYERS SCALED-DOWN INFORMATION REQUEST     The Minerals Management Service this month sent a scaled-downorder for gas-contract settlement information to holders of federaloil and gas leases. The action carries out MMS's side of an agreementmade earlier this year with the Independent Petroleum Association ofAmerica and other industry groups.     The industry groups had challenged MMS's interpretation of theapplication of royalty regulations to contract-settlement payments.Last June, MMS ordered all federal lessees to submit detailedinformation about payments they had received in settlement of gas-contract disputes. The order came as a wave of take-or-pay settlementsresulting from industry restructuring was winding down.     IPAA, in conjunction with the American Petroleum Institute, suedMMS over the June order and sought a preliminary injunction in federalcourt against the data collection effort. It agreed to drop therequest for injunction upon issuance by MMS of the revised order.     The main difference between last year's order and this year's isthat MMS no longer requires lessees to list the federal or Indianleases involved in each settlement or the proportion of the settlementattributable to those leases. MMS continues to require that thefederal royalty payers list all settlements taking place after Dec.31, 1979.Still may go to court     As did the old order, the new order requires royalty payers togive the date of settlement, the producer's name, the purchaser'sname, the amount of the settlement and the date the settlement paymentwas received. MMS defines a settlement as "including, but not limitedto... take-or-pay, price deficiencies, buy out or buy down payments,etc."     Under terms of the agreement, the associations will not challengethe latest MMS order. In the near future, MMS will select up to 10responses for which it will issue an "order to pay." Those cases willthen enter the Interior Dept.'s administrative review process, and MMSsays it expects they will be litigated to determine whether thegovernment is owed royalties based on the settlement payments. (MMS,202-208-3983)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994WEEKLY SNAPSHOT OF CASH PRICES AT HENRY HUB, LA.(per MMBtu)Feb.18  Feb.25  Mar.4  Mar.11  Mar.18  Mar.25  Apr.4*  Apr.8  Apr.15------  ------  -----  ------  ------  ------  ------  -----  ------$2.36   $2.43   $2.24  $2.08   $2.03   $1.94   $1.97   $1.99  $2.08*Survey conducted on Monday because insufficient reports wereavailable on Friday, April 1.Prices are median for reported short-term sales of 5,000 MMBtupackages on the date shown.     Source: telephone survey by Gas Transactions Report staff.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994STANDARD CONTRACT HAS ALTERNATIVES FOR SITUATIONS OF NON-PERFORMANCE     As it does with force majeure, a standard gas contract drafted bya committee of marketing and legal executives provides alternativeclauses for situations in which one party fails to live up to the deal.     The standard EFP contract offers two alternatives for the articletitled "Failure to Perform," Article 10. The "A" set places the burdenof dispute resolution on both contract parties by calling on them to"cooperate" to resolve non-performance issues. The "A" set alsoprovides for more severe penalties for non-performance.Alternative A: cooperative dispute resolutionARTICLE XFailure to Perform10A.1 Subject to the tolerances set forth in Transporter's tariff,Seller is obligated daily to Schedule, or cause to be Scheduled, andto deliver to the Transporter which is delivering Gas to the DeliveryPoint, and Buyer is obligated daily to Schedule, or cause to beScheduled, and to receive, from the Transporter receiving the Gas atthe Delivery Point, the Daily Contract Quantity of Gas at the DeliveryPoint agreed to for the Period of Delivery. Both parties hereto shallalso promptly notify each other as soon as possible of anynotification by a Transporter of any imbalances which are occurring orwhich have occurred, and they shall cooperate to eliminate suchimbalances including the use of any make-up or balancing rights whicheither party may have.[The requirement to notify the other party of an imbalance situationcould be accomplished by telephone; that possibility, along with theparties' mutual obligation to "cooperate" on the elimination of animbalance, adds up to a fairly broad imbalance remedy.]10A.2 If either party fails to Schedule the Daily Contract Quantity,as provided in Section 10.1, that party shall be liable for thefollowing damages:(1) If the amount Buyer Scheduled on any day is less than theapplicable Daily Contract Quantity and the Sales Price, as defined inSection 10.2(3) hereunder, is less than the Contract Price, then Buyershall be liable for and shall pay to Seller (a) a dollar amount equalto any demand charges which Seller has incurred on the Transporterimmediately upstream of the Delivery Point for firm transportation ofGas which Buyer failed to Schedule and (b) a dollar amount equal tothe sum of the product of (i) the difference between the ContractPrice and the Sales Price the Seller receives, multiplied by (ii) thedifference between the Daily Contract Quantity and the quantitiesScheduled by Buyer for each such day during the Period of Delivery.Receipt of full payment hereunder by Seller shall act to reduce theContract Quantity by a quantity equal to the difference between theoriginal Contract Quantity and the total quantity Scheduled for thePeriod of Delivery.[For example, if the buyer takes 2,000 MMBtu less than the DCQ and theseller is forced to sell the gas for 10 cents/MMBtu below the contractprice, the buyer must pay the seller $200 per each day it under-takesplus the pipeline demand charges paid by the seller for firmtransportation.](2) If the amount Seller Scheduled on any day is less than theapplicable Daily Contract Quantity and the Replacement Price, asdefined in Section 10.2(3) hereunder, is greater than the ContractPrice, then Seller shall be liable for and shall pay to Buyer (a) adollar amount equal to any demand charges which Buyer has incurred onthe Transporter immediately downstream of the Delivery Point for firmtransportation of Gas which Seller failed to Schedule and (b) a dollaramount equal to the sum of the product of (i) the difference betweenthe Replacement Price and the Contract Price multiplied by (ii) thedifference between the Daily Contract Quantity and the quantitiesScheduled by Seller for each such day during the Period of Delivery.Receipt of full payment hereunder by Buyer shall act to reduce theoriginal Contract Quantity by the difference between the originalContract Quantity and the total quantity Scheduled by Seller for thePeriod of Delivery.[For example, if the seller delivers 2,000 MMBtu less than the DCQ andthe buyer is forced to buy replacement gas for 5 cents/MMBtu more thanthe contract price, the seller must pay the buyer $100 for each day itunder-delivers plus the pipeline demand charges paid by the buyer forfirm service.](3) The "Sales Price" shall be the price at which Seller is able,acting in good faith, to make comparable sales at the highestreasonable price. The "Replacement Price" shall be the price at whichBuyer is able, acting in good faith, to obtain comparable supplies atthe lowest reasonable price. In the event Seller is not able to find amarket for the quantity of Gas within the Contract Quantity not takenby the Buyer, the Sales Price shall be deemed to be the fair marketprice for the Gas not taken, as agreed to by the parties, minus anamount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the Contract Price.[To reach a valid sales price, the parties can resort to some index --such as closing prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange or spotprices published in newsletters.]In the event Buyer is not able to find replacement gas for thequantity of Gas within the Contract Quantity not delivered by Seller,the Replacement Price shall be deemed to be the fair market price forthe Gas not delivered, as agreed to by the parties, plus an amountequal to fifteen percent (15%) of the Contract Price.[As was the case with the Sales Price determination, it is left to thebuyers to identify an index for the Replacement Price determination.]10A.3 If by failing to receive or deliver quantities equal to theContract Quantity or by failing to confirm Scheduled quantities,either party hereto creates an imbalance on a Transporter, such partyshall be solely liable for correcting such imbalance(s), so long asthe parties cooperate to correct the imbalance as provided in Section10.1. If any such imbalance is not corrected, and charges or penaltiesare assessed by a Transporter, the party which caused such imbalanceshall be responsible for any and all such charges or penalties.Alternative B: independent action     The second alternative for failure to perform makes each partyprimarily responsible for finding a suitable commercial outlet in theevent of non-performance by the other party. In so doing, itestablishes the time limits of that substitute outlet and restrictsthe damages that can be collected in the event of non-performance.ARTICLE XFailure to Perform[The following section requires each party to find alternative supplyor buyers in the event of non-performance by the other party, and itpermits the alternative arrangement to continue until the end of themonth it which it was entered into.]10B.1 If for any reason other than an event of force majeure eitherparty fails, in whole or in part, to perform its respective obligationto deliver or take Gas under this Agreement, the other party shall useits best efforts, acting in a commercially reasonable manner, tomitigate the effect of such failure, which includes attempting tosecure an alternate interruptible supply, or interruptible market, asthe case may be, which allows the defaulting party to resume itsobligation when the defaulting party becomes capable of doing so. Ifin so doing, Buyer secures an alternate source of supply and Sellersubsequently regains its ability to deliver Scheduled volumes, Buyershall not be required to accept Gas, and Buyer may, without prejudiceto its rights to collect damages from the Seller in accordance withSection 10B.2 hereof, through the last day of the month in whichSeller's failure to deliver Gas occurs, rely upon the alternate supplyarrangements. If in acting to mitigate its damages Seller securesalternate markets therefor and Buyer subsequently regains its abilityto accept delivery of Scheduled volumes, Seller shall not be requiredto deliver the volumes that the Buyer was previously unable to acceptfor delivery, and, Seller may, without prejudice to its rights tocollect damages from the Buyer in accordance with Section 10B.3hereof, through the last day of the month in which Buyer's failure totake Gas occurs, continue to deliver to the alternate markets thenominated volumes of gas that it would have otherwise have beenobligated to deliver hereunder.[The following section details and limits the damages to which a partyis entitled in the event of non-performance by the other party.]10B.2 If Seller fails, in whole or in part, to Schedule volumes or tomake Scheduled volumes available to Buyer in accordance with thisAgreement and such failure is not excused by an event of force majeureor some other provision of the Agreement, the Buyer's right to recoverdamages for such failure shall be limited to the following:(1) If Buyer obtains alternate supplies of Gas, a daily amount equalto (a) the shortfall in delivery from the Scheduled amount ("DeliveryShortfall") times the difference between (b) the Contract Price and,(c) the price Buyer paid for the Gas obtained from an alternatesource. In no event, however, shall the amount of such damages exceedthe amount that would have been payable by the Buyer had the Sellerdelivered the Scheduled volumes.(2) If Buyer does not obtain alternate supplies of Gas, a daily amountequal to the Seller's Delivery Shortfall times the Contract Price.Seller agrees to pay Buyer any damages to which Buyer is entitledhereunder on or before the 15th day after the Seller receives awritten calculation of the amount of such damages from the Buyer.10B.3 If Buyer fails to Schedule volumes or to take on any day all orany part of the volumes Scheduled by Buyer hereunder and such failureis not excused by an event of force majeure or some other provision ofthis Agreement, the Seller's right to recover damages for such failureshall be limited to the following:(1) If the Seller is able to obtain alternate markets for the Gas theBuyer fails to take, a daily amount equal to the difference between(a) the Scheduled volumes for such day and (b) the volumes taken onsuch day by the Buyer ("Take Shortfall") times the difference between(i) the price received by the Seller from the alternate buyer(s) and(ii) the Contract Price.(2) If the Seller is not able to obtain alternate markets for the Gasthe Buyer fails to take, a daily amount equal to the Take Shortfall onsuch days times the Contract Price. Buyer agrees to pay Seller anydamages to which Seller is entitled in accordance with the aboveprovisions on or before the 15th day after the Buyer receives awritten calculation of the amount of such damages from the Seller.      The force majeure aspects of the standard EFP agreement, whichwas developed to govern transactions incorporating the exchange offutures for physicals, were covered in article in the previous GASTRANSACTIONS REPORT (4/8 GTR, p. 3). Copies of the standard EFPagreement can be obtained by calling Shelley Hurley, vice presidentfor risk management at Equitable Resources Marketing Co. (EquitableResources, 214-361-3202)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994GRANDS LACS MARKET CENTER WILL BE DEVELOPED IN S.E. MICHIGAN     The Grands Lacs Market Center will be developed in southeasternMichigan to leverage that location's access to U.S. and Canadianpipelines, Midwestern and Canadian gas markets and nearby bedded-saltstorage sites, the project sponsors announced. The project includes a25-mile pipeline interconnecting the systems of Consumers Power Co.,Dearborn, Mich., and Union Gas Ltd. of Chatham, Ontario. Projectsponsors are affiliates of CMS Energy Corp., Union Gas, Tejas PowerCorp., Houston, and Enron Gas Services Corp., Houston. (CMS, 313-438-9253)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994HNG STORAGE ACQUIRES  NORTH DAYTON GAS STORAGE FACILITY     HNG Storage Co. acquired the North Dayton Gas Storage Facility, asalt-cavern structure with a working capacity of 3 Bcf, from Lone StarEnergy Storage Inc. HNG Storage also negotiated modifications to aservice contract for the facility with Houston Lighting & Power Co. aswell as an extension of that contract to 20 years, reports an officialwith the acquiring company. The official adds that there are "activeplans" to add capacity and pipeline connections to the North Daytonfacility (HNG Storage, 713-589-9840)Back to Headline List WT03-B35-10IA059-000325-B004-239http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey07.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232046 text/html 10863HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:19:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:48 GMTContent-length: 10676Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey07.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNet NOVEMBER 2, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Active aftermarket and capacity glut predicted (547 words) Northern Border plans expansion into Indiana (317 words) Pipelines go easy on scheduled November maintenance (185 words) Market (195 words) Futures (34 words) Storage (160 words) CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Active aftermarket and capacity glut predicted      Unseasonably mild weather in the Northeast has created a lullin the capacity market after a busy bid week, and sources arepredicting an active aftermarket for capacity in November if themild weather keeps up.      Replacement shippers held about 10 billion cfd in released firmcapacity on Oct. 28, down about 1.5 billion cfd from Sept. 28.Storage capacity releases were done on CNG Transmission and TexasEastern Transmission.      The aftermarket for capacity should be active now thatpipelines aren't discounting transportation as deeply and if theweather stays mild, said Ben Hadden with Appalachian Gas Sales.      He said there have been more release deals done this bid weekthan during prior bid weeks, partly because bottlenecks haven'tshown up yet on the long-haul pipelines out of the Gulf Coast. Inpast years capacity restraints usually had caused some problemsby now, but pipelines aren't anticipating allocating supply in thenear future, he added.      "The market is pretty dead right now," said an official with aNortheastern distributor. But look out if the weather suddenlyturns cold, he said. "If the weather all of a sudden heads south,markets in the Northeast will catch fire."      The distributor official said his company held on to itsTennessee capacity in case the weather turns and its Texas Easterncapacity so far wasn't selling very well.      He said there is no demand on CNG, but demand on Columbia Gaspicked up a bit with its recallable capacity going for about a 5cents/mcf daily demand rate. On Columbia Gulf, the official said hegot a 9 cents/mcf rate for capacity to Leach, Ky.      The Lebanon, Ohio, interconnect was "really hot" during bidweek for gas sales and capacity releases, according to Hadden.      On Texas Gas Transmission, Dayton Power & Light releasedcapacity in about 13 November release deals into Lebanon for dailydemand rates ranging from 5 cents/mcf to CMS Gas Marketing to17.5 cents/mcf to Tenneco Gas Marketing.      Term deals for the winter and beyond and storage releases arestarting to pop up on electronic bulletin boards. On CNG, theHarriman Utility Board released 26 million cf of various storagecapacity on the pipeline to CNG Gas Services for an injection rate of2.6 cents/mcf and a withdrawal rate of 2.8 cents/mcf. Boston Gaspicked up storage capacity on Texas Eastern from Dartmouth Powerand Bristol & Warren.      Texas-Ohio Gas picked up about 16 million cf from Yankee Gasin three term deals on Texas Eastern for about a 13 cents/mcf dailydemand rate in the field and a 21 cents/mcf rate into zone three.All three deals run through March 1995.      One source said if shippers start pulling the high-priced gasthey bought last April out of Northeastern storage there willprobably be plenty of capacity coming out of the Gulf Coast accessareas in November.      Another source said he also expects an active aftermarket aslong as the weather stays mild. He said he's been getting a lot ofcalls from customers willing to pay maximum rate into theNortheast.      Recallable deals on Tennessee into zone five were going for adaily demand rate in the low-30 cents/mcf range, according to thesource.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Northern Border plans expansion into Indiana      Northern Border Pipeline is seeking customers for a proposedcapacity expansion of its existing system and a pipeline extensioninto Northern Indiana.      The proposed capacity expansion involves increasing receiptcapacity by at least 60 million cfd between the Monchy receiptpoint at the U.S./Canadian border and the Glen Ullin, N.D., receiptpoint on the 42-inch system.      The 30-inch system between Ventura and Harper, Iowa, ismarked for a 260 million cfd capacity expansion. Both expansionswill be accomplished through the addition of compression.      The proposed extension into Northern Indiana involves threelegs that start with 163 miles of 30-inch pipeline from Harper,Iowa, to Northern Illinois Gas' (NIGas) Troy Grove storage field inIllinois.      Along this segment, Northern Border proposes to connect withInterstate Power at Prophetstown, Ill. The pipeline plans 2,200 hpof compression for this leg with a maximum capacity of 260 millioncfd.      From Troy Grove, Northern Border plans to build 69 miles of26-inch pipeline without compression to Manhattan, Ill., where itwill connect with Peoples Gas Light & Coke in the area of Joliet, Ill.Maximum capacity on this leg will also be 260 million cfd.      The proposed extension then continues eastward 35 miles with20-inch pipe into Northern Indiana to connect with NorthernIndiana Public Service (NIPSCO) at Griffith, Ind. Maximum capacityon this segment will be 175 million cfd.      Northern Border has not sought FERC approval for the projectyet. The pipeline has targeted Nov. 1, 1997, as the in-service datefor the expansion. The window for bidding on this potentialcapacity opened Oct. 24 and will close Nov. 18, 1994. NorthernBorder will do a final allocation of bids for the capacity and postthem on its electronic bulletin board by Dec. 16, 1994.      For more information about the expansion, contact Bill Fondawith Northern Border at 402-398-7756.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Pipelines go easy on scheduled November maintenance      Few disruptions in capacity are expected during November asscheduled maintenance continues to remain light on pipelinesacross the United States.      Starting Nov. 2, ANR Pipeline will be lowering a line at a streamcrossing upstream of the Eakley compressor station. Themaintenance work is scheduled to last about three days. Receiptpoints in line segments SW2H, SW2I and SW2J will be shut induring the work.      On Oct. 31, Tennessee Gas Pipeline was at capacity throughstation 219 in Mercer, Pa., and near capacity on the Sullivan Citylateral in Hidalgo, Texas. The pipeline said it may restrict servicesstarting Nov. 2.      Texas Eastern Transmission was at capacity for interruptibletransportation on the 24-inch system through station 16 at Berne,Ohio, and into the suction of Berne, Ohio, from the 24-inch systemon Nov. 1. The Wilcox, Willow Springs and Monroe laterals were alsoat capacity.      On Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line, flow through station 40 atSour Lake, Texas, was being allocated on Nov. 1. Also on Transco,interruptible capacity was limited to 100 million cfd from station180 in Virginia eastward.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Market      A marketer in New England said Monday about gas prices, "Ithink they'll come off a little bit." And a buyer in Houstonexpected much the same, pointing to this week's December futuresclose at almost a nickel off last week.      In other trading, an eastern LDC was fishing for baseload gasinto Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line at station 65 at $1.74 butcouldn't find any baseload sellers under $1.78. Swing sellers wereoffering deals at $1.72.      At Parkway, Ontario, into the Union Gas system, buyers wantedprices in the mid-$1.90s yesterday, while sellers wanted $2.05-15for their gas.      A West Coast marketer bought some Permian gas on El Paso at$1.62, a healthy jump from the mid- to high-$1.50s at the end oflast week. He thought the price increase, which some sources saidhad reached $1.68 by late yesterday afternoon, might be inanticipation of some colder weather moving down from theNorthwest. He was hoping to sell it in the mid-$1.60s.      Prices at AECO-C ranged from C$1.70-$1.80/gj for day-to-daytrading, and at Sumas into Northwest and at Kingsgate into PGTprices hovered around $1.50.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Futures      December futures will find technical support at around $1.93,with short covering expecting at that level, said an analyst.However, the contract is expected to find its ceiling at $1.87 andthen trade lower.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Storage      With withdrawal season right around the corner, net injectionsinto storage jumped to 8.6 billion cfd, more than double theprevious week's, according to the American Gas Assn.'s (AGA)survey for the week ending Oct. 21.      This turnaround at the end of the injection season pushedworking gas in storage to 3,081 billion cf, after passing 3 trillion cfthe previous week, according to AGA's survey. Storage facilitiesnationwide are now 96% full, using AGA's estimated full level of3,206 billion cf.      Sources said the big increase in injections was probably due tostorage users trying to top off their storage capacity in the last fewweeks of injection season.      Net injections were 60 billion cf, up 36 billion cf, or 5.1 billioncfd, from last week's estimate.      Storage facilities in the east hit 97% full, compared to 95% thepreceding week. The producing region appears to have completed itsinjections, with net injections of only 1 billion cf.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-11IA059-000325-B004-270http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey63.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232130 text/html 22040HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:19:43 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:08 GMTContent-length: 21853Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey63.html Sample Issue Copyright WORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MITCHELL DIRECTORS DECLARE DIVIDENDS (64 words) WISCONSIN PSC MODIFIES EXISTING ELECTRIC SERVICE EXTENSION RULES BY EXTENDING THE REFUND PERIOD (182 words) CHEVRON GETS GO-AHEAD TO EXPLORE 1.77-MILLION-ACRE TRACT IN PERU (217 words) MITCHELL'S REMAINING INTEREST IN THE WOODLANDS COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK FOR $17 MILLION (218 words) SPECIAL CHARGES REDUCE CHEVRON'S THIRD QUARTER NET INCOME TO $282 ON OPERATING EARNINGS OF $504 MILLION UP 24 PERCENT (1321 words) ENERGY WEEK '96 FOCUSES ON TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS (129 words) MITCHELL REPORTS LOWER THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGS (424 words) MURPHY OIL REORTS ON THIRD QUARTER (408 words) CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MITCHELL DIRECTORS DECLARE DIVIDENDSDirectors of Mitchell Energy & Development Corp. (NYSE: MND A,MND B), The Woodlands, TX, have declared regular quarterlycash dividends of 12 cents per share on the company's Class Acommon stock and 13.25 cents per share on its Class B commonstock. The dividends are payable Jan. 4, 1996, to stockholdersof record at the close of business on Dec. 21, 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996WISCONSIN PSC MODIFIES EXISTING ELECTRIC SERVICEEXTENSION RULES BY EXTENDING THE REFUND PERIODThe Public Service Commission of Wisconsin (commission) hasdecided to modify its current set of electric serviceextension rules to lessen the financial impact upon customerswho wish to extend service to previously undeveloped areas.The Commission indicated that a wholesale change in thecurrent rules was not appropriate because it would likelycontribute to urban sprawl, but it was reasonable to extendthe refund period for those customers.Extension rules determine who pays for the cost incurred inextending electric utility service to a previously unservedarea. When a customer applies for an extension with a utilitywhere existing distribution lines are far from the dwelling,the utility has to extend a distribution line all the way into the new location. The customer is responsible for the costof the distribution line in advance.Under the current extension rules the customer is entitled toa small credit based on the depreciated cost of thedistribution system. The customer is also eligible forrefunds when other customers attach to the same distributionline that he or she paid for.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996CHEVRON GETS GO-AHEAD TO EXPLORE1.77-MILLION-ACRE TRACT IN PERUChevron Overseas Petroleum (Peru) Limited has signed a licensecontract with PeruPetro S.A. to explore more than 1.77 millionacres on Block 52 in the Peruvian highlands.Chevron's exploration program will include a seismic programand other geologic studies, and is anticipated to startimmediately. Following acquisition and interpretation of thegeologic and seismic data, determinations regarding drillingwill be made.Block 52 is located 250 miles east of the capital city ofLima and is adjacent to the giant Camisea gas/condensatediscoveries. It comprises 718,928 hectares (more than 1.77million acres), and has had no previous exploration activity."We are delighted to be returning to Peru," said RichardMatzke, president of Chevron Overseas Petroleum, "and we areeager to begin exploration in such an exciting area. We feelBlock 52 offers excellent potential due to its geologicsimilarities with and geographic proximity to the prolificCamisea fields," he added.Chevron's history in Peru dates back to the 1930s when thecompany conducted geological exploration in the foothills ofthe Andes. In addition, Chevron operated a refinery inConchan, Peru, until 1972.The Peruvian government's newly revised hydrocarbon laws andnoted that they have enhanced the appeal of operating in Peruby offering favorable terms and encouraging foreign investmentin the country.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MITCHELL'S REMAINING INTEREST IN THE WOODLANDSCOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK FOR $17 MILLIONMitchell Energy & Development Corp., The Woodlands, TX, hassold its remaining 50 percent interest in The WoodlandsCommunications Network to TCI Communications, Inc., for $17million, making TCI Communications the sole owner.This business was started by Mitchell to serve The Woodlandswhen it opened in October 1974 and provides cable television,home security and advertising services. In April 1987,Mitchell sold a. half interest to United Artists Cable.  Tele-Communications, Inc. (TCI) acquired United Artists' cablesystems in 1991, including its half interest in The WoodlandsCommunications Network.Chairman and Chief Executive Officer George P. Mitchell saidthe sale of the remaining interest in The WoodlandsCommunications Network is part of the company's continuingefforts to enhance profitability by selling non-core assets,including those that have a greater value to others. Thecompany has sold more than $200 million in assets during thelast 18 months, Mitchell added.Mitchell Energy & Development Corp. is among the nation'slargest independent producers of natural gas and natural gasliquids. The company, through its subsidiary, The WoodlandsCorporation, also is the developer of a 25,000-acremaster-planned community 27 miles north of Houston. Mitchell'sshares are traded on the New York and Pacific stock exchangesunder the symbols MND A (voting) and MND B (non-voting).Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996SPECIAL CHARGES REDUCE CHEVRON'S THIRD QUARTER NET INCOMETO $282 ON OPERATING EARNINGS OF $504 MILLION UP 24 PERCENTChevron Corporation has reported that special charges reducedthird quarter net income 34 percent to $282 million, or $.44per share, from $425 million ($.65 per share) reported for thethird quarter of 1994.Excluding special charges, 1995 third quarter results were$504 million, a 24 percent increase from adjusted earnings of$407 million for the prior year quarter. Special chargestotaled $222 million and included a $168 million provisionrelated to the company's recently announced decision todispose of its real estate development operations.Commenting on third quarter results, Chairman and CEO KenDerr said, "We're pleased to report another quarter withoperating profit that exceeded half a billion dollars.Despite flat crude oil and lower natural gas prices comparedwith the third quarter of last year, our operating earningsincreased' nearly $100 million, reflecting ongoing strengthin our chemicals and international upstream businesses and ourcontinued emphasis on reducing costs."Derr continued, "Our increased profitability this yeartranslates to a return on capital employed, adjusted forspecial items, of 10.2 percent for the 12 months ended Sept.30. This compares with a return of 8.6 percent for thecalendar year 1994, and demonstrates good progress toward our12.0 percent goal."Adjusted for special items, earnings for the first ninemonths of 1995 were $1.511 billion, up 38 percent from $1.093billion for the 1994 nine months. Net income for the 1995nine months was $1.348 billion, or $2.07 per share, includingspecial charges totaling $163 million; net income for thecomparable prior year period was $1.070 billion, or $1.64 pershare, and included $23 million of special charges."We have a major turnaround currently under way at ourRichmond, Calif., refinery," said Derr. The refinery isexpected to be down for about six weeks to prepare for theintroduction of California-mandated reformulated gasolinesearly next year. When the turnaround is complete, we will bepositioned to be the largest producer of these new gasolines.However, the shutdown will have an effect on our fourthquarter operations."Total revenues in the third quarter were $9.3 billion, down 2percent from $9.5 billion in the year earlier quarter. Totalrevenues for the first nine months of 1995 were $27.9billion, a 5 percent increase from $26.6 billion reported forthe 1994 nine-month period.Included in third quarter net income were foreign exchangelosses of $26 million in 1995 and $30 million in 1994. For thefirst nine months, foreign exchange losses were $20 millionin 1995 and $51 million in 1994.U.S. exploration and production third quarter net earningswere $131 million compared with $63 million in the 1994 thirdquarter. However, current quarter earnings included a netbenefit of $19 million from special items, whereas 1994earnings were reduced $61 million for environmentalremediation and litigation provisions. In the 1995 quarter, a$27 million gain resulting from a refund of federal offshorelease costs was partially offset by environmental remediationprovisions.Excluding special items in both quarters, 1995 earnings of$112 million declined from year-ago earnings of $124 million,primarily because of lower production volumes and lowernatural gas prices. The company's average U.S. liquidsrealization of $14.91 per barrel was little changed from the$15.03 realized in last year's third quarter; however,average natural gas realizations of $1.40 per thousand cubicfeet in the 1995 third quarter were down 14 percent from$1.62 last year. Net liquids production declined to 346,000barrels per day from 371,000, and net natural gas productionvolumes of 1.8 billion cubic feet per day were down 10 percentfrom 2.0 billion in last year's third quarter. The lowerproduction levels were due to normal field declines and anatural gas field unitization adjustment.Depreciation expense declined in line with lower production;exploration expense also declined due to lower wellwrite-offs.International exploration and production third quarter netearnings were $140 million compared with $131 million in the1994 third quarter. The 1995 quarter included special chargesof $22 million for prior year tax adjustments, mostly due toa statutory tax rate increase in Australia.Earnings benefited from higher crude oil sales volumes, dueto the timing of vessel loadings, and a lower effective incometax rate due to the earnings mix. Crude oil and natural gasrealizations were about flat with the prior year quarter.Exploration expenses increased due to higher well write-offs.International net liquids production volumes increasedslightly to 644,000 barrels per day from 640,000 in the 1994third quarter. Net natural gas production volumes declinedabout 6 percent, primarily in Canada, to 539 million cubicfeet per day.U.S. refining and marketing net earnings were $98 millioncompared with a loss of $110 million in the year-ago quarter;however, when special charges in both periods forenvironmental remediation are excluded, earnings werebasically flat at $109 million for the current year quarterand $108 million for the 1994 quarter.Refined product sales margins improved in the 1995 quarter onslightly higher prices. Sales volumes declined 13 percent to1.2 million barrels per day, as a result of the sales of thecompany's Philadelphia refinery in August 1994 and PortArthur, Texas, refinery in February 1995. The volume declineoccurred in lower margin unbranded bulk sales; brandedgasoline sales through the company's marketing systemincreased 2 percent.International refining and marketing net earnings declinedslightly to $53 million from $55 million because of specialcharges of $15 million in the 1995 third quarter related torestructurings in certain Caltex areas and in the company'sUnited Kingdom operations.Excluding the special charges, earnings increased $13 millionas improved operations in Canada and the United Kingdom morethan offset a decline in Caltex earnings, where sales marginsremain depressed in some of that affiliate's operating areas.International sales volumes decreased 4 percent to 894,000barrels per day, largely due to declines in U.K. marketingsales and in the company's international trading operations.Caltex sales volumes decreased 1 percent.Chemicals net earnings increased to $127 million in the 1995third quarter from $68 million in the comparable 1994 quarter.Adjusting for special charges in both periods, mostlyenvironmentally related, earnings of $148 million in the 1995third quarter were more than double the $72 million earned inthe third quarter of 1994.The higher 1995 earnings reflect higher product prices andsales volumes compared with the prior year quarter, consistentwith the improved state of the petrochemicals industry.However, prices for the company's major products began tosoften in the third quarter, and results declined from therecord $175 million earned in the second quarter. Althoughstill much stronger than a year ago, prices have weakened formajor products such as styrene and polyethylene.Corporate and other net charges were $277 million in thecurrent year quarter compared with income of $212 million inthe 1994 third quarter. Both quarter's results were distortedby special items. The 1995 quarter included special chargestotaling $172 million, almost all related to the write-down ofthe company's investment in the real estate developmentbusiness. Results in the 1994 quarter included the reversal of$301 million of previously established tax and relatedinterest reserves resulting from a global settlement with theInternal Revenue Service covering several open tax years.Excluding the special items in both periods, corporate andother charges were $105 million in the 1995 third quarter and$89 million in the year-ago quarter. The 1995 increase was dueto consolidating income tax adjustments.Capital and exploratory expenditures, including the company'sshare of affiliate expenditures, were $1.144 billion in thethird quarter, compared with $1.042 billion spent in lastyear's third quarter. Total expenditures for the first ninemonths of 1995 were $3.292 billion, up 4 percent from $3.174billion spent in the same period in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENERGY WEEK '96 FOCUSES ON TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTSRapid changes within the energy industry - oil, gas,alternative fuels, and petrochemicals -- are having a majorimpact both technologically and geographically. The ENERGYWEEK'96 Conference & Exhibition, the world's largest event tofocus on current and future technologies for these industries,attests to the significant advances underway around the globe.It will also explore CAD/CAM/CIM technologies as applied toenergy industries. It will be held January 29-February 2,1996, at the George R.  Brown Convention Center in Houston,Texas.This year, for the first time, the event is being sponsoredjointly by three major organizations -- the American Societyof Mechanical Engineers (ASME International), the AmericanPetroleum Institute (API), and PennWell Conferences andExhibitions (a division of PennWell Publishing Company).For more information, call (212)705-8157.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MITCHELL REPORTS LOWER THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGSMitchell Energy & Development Corp., The Woodlands, TX,has reported that its net earnings for the three months endedOct. 31, 1995, declined to $11.3 million, or 21 cents a share,from $15 million, or 28 cents a share, in the same period ayear earlier.Excluding unusual gains and charges in both years, earningswere $15 million, versus $10.6 million in the prior-yearperiod. Current-quarter results were adversely affected byseveral factors: significantly lower natural gas prices inNorth Texas due to the termination of the premium-priced gassales contract covering this production in July 1995; weakspot market prices; a 23-day curtailment in October of gasand natural gas liquids production in North Texas resultingfrom maintenance on the interstate pipeline that transportsMitchell's gas from this area to Midwest markets; and a47-day shutdown of the company's one-third-owned MTBE gasolineadditive plant to increase capacity. These factors were morethan offset by profits totaling $19.4 million ($12.6 millionafter tax)Real estate operating earnings increased to $28.9 million,from $6.3 million during the prior year's third quarter. Muchof the improvement results from the previously discussed $19.4million cable TV gain. Current-period earnings alsobenefitted from an increase in residential lot sales in TheWoodlands at prices 8 percent higher per square foot thanthose realized in the prior-year period, improved occupancyat The Woodlands Executive Conference Center and Resort, andearnings from The Woodlands Mall, which opened in October1994.During the first nine months of the current fiscal year, thecompany had net earnings of $13.6 million, or 26 cents pershare, compared with $36.8 million, or 70 cents per share, inthe same period last year. Excluding unusual items in bothyears, earnings during the current period were $41.1 million,versus $28.1 million during the prior-year period.Year-to-date results benefitted from higher natural gasliquids margins, profits from the MTBE plant, the gain fromthe cable system sale, increased earnings from residential andcommercial activities in The Woodlands and lower staff andinterest expenses. These factors were partially offset bylower gas prices resulting from the buyout of the North Texasgas sales contract and weak spot market prices.Mitchell Energy & Development Corp. is a large independentenergy producer and through its subsidiary, The WoodlandsCorporation, is the developer of a 25,000-acre master-plannedcommunity located 27 miles north of downtown Houston. Itsshares are listed on the Now York and Pacific stock exchangesunder the symbols MND A (voting) and MND B (non-voting).Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MURPHY OIL REORTS ON THIRD QUARTERMurphy Oil's president and CEO, Claiborne P.  Deming,announced today that net income for the third quarter of 1995totaled $7.6 million, $.17 a share, compared to $37.3 million,$.83 a share, earned in the third quarter a year ago.  Thecurrent quarter included a bensfit of $8.1 million, $.18 ashare, resulting from settlement of tax matters in the U.S.and U.K., while the third quarter of 1994 included a benefitof $13.9 million, $.31 a share, from settlement of a U.S.Department of Energ Proposed Remedial Order. Net cash fromoperating activities excluding changes in noncash workingcapital items totaled $84.2 million in the third quarter of1995, down six percent from a year ago.In commenting on the results for the current quarter, Mr.Deming said, "Excluding the unusual item, operating resultsreflected a loss of $.5 million that included a $13.6 millionafter-tax charge for a previously announced unsuccessful wellin Mobile Block 908. In total, exploration and productionoperations lost $5 million in the third quarter of 1995compared to earning $9.8 million a year ago.In addition to the Mobile Block 908 well, the current quarterwas adversely affected by generally lower crude oil salesprices, lower U.S. and Canadian natural gas sales prices, andan increase in international exploration activity. Partialoffsets were provided by a 12-percent increase in crude oiland gas liquids production and a 10-percent increase innatural gas production. Posted price for West TexasIntermediate crude oil fluctuated between $15.00 a barrel and$17.25 a barrel in the third quarter of 1995, and closed thequarter at $15.75."Barnings from our worldwide downstream segment totaled $4.2million in the current quarter compared to $11.9 million ayear ago. U.S. operations accounted for most of the decline asa result of lower unit margins and a decline in salso ofrefined products."Earnings from farm, timber, and real estate totaled $1.3million, a decreases of 58 percent compared to the thirdquarter of 1994. Timber operations accounted for most of thedecline."Exploration and production operations in the U.S., whichincluded the $13.6 million after-tax charge for the MobileBlock 908 well, lost $8.9 million compared to earning $.7million in the third quarter of 1994. Operations in Canadaearned $6.3 million in the current quarter, up from $6.2million a year ago, and U.K. operations earned $.9 millioncompared to $1 million.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-12IA059-000325-B004-296http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey11.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232223 text/html 36239HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:20:15 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:51 GMTContent-length: 36052Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey11.html Sample Issue Copyright IMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNet JUNE 21, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Injection program to up yield at Norway's Snorre field (776 words) DOE funds seven reservoir projects (472 words) IPAA reports drilling cost uptick in 1992 (464 words) Two Kern fields revise reserves downward (403 words) '92 Okla. oil yield down; gas up slightly (277 words) AOSTRA reports on IOR, heavy oil (363 words) Petroleum Abstracts (243 words) New IOR patents (399 words) Texas extends IOR incentives (157 words) Horizontal well ups reserves (277 words) Pa. coalgas plans on tap (111 words) Imperial revs up heavy oil output (144 words) Horizontal scores in Sask. (250 words) Calendar (733 words) CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Injection program to up yield at Norway's Snorre field     Norway's Petroleum Directorate says estimated total reserves from theSnorre field in that country's sector of the North Sea could soon beupgraded by 20% to 1 billion barrels.     That's possible because of a pilot project involving the alternateinjection of water and natural gas to increase exploitation yields.     The field, discovered in 1979, is in blocks 34/4 and 34/7 about 125miles west of the coastal community of Floro. Norway's Saga Petroleum isoperator of the field -- with Esso Norway as co-operation partner -- forDeminex, Idemitsu, Norsk Hydro, Elf Petroleum Norge, Amerada Hess,Enterprise Oil and DNO.     The Snorre project is one of the most challenging of its kind. It is indeep water, and the reservoir is extensive and complex. Explorationdrilling delineated the field during most of the 1980s, but sustained low oilprices added to slow development.     Original estimates put Snorre recoverable reserves at 77 million barrelsof oil, 247 bcf of gas and 1.8 bcf of natural gas liquids, with a field lifeexpectancy of 20-25 years. At its peak, original estimates were that field'sliquid output would average 190,000 b/d.     Located in 985' of water, the field is the first truly deepwaterdevelopment in the North Sea. It consists of the largest tension legplatform (TLP) yet installed, with 40 well slots, and a large, 20-well slot,remote subsea production system. Wells drilled from the TLP went onproduction in August 1992, more than a month ahead of schedule andunder the original budget.     The field, whose oil-bearing sandstone reservoir layers are found in twoformations (Statfjord and Lunde, averaging 7,500'-8,500' below the oceanbottom), with pay ranging from nearly 2,790' to 330' in thickness, will bedeveloped in two stages. The operations in Phase 1 will account for all therecoverable reserves in the Statfjord formation and some 30% of theestimated recoverable reserves from the Lunde formation. The decision onPhase 2 development will be based on experience with Phase 1 productionbut likely will involve either relocation of the TLP to the northern part ofthe field or installation of two new subsea production systems.     Tests of wells drilled from the TLP to the Lunde formation have provenSnorre to be richer than first believed. Based on this, the field's lifeexpectancy has been extended beyond 2015. Snorre production is about120,000 b/d currently.     Oil and gas production is partially processed on the Snorre TLP andthen exported in two 17-mile pipelines to the Statfjord A platform, wherethe final processing takes place. The processed oil is then loaded intotankers through the Statfjord buoy loading system, while the gas istransported to shore through a Statpipe system.     However, field output from Snorre likely will not be increased for sometime since the Statfjord platform can handle only 140,000 b/d from Snorre.     Production from the Snorre reservoirs requires a concept calling fornearly 100 wells, half of which will be used for water injection and naturalgas reinjection.     The Snorre subsea production system is the world's largest.  Thesystem's wells are drilled from a floating drilling unit. The system has adouble set of well slots (10 x 10). The inner row of wells is intended to bedrilled first. They will come on stream one by one. The system's manifolddesign allows each well slot to be used for either production or injectionpurposes. The 10 outer wells become operational when the inner wellshave ceased production and have been plugged. The 10 x 10 arrangementallows the manifold and control system, as well as all pipelines and subseatrees, to be used twice, helping to cut costs beyond those for drilling andcompletion.     Large amounts of electricity are required on the TLP for drillingoperations, water injection and processing. The platform has its ownpower station consisting of four gas-powered generators giving a totalcapacity of 60 MW.     Water, pumped into the reservoir to raise formation pressure andthereby increase production, is pumped from the sea and filtered in theTLP's water injection system before it reaches the reservoir.     In addition to 20 wells drilled for oil production, 40 wells will bedrilled from the Snorre TLP, most of the remaining well slots being usedfor injection wells.     To ensure optimum exploitation of the reservoir, the wells will bedrilled horizontally away from both the TLP and the subsea productionsystem. On the average, wells will be drilled some 1.5 miles below theseabed, and their horizontal distance from the platform may be as much as2.5 miles. Total measured depth of wells could reach nearly four miles.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993DOE funds seven reservoir projects     DOE hopes a new initiative will result in more effective productionmethods that could keep many aged U.S. oil fields in operation,particularly for independent producers.     Under the initiative, DOE has made more than $5 million available tosix leading petroleum-oriented universities and one state geological surveyto help develop more accurate methods for depicting the geologicalmakeup of oil and gas reservoirs.     The seven projects were selected during DOE's 1993 petroleumgeoscience competition. Some 63 proposals were received in response to aDOE solicitation issued last October.     In total, the seven projects will cost more than $8 million, with theadditional $3 million to be funded by the winning teams. In most cases,says DOE, the sponsors will team with major and independent producers,service companies and oilfield consultants to carry out the work.     All of the projects will apply advanced geoscience and reservoirengineering concepts to provide operators with a better picture of areservoir's characteristics. In some cases, says DOE, the projects will resultin smaller independent producers having access to new and sophisticatedtechniques that have been available to and used by major producers buthave not yet trickled down to the independent sector.     The selected projects, whose quoted costs are estimates and maychange during negotiations, will take place during a three-year period, andwork will be monitored by DOE's Bartlesville, Okla., Project Office.     The seven selected projects -- with contacts for companies interested inparticipating -- are:     ** Visual Display of Reservoir Parameters Affecting Enhanced OilRecovery -- Proposer: Michigan Technological University at Houghton(contact J.R. Wood, phone 906-487-2894). Total estimated cost: $994,000.Private cost share: 20%.     ** Application of Artificial Intelligence to Reservoir Characterization-- Proposer: University of Tulsa (contact B.G. Kelker, phone 918-631-3036). Total estimated cost: $979,000. Private cost share: 22%.     ** Geoscience/Engineering Characterization of the Inter-WellEnvironment in Carbonate Reservoirs Based on Outcrop Analysis --Proposer: University of Texas at Austin (contact Charles Kerans, phone512-471-7721). Private cost share: 20%.     ** Integration of Advanced Geoscience & Engineering Techniques toQuantify Inter-Well Heterogeneity in Reservoir Models -- Proposer: NewMexico Institute of Mining & Technology at Socorro (contact F.D. Martin,phone 505-835-5142). Private cost share: 60%.     ** Interdisciplinary Study of Reservoir Compartments andHeterogeneity -- Proposer: Colorado School of Mines at Golden (contactC. W. Van Kirk, phone 303-273-3749). Private cost share: 20%.     ** Geological and Petrophysical Characterization of the FerronSandstone for 3-D Simulation of a Fluvial Deltaic Reservoir -- Proposer:Utah Geological Survey at Salt Lake City (contact M. Lee Allison/T.A.Ryer, phone 801-467-7970). Private cost share: 56%.     ** Anisotrophy and Spatial Variation of Relative Permeability andLithologic Character of Tensleep Sandstone Reservoirs in Wyoming --Proposer: University of Wyoming at Laramie (contact R.C. Surdam/T.L.Dunn, phone 307-766-4200). Private cost share: 20%.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993IPAA reports drilling cost uptick in 1992     The Independent Petroleum Assn. of America says domestic oil and gaswells are getting deeper, and operators are returning to existing wells withimproved recovery technology.     Yet, in 1992, this trend failed to reflect in higher drilling costs. To thecontrary, the IPAA report observes that the average cost-per-well last yearexhibited a decline of nearly 4%.     The report adds that much of this decline was precipitated by heavydiscounting by service and supply companies .     Overall, however, the cost of drilling and completing domestic wellslast year increased by slightly more than 1% from 1991, because wells onaverage are deeper than ever.     Scott Espenshade, who prepared the report, says record low drilling in1992 forced service and supply companies to offer discounts in order toget more business. He added that the industry should expect to see suchdeep discounts through the remainder of 1993.     He said an estimate of an average dollar amount for drilling costswould not prove valid, since the cost varies greatly from well to well.Instead, the report uses 1989 data to provide a median for comparison forthe 1992 figures.     Since 1989, the report observes, the cost-per-foot drilling average hasfallen by more than 6% and the cost per well has risen almost 2%. Thisshould be good news to independents, it adds, since the per-well rise ismodest while wells continue to be drilled deeper.     Since 1989, U.S. well depth has increased an average of 12%,Espenshade writes. One cause of this, he adds, is that producers arelooking at deeper pay zones. Also, they are going back to old wells withimproved recovery technology.     Purchased items accounted for 69% of the cost of drilling andequipping wells in 1992. And the remaining 31% involved payments todrilling contractors. This portion of the drilling cost has fallen by about20% from 1990 levels, IPAA notes. The decline was anticipated becausethe industry's average rig count for 1992 -- 721 -- was an all-time low.     Although overall drilling costs have increased slightly so far in 1993,says Gene Ames, IPAA chairman, "there is no better time to drill fornatural gas and oil here at home with drilling costs down and the use ofadvanced technology on the upswing."     The drilling cost report will be published quarterly, says Espenshade.He says he hopes the quarterly report will be beneficial to independents.Instead of basing their findings on information gathered on a "typical"U.S. well, he noted, future reports will be broken down by region to reflectthe differences between drilling areas.     Producers also can take heart from a report just released by Houston-based Baker Hughes Inc., which estimated the average rig count for 1993will be about 760 working units.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Two Kern fields revise reserves downward     Downward additions outnumber by a margin of 2-to-1 upwardadditions to estimated reserves in four of California's Kern County oilfields, where improved recovery projects play a role in production.     The state Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources Div. in its annual look athow much recoverable oil is left in the state's fields singles out the Cymricand Yowlumne fields for upward revisions totaling 24 million barrels;however, the gains are not enough to make up for downward revisionstotaling 55 million barrels in the McKittrick and Poso Creek fields.     The Cymric field's Reef Ridge-Antelope pool in the Welport area of thefield is credited with addition of 15.2 million barrels, boosting estimatedreserves to 78.7 million barrels as of the first of this year. Cumulativeproduction is 191.4 million barrels. Production last year averaged 2,000b/d. In January, production from 82 wells was 2,750 b/d. Steam plays animportant role here, with Chevron Corp. injecting about 7,000 b/d in cyclicsteaming of some 50 wells.     The Yowlumne field's Stevens pay picked up 8.8 million barrels,boosting estimated reserves to 19.1 million barrels. Cumulative productionis 95.9 million barrels. Fifty-six Stevens wells were on line in January,producing 6,720 b/d. Waterflooding plays an important role at Yowlumne.Arco Oil & Gas Co., the field operator, puts away 40,000 b/d in 29injection wells.     On the debit side, the main area of the McKittrick field wasdowngraded 34.5 million barrels, reducing estimated reserves to 4.2million barrels. In January, 350 wells produced 2,900 b/d. Steamfloodinghas been reduced to a minor role in the field, which was on production asearly as 1896 with actual discovery date unknown. In January, only fourinjectors were active, with steam injection at a rate of 511 b/d. Onehundred nineteen injection wells were shut in.     The Poso Creek field, a 1920 discovery, took hits in the Premier area,where reserves dropped 15.5 million barrels, reducing year-end estimatedreserves to 2 million barrels; and the McVan area, where the drop was 5million barrels, leaving estimated reserves of 300,000 barrels. Cumulativeproduction from Premier is 72.5 million barrels. In January, 62 wellsproduced 300 b/d. Steamflooding was down to 12 injectors and a rate of540 b/d with 10 injection wells shut in. At McVan, cumulative productionis 7.2 million barrels. In January, 53 wells produced 146 b/d. Fivesteamflood injection wells were shut in.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993'92 Okla. oil yield down; gas up slightly     Oil production in Oklahoma during 1992 declined 5.6% from 1991totals, while natural gas production increased by 1.4%, says a recent reportfrom the Oklahoma Corporation Commission.     Crude oil and condensate production totaled 101.8 million barrels,down 6 million barrels from 1991's 107.8 million barrels. Daily averageproduction was 278,234 barrels, compared with 295,457 b/d in 1991.     Natural and casinghead gas production last year totaled 1.962 tcf,compared with 1.935 tcf a year earlier. Daily average production was5.362 bcf compared with 5.302 bcf/d a year earlier.     Monthly production figures indicate the decline continued into early1993, the report notes. For February 1993, oil production totaled 7,006,551barrels of crude oil and condensate for a daily average of 250,234 barrels.This was an 8.9% decline from that reported for February 1992.     Natural gas production also showed a dip for February, with a total of100.4 bcf, for a daily average of nearly 3.6 bcf. This was a 7.7% declinefrom February 1992 figures.     Oklahoma oil production has declined annually from 1984 productionof 168.6 million barrels. Oil production in 1992 was the state's lowestsince 1919 when production totaled 86.9 million barrels.     The average price paid for Oklahoma oil in 1992 was $18.99/barrel,compared with an average price of $19.72 in 1991. The average price forOklahoma natural gas was $1.63/mcf, compared with $1.57/mcf a yearearlier.     Of Oklahoma's 77 counties, 66 produced oil and 69 produced gas in1992. Five counties produced neither during the year.     Carter County, in Southcentral Oklahoma, led in oil production with13.6 million barrels. Latimer County in Southeastern Oklahoma, led innatural gas production with 212.8 bcf.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993AOSTRA reports on IOR, heavy oil     The Alberta Oil Sands Technology and Research Authority makes thefollowing IOR and heavy oil research reports and technical papersavailable to interested parties. Copies may be ordered by calling AOSTRAin Edmonton at 403-427-8382 or in Calgary at 403-297-3631:     From Oil Sands: Our Petroleum Future Conference (AOSTRA, AlbertaChamber of Resources, Energy Mines and Resources Canada) Edmonton,Alta., Canada, April 4-7, 1993:     A Eureka Technique for Processing Vacuum Residue from ChinaCrudes, by R.Z. Chen.     Synthetic Crude Oil Production from Retorted Mined Oil Sands:Economic Facts and Misconceptions, by R. Padamsey, R. Kiszarycz, R.W.Luhning, and R.M. Ritcey.     High Conversion Soaker Cracking Process: Commercial Experienceand Recent Development, by K. Washimi, and M. Hamamura.     The CANMET Hydrocracking Process: Recent Developments, by B.B.Pruden, G. Muir, and M. Skripek.     Update of the HDH Process, a Commercial Hydrocracking Technologyfor Extra-Heavy Crude Upgrading, by I. Lopez, R. Marzin, L. Zacarias, P.Pereire, and J. Guitian.     MICROCAT RC: a Resid Conversion Technology Contender, by R.F.Bauman, C.L. Aldridge, R. Bearden Jr., F.X. Mayer, and G.F. Stuntz.     Comparative Economics of Petrochemicals from Alberta Bitumen --Revisited, by R.A.S. Brown, S.S. Wong, and S.P. Singh.     De-Bottlenecking the Suncor Upgrader, by D. Hawthorne, and V.Leung.     Towards More Economical Upgrading, by T.J. McCann.     Startup of the Bi-Provincial Upgrader, by D. Howell, S. Chase, and D.Mitchell.     Managing Cold Flow Production at Cold Lake, by M.F. Adamson, andK.C. Yeung.     In Situ Recovery Technology at Cold Lake, by P.R. Kry.     The Evolution of a Successful Recovery Scheme for the Peace RiverOil Sands, by L.M. Goobie, and H.L. Chang.     Development of a Top-Down Combustion Process, by J. Ivory, S.Lorimer, D. Redford, and B Nzekwu.     HAS Drive Pilot Performance at the AOSTRA Underground TestFacility, by J.H. Duerkisen, D.J. Anderson, D.J. McCallum, and J.C.Suggett.     AOSTRA Underground Test Facility (UTF) Phase B. Implications forCommercialization, by D.P. Komery, J.C. O'Rourke, and J.I. Chambers.     Evaluation of Alternative Technologies for SO2 Reduction, by P.W.Smith, and M. Johnstone.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Petroleum Abstracts     Following is a summary of a technical article published in a petroleumindustry publication. It is available from Petroleum Abstracts, a service ofthe University of Tulsa. Write to McFarlin Library, University of Tulsa,600 S. College, Tulsa, Okla. 74104. Call 800-247-8678 for details, plusprices, giving the title and specific abstract number. The fax number is918-631-3823.     Improving Matrix Acidizing with Nitrogen and Heat In SituGeneration, by C.N. Khalil and Z. de Almeida of Petroleo Brasiliero SA.From the 4th SPE, Et Al, Latin American Petroleum EngineeringConference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Oct. 14-19, 1990:     In matrix acidizing operations in sandstone formations, special caremust be taken to prevent the formation of undesirable precipitatesgenerated by secondary reactions and by cooling of the surroundingwellbore. The fast and thorough recovery of the spent acid fluid isdesirable. Based on studies conducted at the Petrobras R&D Center, achemical process that uses a mixture of saturated solutions of nitrogenatedsalts to simultaneously generate nitrogen and heat was applied. Theintercalated cushions of acid fluid and a mixture of the above solutionsresults in the in situ generation of nitrogen and heat. The increase information temperature associated with the generation of gas increases theradial penetration of the acid fluid, at the same time prevents the formationof insoluble compounds and water blockage, and in general  eases therecovery of the spent fluid (Abstract No. 545283).Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993New IOR patents     S.F. Chien, C.L. Redus and P.L. Sigwardt of Texaco DevelopmentCorp. have patented a method of determining flowline steam quality whichuses flow restriction devices with water addition at a known rate betweenrestrictions. Another object of the invention is to provide for certain fieldapplications where high-quality steam is mixed with water to achieve aspecific low-quality steam. In such case, the quality of the resulting low-quality steam may be accurately determined (Canadian Patent No.1,301,481).     W.J. Clarke of Geochemical Corp. has patented a method of groutingporous gas- and petroleum-bearing formations with a cementitiousmaterial comprising ultra-fine ground slag that is useful for primary andremedial cementing of a wellbore. A composition is provided whichcomprises water, a dispersant, slag and an accelerator to activate the slag(U.S. Patent No. 5,106,423).     P.I. Day of Union Oil Co. of California has patented a method used fordetermining true in situ resistivity of a thin layer within a formation fromdual induction log data. The method first corrects resistivity data read fromthe dual induction log. A representative shoulder bed resistivity is firstdetermined from average deep resistivity data near the shoulder bed. Apaired estimate of layer resistivity and thickness is then computed basedon the determined shoulder bed resistivity, dip angle, and both deep andmedium resistivity data related to the thin bed. The method does notrequire thickness data to be input, and in fact, outputs this information, ifneeded (U.S. Patent No. 5,142,472).     W. Sneed has patented a wireline delivery tool for an underground wellhaving a pipe, a surface seal for the pipe, and a wireline extending fromthe surface into the pipe. The wireline delivery tool includes a body,having a diameter of less than the interior diameter of the pipe, and a cupextending from the body to create a seal with the interior of the pipe. Alongitudinal bore within at least a portion of the body has a port throughthe body on each side of the cup, so that the ports are in communicationwith the interior of the pipe. A pressure valve within the bore normally isin the closed position. Pressure supplied into the pipe between the surfaceseal and the cup will move the delivery tool within the pipe (U.S. PatentNo. 5,180,009).Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Texas extends IOR incentives     Texas Gov. Ann Richards signed into law a bill (S.B. 466) that extendsby four years the opportunity for operators to qualify for existing taxincentives for new and expanded IOR projects.     The bill extends the 50% severance tax break for IOR projects through1998 on projects begun on or after Jan. 1, 1994. The credit will beavailable after Jan. 1, 1996.     Richards praised the measure's incentives. "The estimates I've seen forthe additional recovery of Texas oil surpass 650 million barrels for theperiod extending to 1998," Richards said.     The benefits of the legislation include additional investment in oilproduction infrastructure and greater operating efficiency due to the longeroperational life of projects subject to the tax credit, she said.     State Sen. Bill Sims, D-San Angelo, the bill's sponsor, said the bill was"the single most important piece of legislation to help the oil and gasindustry passed in the 73rd Texas legislative session."Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Horizontal well ups reserves     Pogo Producing Co. is developing a 21-year-old oil and gas field in theGulf of Mexico, adding additional proven reserves with the aid ofhorizontal drilling technology.     Pogo, as operator, recently completed two wells in the Eugene IslandBlock 330 field, one of which was the first horizontal well to be drilled inthe field's prolific reservoir.     Pogo Chairman Paul Van Wagenen said first results from the horizontalwell, the C-7ST Well No. 2, indicated 535' of net pay section from twolobes of the GA-2 horizon. The well was drilled from Platform C, one ofseveral fixed drilling/production platforms in the field.     Due to the successful completion of the horizontal well, an additionalassignment of proven reserves in the field is anticipated, Van Wagenensaid.     The horizontal well followed by about a week successful completion ofa conventional development well, the C-10ST No. 2, which is nowproducing at a rate of 710 b/d of oil on a 20/64" choke, with flowingtubing pressure of 620 psi. That well encountered 80' of net oil sand and isproducing from the HB sand horizons.     Pogo, with 35% working interest, is the largest owner in the field,which was discovered in 1972 and already has produced more than 600bcf of gas and more than 100 million barrels of oil.     Van Wagenen said Pogo's approved $60 million 1993 capitalexpenditures budget includes a minimum of four development wells andtwo recompletions in this very prolific block. The group expects to begindrilling the third development well within a few weeks, following up withfurther drilling and workover activity during the remainder of the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Pa. coalgas plans on tap     The Independent Oil & Gas Assn. of Pennsylvania will participate in adiscussion June 25 of issues and potential directions for development of acomprehensive coalbed methane program for that state.     The state Environmental Resources Dept. will meet with IOGA andrepresentatives of other associations in Harrisburg.     The meeting was called in response to a published notice regarding asection of the federal Energy Policy Act of 1992, which includesPennsylvania on a list of affected states with large coal reserves.     IOGA says ownership, access and discharge issues will be discussed atthe meeting.     For more information, phone Barry Cosey, IOGA executive director, at717-232-0137; fax 717-232-3035.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Imperial revs up heavy oil output     Imperial Oil Ltd., Calgary, Alberta, is working to find ways to speedheavy oil production at its Cold Lake project.     A company senior vice president, Douglas Baldwin, said the companywill bring phases 7 and 8 of its Cold Lake program onstream later thisyear, and the company is investigating ways to accelerate phases 9 and 10,with steam injection scheduled to begin by mid-1994, adding 25,000 b/d toproduction. That will bring total Cold Lake production to about 125,000b/d, he added.     Once completed, the four-phase expansion will have cost about C$100million, Baldwin said.     He said boilers and central processing facilities needed for theexpansion are in place, with the drilling of injection wells and producingwells remaining to be completed.     Drilling in Western Canada is at an all-time high, with shortages ofdrilling equipment developing in some areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Horizontal scores in Sask.     Incentives offered by Western Canadian provincial governments tooperators that drill horizontal wells or re-complete horizontally in verticalwells are keeping the number of such wells high in recent months.     An example is Petrolantic Ltd., which announced last week it hadcompleted a horizontal producer in the Battle Creek field in WesternSaskatchewan.     The well, No. 2-27-3-26 W3M, was drilled to 6,750' total depth  andcut 1,886' of the Shaunovan formation pay with the horizontal section.Petrolantic described the main pay zone, some 915' in length, as excellentoil-saturated, porous (18%-24% porosity) and permeable rock.     Completed open hole, the well tested at rates of 150-260 b/d. It wasequipped with pumps and rods and is producing into on-site productiontanks.     The well will be flow-lined to the battery to test production rates at fullcapacity, the company said, adding it expects this rate to reach about 500b/d. It is anticipated that the oil cut will stabilize at the 60% range.Maximum projected flow rates achievable with existing facilities andequipment is 800 b/d of fluid, the company added.     If four-month production results meet projections, up to two additionalhorizontal wells may be drilled in the Battle Creek area prior to year-end,the company said.     Petrolantic, with headquarters in Calgary, Alberta, says it holds a32.4% before-payout interest and a 29.3% after-payout interest in theBattle Creek project. Laval, Quebec-based Granisko Resources Inc. holdsa 29% working interest.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Calendar     The National Energy Summit, June 28-29, National Press Club,Washington, D.C. (National Energy Summit, 919 18th St. N.W., Suite450, Washington, D.C. 20006; phone 202-457-0001).     SPE Gas Technology Symposium, June 28-30, Calgary, Alberta,Canada (SPE Conference Programming Dept., P.O. Box 83836,Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; phone 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     8th Petroleum Computer Conference, July 11-14, New Orleans, La.(Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     SPE Forum Series in North America, July 11-14, New Orleans (LoisWoods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     AAPG School on Fractured Reservoir Analysis July 19-23, Great Falls,Mont. (AAPG Education Dept., P.O. Box 979, Tulsa, Okla. 74101; phone918-584-2555).     39th Annual Rocky Mountain Mineral Law Institute, July 22-24,Radisson Resort Vail, Vail, Colo. (The institute, Porter AdministrationBldg., 7039 E. 18th Ave., Denver, Colo. 80220; 303-321-8100).     AAPG Fracture Analysis Workshop: With Problem Set to IdentifyFractured Exploration Targets, Aug. 23-27, Hagerstown, Md. (AAPGEducation Dept., P.O. Box 979, Tulsa, Okla. 74101; phone 918-584-2555).     SPE Offshore Europe, Sept. 7-10, Aberdeen, Scotland (Lois Woods,SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836;214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     SPE Forum Series in Europe, Sept. 12-Oct. 1, Seefeld, Austria (LoisWoods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     IADC Annual Meeting, Sept. 19-21, Westin Oaks Hotel, Houston,Texas (Kathy Glass, IADC, 15810 Park 10 Place, Suite 242, Houston,Texas 77084-5134; phone 713-578-7171; fax 713-578-0589).     Eastern Coalbed Methane Forum, Sept. 21, Bryant Conference Center,University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Ala. (Dan Thompson, College ofContinuing Studies, U. of Alabama, 226 Martha Parham Bldg., P.O. Box870388, Tuscaloosa, Ala. 35487-0388; phone 205-348-8687).     SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, Oct. 3-6, Houston,Texas (Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson,Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     First Kazakhstan Int'l. Oil & Gas Exhibition '93, Oct. 5-8, VDNKh Int'l.Exhibition Centre, Alma Ata, Kazakhstan (Mark Webber, in London,England; phone 44 (71) 286-9720; fax: 44 (71) 286-0177).     Fifth Saskatchewan Petroleum Conference: 'Prosperity ThroughTechnology', Oct. 18-20, Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada (Saskoil, P.O.Box 1550, 1777 Victoria Ave., Regina, Sask. S4P 3C4 Canada; Gen.Chairman, Rich Kerr, phone 306-781-8392).     AAPG International Conference and Exhibition, Oct. 17-20, TheHague, The Netherlands (Roelof J. Murris, Nieuwe Parklaan 26B, 2597LD, The Hague, The Neth.; 31-70-3500052; fax: 31-15-617988).     GRI Short Course: Recompletion Strategies for Coalbed MethaneWells, [location to be announced], (Charles M. Boyer, AdvancedResources Interantional, Inc. 1110 N. Glebe Rd., Suite 600, Arlington,Va.22201-4714; phone 703-528-8420).     AAPG School on Development Geology: Appraisal, Delineation,Enhanced Recovery, Nov. 1-4, Houston, Texas (AAPG Education Dept.,P.O. Box 979, Tulsa, Okla. 74101; phone 918-584-2555).     Deep Offshore Technology Conference and Exhibition, Nov. 8-10,Monte Carlo Convention Center, Monte Carlo, Monaco (DOT '93, TourAlbert ler, 65, avenue de Colmar, 92507 Rueil-Malmaison Cedex, France;phone 33 (1) 4714-1659; fax: 33 (1) 4752-9044).     1993 Eastern Oil Shale Symposium, Nov. 17-19, Lexington, Ky.(Geaunita Caylor, coordinator, University of Kentucky/OISTL, 645Maxwelton Court, Lexington, Ky. 40506-0350; phone 606-257-2820; fax606-258-1049).      SPE Forum Series in the Middle East, Dec. 4-9, Dubai, UAE(Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     IADC/SPE Drilling Conference, Feb. 15-18, 1994, Dallas (Ken Fischer,IADC Document Service, 15810 Park 10 Place, Suite 242, Houston, Texas77084-5134; 713-578-7171, ext. 210, or Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept.,P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     14th World Petroleum Congress, May 29, June 1, 1994, Stavanger,Norway (WPC 94, Congress Secretariat, c/o Statoil, P.O. Box 300, 4001Stavanger, Norway; 47-4-80-61-41; fax 47-4-80-60-20).     AAPG Annual Meeting, June 12-15, 1994, Denver, Colo. (RobbieGries, 1660 Lincoln St., Suite 1640, Denver, Colo. 80203; 303-861-1006).Back to Headline List WT03-B35-13IA059-000325-B004-340http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey67.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232249 text/html 85889HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:20:53 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:12 GMTContent-length: 85702Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey67.html Sample Issue Copyright INDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TAIWAN SELECTS ENSERCH, INTERGEN, SCEPTRE IN SECOND ROUND OF IPP BIDS (382 words) S&P DOWNGRADES SOME PROJECT DEBT DUE TO NIMO PRESSURE ON NUG PACTS (552 words) FORMOSA PLASTICS DEVELOPING TWO PROJECTS TOTALING 5,900 MW IN CHINA (238 words) FINANCE EDF, ITALY'S EDISON AND FINEL CLOSE ON 600-MW ITALIAN GENERATING FIRM (210 words) ENTERGY CLOSES $1.2-BILLION PURCHASE OF AUSTRALIAN DISTRIBUTOR CITIPOWER (274 words) FIRST GAS IN TALKS FOR FINANCING 880-MW GAS PROJECT IN PHILIPPINES (199 words) PHILIPPINE DEVELOPER TO FLOAT BONDS VALUED AT $85-MILLION IN U.S. MARKETS (155 words) COMPANIES UTILICORP, AIR PRODUCTS FORM LINK FOR GAS-FIRED PROJECTS IN MIDWEST (404 words) IDAHO POWER CONSIDERS RENEWABLES SUBSIDIARY; INDONESIA FIRST TARGET (301 words) CORDELL HULL, ERIC ZAUSNER ESTABLISH FIRM FOR INTERNATIONAL ENERGY ASSETS (132 words) TENNECO BUYS 10% OF AUSTRALIAN GAS, POWER DEVELOPMENT COMPANY (270 words) THAILAND'S EGCO EYES PLANTS IN LAOS CHINA, VIETNAM, INDONESIA, MYANMAR (529 words) ASIA/PACIFIC RIM MAHARASHSTRA OKAYS AMENDED PLAN FOR DABHOL PROJECT, NOW 2,450 MW (951 words) CHINA FORMS NEW AGENCY TO SEPARATE GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE ELECTRIC SECTORS (435 words) LAOS MAY ALLOW CHINA-THAI LINE IN COUNTRY FOR 1,500-MW PROJECT (409 words) SCEPTRE, PARTNERS TO REPOWER TWO SMALL PLANTS IN CHINA; MORE PLANNED (341 words) KEY PHILIPPINE SENATOR WANTS PROBE OF LINE DELAYS AFFECTING CEPA PLANT (259 words) PHILIPPINES' NAPOCOR MAY SELL TWO WESTINGHOUSE TURBINES TO TEXACO (202 words) PHILIPPINE INVESTMENT BOARD GRANTS INCENTIVES FOR TWO PROJECTS, 160 MW (213 words) SOUTH KOREA LIFTS 750-MW SIZE CAP; 1,600-MW RFP NOW SEEN IN FEBRUARY (399 words) QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA, ENCOURAGING BAGASSE PLANTS UNDER NEW PROGRAM (235 words) EUROPE/MIDDLE EAST NATIONAL POWER, POWERGEN MAY FACE MORE AGENCY-ORDERED PLANT SELL-OFFS (348 words) UKRAINE GETS $1.8-BILLION WESTERN AID FOR POWER; BIG ABB PROJECT DEAD (441 words) U.K.'S NATIONAL POWER PLANS 60-MW PROJECT IN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (307 words) NORTH AMERICA MET-ED MAY PAY UP TO $35-MILLION TO KILL 227-MW AIR PRODUCTS PACT (478 words) PANDA TO REFILE LAWSUIT CHARGING FLA. POWER BLOCKED 115-MW PROJECT (426 words) ENERGY INITIATIVES BEATS FLA. POWER IN COURT ON RATES FOR 112-MW PLANT (498 words) NIMO: PURPA PREEMPTS NEW YORK LAW REQUIRING TAX REIMBURSEMENT TO QFS (303 words) N.Y. JUDGE SEES ISO AS KEY IN MOVE TO WHOLESALE COMPETITION, ACCESS (341 words) PACIFIC GENERATION BUYS 25% INTEREST IN 100-MW ONTARIO PLANT FROM DESTEC (298 words) MISSION FORMALLY EXITS 400-MW PROJECT AT WEYERHAEUSER MILL IN WASH. STATE (211 words) LATIN AMERICA AES, ONTARIO HYDRO UNIT IN TALKS TO BUY 2,700-MW ARGENTINE PLANT (279 words) TAIWAN FIRM PROPOSES 1,010-MW BOT HYDRO PROJECT IN HONDURAS (270 words) SPAIN'S ENDESA SELLS 9.7% OF EDENOR IN ARGENTINA FOR ABOUT $76-MILLION (145 words) CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TAIWAN SELECTS ENSERCH, INTERGEN, SCEPTRE IN SECOND ROUND OF IPP BIDSEnserch Development Corp., International Generating Co. (Intergen) andSceptre Power are members of four consortia proposing a total of 3,750 MWthat were selected by the government of Taiwan in the country's secondindependent power solicitation, originally for 1,800 MW.   The four consortia were among 18 bidders proposing 19 separate projectsrepresenting 10,050 MW of new capacity for the solicitation.   Recently, Taiwan's Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA) selected from thefirst round of proposals seven consortia to build a total of 7,110 MW (IPR,28 July '95, 1). In that bidding, developers proposed 23 projectsrepresenting more than 30,300 MW.   Many of the projects selected in the first round have stalled due to thelack of development experience among the local sponsors (IPR, 20 Oct '95,1).   In the latest round, Enserch Development of Dallas said it is part of aconsortium that will build, own and operate a 500-MW, oil-fired, project inthe northern city of Hualien.   Enserch officials said the company will hold a 30% equity stake in theproject, while 70% will be held by two domestic partners, the Fubon Groupand the Ambassador Group.   The consortium will spend the rest of 1996 on preliminary developmentand expects to begin construction sometime in 1997. Commercial operationwill begin after 1999.   Boston-based Intergen, a joint venture of Bechtel Group and Pacific Gas& Electric affiliates, was selected to develop a private power project ofbetween 1,200 MW and 1,500 MW in a location known as Lizhe. Intergendeclined to release details of the project, but it will be in a jointventure with a local Taiwanese company.   Sceptre Power officials declined to release project details, but saidthe company is actively developing a project in Taiwan. Reportedly, Sceptrewill have a partner, perhaps Taiwan Sakura Co., in a 1,224-MW, oil-firedproject in Suao.   A fourth award, to a joint venture of Taiwan's Cheng-Chou Electronicsand ESC of Germany, was for a 600-MW to 700-MW project in Hsin-Chu, thoughthis could not be confirmed at presstime.   All four projects are expected to be in commercial operation by 2000 or2001.   The government said power rates offered by developers were verycompetitive, but did not offer details. The developers now must focus onobtaining environmental approvals.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   S&P DOWNGRADES SOME PROJECT DEBT DUE TO NIMO PRESSURE ON NUG PACTS   Standard & Poor's has downgraded two non-utility generation debt issuesbecause of their reliance on payments by Niagara Mohawk Power, which ismoving aggressively to restructure contracts.   In its ``Power Choice'' proposal, submitted to the New York PublicService Commission last fall, NiMo offered to open up its service territoryto retail competition, but only if it could restructure the above-marketcontracts, which it blames for much of its high rates (IPR, 20 Oct '95,1).   If it cannot restructure those pacts, NiMo said, it will seek to takeover projects through its power of eminent domain, then auction them off toparties that would sell at market prices.   In addition, NiMo raised the prospect that it might seek Chapter 11protection under federal bankruptcy laws, which would most likely reducepayments to NUGs.   In response, S&P set a BBB- rating for the first mortgage bonds ofSelkirk Cogen Funding Corp., and affirmed that rating on Jan. 5, addingthat the rating outlook is now negative.   The $392-million debt issue relates to the 332-MW Selkirk cogenerationproject, developed by Cogen Technologies, with a 79% stake, along withEnergy Initiatives, Tomen Power, and U.S. Generating.   S&P fears the cash flows supporting the debt could be eroded if NiMoforces a renegotiation of the power-sales contract, or pursues a Chapter 11filing, it stated. The ratings agency reached that conclusion despite thefact that the Selkirk project sells only 20% of its power to NiMo, withmost of the output going to Consolidated Edison.   However, because of the minor reliance on NiMo, ``the project has theflexibility to potentially absorb a partial loss of Niagara Mohawkrevenues, through contract renegotiation or otherwise, at the BBB- ratinglevel.'' Cogen Technologies could not be reached for comment by presstime.   Also on Jan. 5, S&P lowered the ratings from BB to BBB- on seniorsecured debt of Energy Investors Fund Funding Corp., and listed the outlookas negative. Part of the downgrade for the $125-million issue stems fromNiMo's proposals, S&P said.   Mark Tarini, treasurer of Boston-based Energy Investors Corp. (EIF),told Independent Power Report the downgrade was not unexpected, since S&Pput the issue on ``CreditWatch'' after the NiMo proposal in October.However, ``we were surprised they knocked us down two levels.''   Tarini said the fund in question involves five projects connected withNiMo: the High Falls and South Glens Falls projects, operated by AdirondackHydro, totaling 49 MW; a 58-MW hydro project operated by InternationalPaper; the Indeck/Olean Energy Center, an 80-MW gas-fired project owned andoperated by Indeck Energy Services in Olean, N.Y.; and the Salt City EnergyVenture, an 80-MW coal project in Solvay, N.Y., developed by CMS Generationand other partners.   In downgrading the EIF debt, S&P also cited the fund's investment in 71MW of wind projects in California, which are owned and operated byfinancially troubled Kenetech Corp. Kenetech has suffered financialproblems and a number of key executives including its CEO recently resigned(IPR, 29 Dec '95, 3; 1 Dec '95, 1).   If Kenetech recovers and NiMo does not pursue its threats, EIF plans tolobby for an upgrading of the debt, Tarini said. However, he noted that``downgrades are like gravity--once ratings go down, its hard to get out ofthat hole.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FORMOSA PLASTICS DEVELOPING TWO PROJECTS TOTALING 5,900 MW IN CHINA   Formosa Plastics Co. of Taiwan said its Formosa Plastics Group (FPG)will develop two coal-fired independent power plants totaling 5,900 MW inthe city of Zhangzhou in southern mainland China.   The 3,500-MW and 2,400-MW plants will cost a total of $7-billion.   Zhangzhou will provide a number of incentives, including 132-hectares ofland at no charge for five years and reduced charges for the following fiveyears.   Formosa Plastics said it expected to bring in at least one equitypartner from the U.S. into the project.   The company is also building an electric car battery manufacturingfacility in Zhangzhou in a joint venture with American Royal Co. Formosawill produce the car batteries in mainland China and assemble the cars inTaiwan.   Formosa officials said the company is attempting to capitalize on theexperience it is gaining in Taiwan, where it is one of seven companiesselected in that country's first private power solicitation, and to takeadvantage of the ``economic liberalization'' underway in China (IPR, 15 Dec'95, 20).   Under the name Mailiao Cogeneration Co., Formosa is developing a1,350-MW, coal-fired plant on a Formosa site at Mailiao in Yunlin County,Taiwan. The project is expected to be expanded to about 2,400 MW in theyears ahead. Formosa plans for the first phase to reach commercialoperation in 1999.   Over the longer-term, FPG is also evaluating power project opportunitiesin the Philippines.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   EDF, ITALY'S EDISON AND FINEL CLOSE ON 600-MW ITALIAN GENERATING FIRM   A joint venture of Italy's Edison SpA, Finel and Electricite de Francehave completed the purchase of a 75% equity stake in the 600-MW IlvaServizi Energie (ISE), the power generation arm of Italy's state-ownedsteel company Ilva.   The 75% stake in ISE cost the two companies $220-million, which it paidout of cash reserves without financing.   ISE includes a 500-MW, gas-fired, cogeneration plant at Taranto and a100-MW, gas-fired, cogeneration plant at Piombino in Tuscany. An additional500-MW, combined-cycle unit is under construction at Taranto and a 170-MW,combined-cycle unit is planned for Piombino.   The Taranto plant supplies power and steam to the state-owned plasticscompany, Ilva Laminati Piani.   The additional generating units under construction will cost thepartners about $550-million to complete. Part of the those funds will comefrom cash reserves and the remainder from traditional project financing,which is currently being arranged with an undisclosed European bank.   In early-1995, Edison and EdF were selected by the government over bidsby British Gas; Endesa of Spain; Mission Energy of the U.S. with Sondel ofItaly; Foster Wheeler Corp. of the U.S. and partners; and Waste ManagementInternational (IPR, 27 Jan '95, 13).   Edison is owned by Italian holding company Montedison SpA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENTERGY CLOSES $1.2-BILLION PURCHASE OF AUSTRALIAN DISTRIBUTOR CITIPOWER   Entergy Corp. has reached financial closure on its (U.S.) $1.2-billionacquisition of CitiPower Ltd., the Melbourne, Australia-based electricpower distributor (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 11).   Entergy acquired CitiPower, its largest international investment todate, through a solicitation released by the government of Victoria,Australia.   Entergy said Bank of America NT&SA, a subsidiary of BankAmerica Corp.,was the loan arranger for the $914-million of debt financing used toacquire CitiPower. Lead underwriters were ABN AMRO Australia Ltd., Bank ofAmerica and Commonwealth Bank of Australia. Entergy contributed$286-million of equity.   Commonwealth Bank served as the facility agent.   Entergy also noted co-lead underwriter was Credit Suisse, andsub-underwriters were Australian & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. and IBJAustralia Bank Ltd.   Syndication of the $914-million was scheduled to begin within the firstweeks of January.   CitiPower, with a customer base of some 233,000 customers, servesMelbourne and its surrounding suburbs.   Entergy vice president and general manager for Australian activities,Larry Folks, said, ``It is our intention to work closely with CitiPower'smanagement team over the coming months to continue establishing bestpractices targets and marketing strategies.''   The Victorian government's deregulation of the electricity industrymeans electricity prices will continue to fall, in real terms, at leastuntil 2000, said Folks.   Tom Wright, previously vice president, transmission and distributionsystems for Entergy, was appointed CitiPower chief executive officer,replacing former CitiPower CEO Shane Breheny, who became a transitionadvisor.   CitiPower represents Entergy's first investment in Australia and itsfirst major international investment it is making alone. In joint ventureswith others, Entergy is active in Argentina, Chile, China, Pakistan andPeru.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FIRST GAS IN TALKS FOR FINANCING 880-MW GAS PROJECT IN PHILIPPINES   First Gas Holdings Corp., a joint venture of First Philippine Holdingsof Manila and British Gas, is holding talks with Export Risk Guarantee ofSwitzerland, KfW of Germany, Hermes of Germany and the Export-Import Bankof the U.S., for financing an 880-MW gas-fired project in Sta Rita,Batangas province, south of Manila.   The project, expected to cost $600-million, was recently doubled in sizefrom 440 MW (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 5).   Gas will come from the offshore Camago-Malampaya field, the Philippines'biggest oil and gas find, which will be developed by the Philippine unitsof the Royal Dutch/Shell Group and Occidental Petroleum of the U.S.   Meanwhile, three firms have been qualified to submit a final bid tobuild the plant--Asea Brown Boveri, Siemens, and Raytheon Engineers &Constructors, said Ernesto Pantangco, an official of First PhilippineHoldings Corp.   The three pre-qualified firms have been asked to submit a final bid onJan. 26, with the winner to be announced in March, he said.   The plant, expected to enter service in 1998, could be built as a single880-MW facility or with two, 440-MW units, depending on the plan submittedby the winning bidder.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PHILIPPINE DEVELOPER TO FLOAT BONDS VALUED AT $85-MILLION IN U.S. MARKETS   First Private Power Corp., a unit of First Philippine Holdings, is setto float $85-million worth of 12-year bonds in major cities in the UnitedStates next month, a company official said Tuesday.   Proceeds of the flotation will be used to refinance the short-termforeign currency depository unit loans FPPC incurred to build the 215-MWdiesel power plant in Bauangtown in La Union Province, which enteredservice last year.   Money from the refinancing scheme will also be used as a partial equitycontribution for a 880-MW gas-fired facility, which is being built jointlywith British Gas (see story above; IPR, 1 Dec '95, 5).   FPPC chief operating officer Ernesto Pantangco said the lead manager ofthe flotation will be Salomon Brothers.   The coupon rates will be pegged at between 325 and 375 basis pointsabove the seven-year U.S. Treasury bills. The bonds will have a maturity of12 years.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   UTILICORP, AIR PRODUCTS FORM LINK FOR GAS-FIRED PROJECTS IN MIDWEST   UtiliCorp United has joined with Air Products & Chemicals to developgas-fired independent power projects in the Midwest. The partnership maylater expand its activities to other parts of the U.S. and overseas,according to a UtiliCorp spokesman.   UtiliCorp, based in Kansas City, Mo., operates Missouri Public Serviceand WestPlains Energy divisions in Kansas and Colorado, along with some gasutilities. It will pursue the joint projects through its unregulated UtilCoGroup subsidiary.   Both companies have projects in operation and development, and havealready built two plants together: a 120-MW gas-fired cogeneration projectin Orlando, Fla., which began operating in 1993, selling power to FloridaPower and the Reedy Creek Improvement District; and a 49.9-MW coal-firedcogeneration plant in Stockton, Calif., in service since 1988 and sellingelectricity to Pacific Gas & Electric.   The companies will focus on the Midwest because they have identified aneed for gas-fired capacity in the region, according to the UtiliCorpspokesman. He added UtiliCorp brings a knowledge of the Midwest servicearea, the regulatory environment and of other utilities in the region.   Frank Costanza, UtiliCorp vice president of power services, toldIndependent Power Report the partners may consider building uncommitted``merchant plant'' components into some projects. However, until regulatoryuncertainties are resolved, the companies would want to secure purchasersfor most of the output.   As competitive markets emerge, they may consider a purely merchantapproach--where plants are built without long-term contracts for theoutput.   Altogether, UtilCo Group has 319 MW of equity in 17 operating plantstotaling 800 MW from gas, coal waste and hydro sources, all in the U.S. Inaddition, the company is developing a 60-MW plant in Jamaica.   Air Products & Chemicals has 176 MW of equity in six operating plantstotaling more than 300 MW, including three in-house projects at itsindustrial gas and chemical facilities.   The company also has four projects in development, representing 650 to725 MW, including a plant in the Czech Republic that is on hold pending thecountry's restructuring efforts.   Except for the Orlando project with UtilCo Group, all of Air Products'plants involve coal or coal waste.   Recently, Metropolitan Edison asked Air Products to restructure a 227-MWcoal project to gas in order to lower the capacity payments, but theparties could not agree on terms, and Met-Ed agreed to buy out the contractfor up to $35-million (see story, page 10).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   IDAHO POWER CONSIDERS RENEWABLES SUBSIDIARY; INDONESIA FIRST TARGET   Idaho Power said it will decide by late spring whether to establish anindependent power subsidiary or energy services company to developphotovoltaic systems and other renewable energy projects in internationalmarkets.   Indonesia is an immediate target because the government has begun aTransmigration Program to encourage its citizens to relocate to outlyingregions, including some of the country's hundreds of islands. Indonesia hasthe world's fourth largest population, with most people living in the majorcities.   The government has earmarked $100-million for the electrificationcomponent of its Transmigration Program. But rather than build a largepower plant on each island, which would be cost prohibitive, the governmentis studying the possibility of small hydro and photovoltaics (PV).   ``Our involvement in the preliminary stages of this project could be thefirst step in a broad effort to expand our growth opportunities beyond whathas been considered typical for this company,'' said Joe Marshall, chiefexecutive officer.   Idaho Power has been developing PV experience since 1993. In its firsttwo years, it installed sites in Idaho totaling 3 kW. In 1995 alone, itinstalled 86 kW and sources said 1996 will be a pivotal year to decide itsstrategy for the future.   PV systems convert sunlight directly into electricity and can be used toprovide electricity to power water pumps, lighting or refrigeration.   Idaho Power's engineers have traveled to Indonesia with Community PowerCorp., based in Virginia, to assess the potential for PV in that country.Idaho Power also is interested in building small hydro, tapping itsconsiderable experience in the U.S.   ``Developing PV systems could be a good niche for us internationally,''said Larry Crowley, Idaho Power's senior manager of strategic planning.``Our utility has developed a reputation for being a leader in PVsystems.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CORDELL HULL, ERIC ZAUSNER ESTABLISH FIRM FOR INTERNATIONAL ENERGY ASSETS   Cordell Hull, recently retired as executive vice president of Bechtel,and Eric Zausner, a deputy administrator of the Dept. of Energy in the FordAdministration, have formed Energy Asset Management LLC to develop andacquire international energy infrastructure assets.   Hull is chairman of the new company, based in San Francisco, and Zausneris president. Zausner said it was too early to say more about the company,which is just getting organized.   One of Energy Asset Management's first projects is assisting LosAngeles-based Pacific Enterprises International in acquiring a 12.5%interest in two Argentine natural gas utility holding companies. LosAngeles-based PEI, an affiliate of Southern California Gas, announced onJan. 2 that discussions and due diligence were proceeding with SodigasPampana SA and Sodigas Sur SA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TENNECO BUYS 10% OF AUSTRALIAN GAS, POWER DEVELOPMENT COMPANY   Tenneco Power of Houston is taking a 10% equity stake in independentpower developer Energy Equity Corp. Ltd. (EEC) of Perth, Australia, whichhas several projects underway (IPR, 3 Nov '95, 6).   Tenneco Power, a unit of Tenneco Gas, will also take a seat on EEC'sboard of directors. EEC's stock is traded on the Australian StockExchange.   In addition, Tenneco will take a 50% equity stake in EEC's 135-MW,gas-fired Sulawesi independent power plant that will sell electricity toIndonesia's state-owned electric utility, Perusahaan Listrik Negara (PLN).   Tenneco is also taking an equity stake in EEC's Indonesian Sengkangonshore natural gas field, estimated to have proven and probable reservesof 500-billion cubic feet.   Tenneco is expected to pay about (U.S.) $21-million for the equity inboth projects.   Financial close on the power project and pipeline is expected inearly-1996.   As part of its agreement with EEC, Tenneco said it will arrangefinancing for the projects.   Construction of the Sulawesi power plant began in November, withcommercial operation scheduled for early-1997. Tenneco said thepower-purchase agreement with PLN is for a term of 20 years and wasconcluded after negotiations between EEC and PLN.   EEC also holds a 21-year, take-or-pay power-purchase agreement with theQueensland Electricity Commission for a 37-MW, gas-fired power project. EECclosed financing for the project with Barclays Bank Australia Ltd. and theBank of Western Australia Ltd.   Separately, Tenneco plans possible power projects from the 470-mile,16-inch, Moomba-Adelaide pipeline gas pipeline in Australia, which thecompany recently purchased.   Tenneco has separate interests in power projects in Brazil, Chile andTaiwan.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   THAILAND'S EGCO EYES PLANTS IN LAOS CHINA, VIETNAM, INDONESIA, MYANMAR   One year after becoming a publicly traded company, the ElectricityGenerating Public Co. (Egco) of Thailand, a spinoff of the government powerauthority, is moving across Thai borders in search of new investments inChina, Myanmar, Indonesia, Vietnam and Laos.   The company's initial impetus to build plants across the border in Laosto fuel Thailand's growing demand has evolved into expansion for the sakeof investment, said Siwanan Na Nakorn, Egco executive director and deputymanaging director for new business ventures.   In China, the company is exploring a joint venture with Huaneng PowerInternational, to build a 300-MW coal-fired plant in Shanghai.   Huaneng would hold 70% of the equity and 30% would be owned by Egco.Siwanan said Egco is working with Thai partners in the venture but declinedto disclose their identities.   In Myanmar, Egco, in a consortium with the Petroleum Authority ofThailand and British Gas, is likely to bid on a project that includes a gaspipeline, a first-stage 200-MW power unit and fertilizer plant.   In Vietnam, Egco plans to build a 200-MW combined-cycle plant at theAmata City Bien Hoa industrial park, now under construction outside of HoChi Min City. Egco's equity stake is still under negotiation.   The Vietnamese government recently asked Egco to increase the initialcapacity of the plant, from 30 MW to 60 MW, to supply areas surrounding theindustrial park.   Vietnam is also asking Egco to move up the starting date, from late-1997to late-1996. But Egco and the Vietnamese have not arrived on the price ofthe increased power and the company is seeking relief from a tax on dieselfuel, since the gas pipeline to supply the plant will not be in place until1998 or 1999.   The project is a joint venture with Bangpakong Industrial Park ofThailand.   Egco is also negotiating with a mine concession holder in Indonesia tobuild a mine-mouth coal-fired plant--or simply a mine--in Sumatra orKalimantan.   In Laos, the company has been negotiating with Thai Lao Lignite Corp., aconcession holder, to build a lignite-fired plant in Hong Sa near theThai-Lao border. The plant, which would come on-line at 600 MW andultimately reach 1,200 MW, would supply Thailand. Siwanan said thosediscussions are on hold because of differences over price.   At home, Egco plans to bid on the next 1,000-MW independent powersolicitation held by the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (IPR,15 Dec '95, 8). EGAT is expected to announce a second 1,000-MW round in1996, though many bidders in the 1995 request also bid for the secondround.   Siwanan said the newly-privatized company sat out the first round toavoid charges that it would receive preferential treatment from EGAT. As aresult of its first listing on the Stock Exchange of Thailand in November1994, Egco is 50% publicly held, 48% controlled by EGAT and 2% is owned bythe Crown Property Bureau.   The company's second public offering will be held in February or Marchof 1996, and Siwanan said the sale would likely decrease EGAT's holdings to40%. Eventually, EGAT's holdings are expected to decline to 25% or 30%, hesaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MAHARASHSTRA OKAYS AMENDED PLAN FOR DABHOL PROJECT, NOW 2,450 MW   The Maharashtra state administration on Jan. 8 approved a reformulatedversion of Enron Development's Dabhol Power project, which is now plannedas a 2,450-MW plant.   Maharashtra officials canceled Dabhol in August on charges of a lack oftransparency in the negotiation process and excessively high costs (IPR, 11Aug '95, 13). Other project partners are General Electric and InternationalGenerating Co. The state administration is calling for the MaharashtraState Electricity Board to take a 30% stake.   An earlier meeting on Jan. 6 convened expressly to decide on the Dabholplant and two other private power projects was rendered inconclusive after``hardliners'' in the cabinet insisted the government ``beat down'' evenfurther recommendations made by a panel of experts appointed by the state.   A panel's recommendations, submitted in November, had modified theDabhol project profile to reduce the tariff and costs of the project (IPR,3 Nov '95, 6). The cabinet on Jan. 8 ``unanimously accepted most of them''and has further modified others, state officials said.   At the same meeting, the cabinet also approved two other private-sectorpower projects, the 410-MW Patalganga project sponsored by India's RelianceGroup and the 595-MW, coal-fired Bhadravati project sponsored by the IspatGroup.   One of the key alterations to the panel's recommendations has been theproject's power tariff. The Maharashtra state administration has fixed thepower tariff for the Dabhol project at 5.45 cents/kWh, state officialssaid. The expert panel had recommended a tariff of 5.5 cents/kWh.   Chief Minister Manohar Joshi and his Shiv Sena party chief Bal Thackerayhad called for a tariff of 5.3 cents/kWh. Enron officials last weekindicated to the administration that the project would be commerciallyunviable, if the tariff was reduced beyond 5.5 cents/kWh.   Joshi also indicated that Dabhol Power Co., the project company, and theMaharashtra State Electricity Board, the state-owned power utility, wouldhave to sign a new power-purchase agreement before work could resume at thesite of the stalled project.   Similarly, the administration decided to accept ``in toto'' thestate-appointed expert panel's recommendation that while the project'stotal power-generating capacity should be increased from 2,015 MW to2,450-MW, project costs should be reduced from the originally approved$1.3-million/MW to $800,000/MW, amounting to a total reduction of nearly$300-million in fixed costs.   This, state power officials pointed out, was lower than that of mostsimilar power projects being set up elsewhere in India, and the lowestamong those approved in Maharashtra state.   In addition, the project's internal rate of return would be pegged at21%, the level recommended by the panel, instead of the earlier 25%,officials said.   Joshi said the cabinet also approved the use of naphtha instead ofdistillate oil for the first phase of the project, and liquefied naturalgas for the second phase, as in the original plan.   The cabinet, he added, would expect Enron to take measures to ensurethat ``the environment isn't affected whatever the fuel deployed.''   It also directed the Maharashtra administration not to allow work tobegin again on the first phase until ``all the necessary approvals,'' bothtechnical and environmental, have been obtained from the federal governmentfor both the first and second phases. This is expected to delay theresumption of work at the project site even further.   Joshi indicated the administration would not compensate Dabhol Power``in any way'' for the delays that the project has so far incurred. Thefirst, 695-MW phase of the project was already under construction when thenewly elected state administration issued a work stoppage notice to DabholPower on Aug. 4, 1995.   Its subsequent revival was also delayed by nearly a month after thestate administration failed to meet its own self-imposed deadline of Dec.10 to finalize its decision on the expert panel's recommendations (IPR, 29Dec '95, 18).   Dabhol Power had estimated that delays were resulting in cost overrunsof $250,000 a day, and had proposed that they should be shared equally bythe developers and the state administration.   Chief Minister Joshi indicated on Jan. 8 that the Maharashtra StateElectricity Board would hold 30% of the equity of the Dabhol project.   This, state officials said, would help MSEB have a say in the crucialmanagerial decisions of the project, including the use of indigenous ratherthan imported naphtha in order to cut costs, as well as in the case of gasfor the second phase, and project equipment for both phases.   The equity share for MSEB was among the expert panel's recommendationsfor the modified project. However, power industry analysts estimate thatthe ``anomalous'' decision by the cabinet to insist on a 30% stake for MSEBat a time when the federal trend suggests increasing privatization of thepower sector, is expected to cost the state about half of its projectedannual outlays, which could force the state to bring in a private Indiancompany as a partner in the deal.   Joshi said both the state and Enron would ``immediately take theinitiative'' to withdraw arbitration proceedings ongoing in a London court(IPR, 1 Dec '95, 7). The next hearing had been scheduled for Jan. 15.   Enron officials would not comment on the arbitration decision, pointingout that the company had yet to receive a formal notice of the cabinetapproval.   ``While it would be inappropriate for us to speculate on any conditionsuntil they are reviewed and considered in their entirety and the extent towhich they compare to the recommendations of the state-appointed expertcommittee, we are certainly willing to consider recommendations thatprovide for a mutually satisfactory project,'' said Enron officials quotingfrom a prepared statement by Kenneth Lay, chairman and chief executiveofficer of Enron Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CHINA FORMS NEW AGENCY TO SEPARATE GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE ELECTRIC SECTORS   China is creating an independent entity, National Power Corp. (NPC), toseparate the functions of government and the private electric sector.   The Ministry of Power, which will be eliminated as it now functions whenNPC is up and running early this year, said NPC will allow China to step-upits encouragement of foreign investment in the power sector, particularlyin the electricity-starved Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan, Yunnan and Guizhouprovinces and the autonomous regions of Inner Mongolia and Ningxia Hui.   NPC is the first step in a multi-phased program to restructure theChinese power industry from central planning to a market economy forelectricity.   Following completion of the national changes, the same restructuringwill be adopted for regional and provincial power administrations.   All existing national electric power assets will be placed under theauthority of the Chinese State Council. As it is now known, the Ministry ofPower Industry will be dissolved, with its functions transferred to statecommissions, NPC and the China Electricity Council.   Independently, the Federation of Chinese Power Enterprises willcoordinate work within the private sector.   Also, the Chinese note that the new Electric Power Law is before membersof the ongoing 17th session of the Standing Committee of the EighthNational People's Congress, China's top legislative body, for expectedapproval in 1996.   The new electric power laws are designed to encourage more domestic andinternational investors in the power industry and correct``insufficiencies'' in existing Chinese power policy.   The new laws are intended to make sure all of China's resources beutilized to produce electricity and encourage investors to use newtechnology and equipment to build plants, especially cogeneration units.Also, provisions call for protecting the rights of all investors, tradersand end-users.   Use of the new laws will gradually unify the cost of electric poweracross China.   The government has also proposed development of a national 6,000-mile,high-voltage transmission grid. The grid will expand, connect and controlthe movement of electricity between the existing inter-provincial andregional power grid networks.   The grid is expected to eventually triple the current Chinesetransmission capacity of about 220,000 MW over a total of 106,000-miles andwill be centered around the Three Gorges hydro project on the YangtzeRiver. Distribution networks in 35 key cities will be renovated. Thegovernment wants the national grid in-place and operating by 2003.   A new national grid company will operate the grid, dictating how excessgeneration in one area is moved to areas lacking electricity. Developmentof the grid is being handled by the China Electric Power Technology & TradeCorp. of Beijing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LAOS MAY ALLOW CHINA-THAI LINE IN COUNTRY FOR 1,500-MW PROJECT   The Laotian government has indicated it may allow a transmission linelinking a 1,500-MW hydro project in China's Yunnan province with Thailand,to be built on Laotian territory.   Securing a third-country route for the transmission line is critical forthe project, which is now in the feasibility study stage, since China andThailand have no common land border and the project is envisioned to supplyThailand. Thai officials have expressed concern that building the linethrough Myanmar carries too many risks.   In exchange for opening its territory to the line, Laos, which seeks tobe a major supplier of Thailand's booming energy market, has asked thatsome of the power be used to supply Laotian towns and villages near theline.   During a meeting of Chinese, Laotian and Thai officials last month atthe ``Electric Power Forum,'' an Asian Development Bank-sponsored event,Laotian officials agreed in principle to a study on constructing the powertransmission line through Laotian territory.   Somboune Manolom, deputy director of the Laos Electricity Dept., saidLaos has no objection to the transmission line study, and suggested theproject could boost subregional cooperation.   The feasibility study for the hydro plant is being conducted under ajoint venture by MDX Power of Bangkok, Thailand, and the Yunnan ElectricPower Bureau, which hold 48% and 52%, respectively. The plant study isexpected to be completed in late-1997.   The Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand has not yet committedto purchase power from the project.   One EGAT source said it is too early to know if the project will beattractive. And a another EGAT official questioned whether the projectwould offer energy at a competitive price, given the cost of transportingpower 185 miles from the northern Thai border. EGAT has no existingagreements to buy power from China.   But an MDX source said the company is pursuing the effort on the``fairly strong belief that the project will be economically feasible andmutually beneficial for the two countries.'' The transmission line isunlikely to make up a major share of the project cost, he said.   While MDX and Thai officials say that a Myanmar route for thetransmission line remains an option, Piyasvasti Amranand, head ofThailand's National Energy Policy Office said it is ``too risky for us''because the line would go through areas controlled by rebel groups. Also,he said, some international lenders are reluctant to finance projects inMyanmar.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SCEPTRE, PARTNERS TO REPOWER TWO SMALL PLANTS IN CHINA; MORE PLANNED   Sceptre Power Co. of Santa Anna, Calif., has launched a joint venture torepower two existing units totaling 42 MW in Jiangsu Province, China, withhopes of repowering much larger plants in the future.   With project partners New China Hong Kong Group Ltd. of Hong Kong andHorizon Energy Development Inc., a unit of National Fuel Gas Co. ofBuffalo, N.Y., the 27-MW, coal-fired Wuxian Leekou plant will be expandedto 39 MW and the 15-MW, coal-fired Jiangyin Sanfangxiang plant will beincreased to 24 MW. Combined costs of both projects are put at$35.5-million.   NCHK will hold about 50% of the project, while Sceptre Power and HorizonEnergy will hold the other 50%.   Sceptre vice president for Asian project development L.W. Ken Kinniesaid both projects are scheduled to reach financial close during the firstquarter of this year and be complete by year-end.   ``These projects are just to get our feet wet in China,'' Kinnie said.Sceptre's goal in China is to undertake 10 to 15 similar repoweringprojects--although the later ones will be larger--then list the entireportfolio on the stock exchange of either Hong Kong or China.   The company expects to have partners in each of the Chineseundertakings.   Sceptre began as an affiliate of Canada's Sceptre Resources, butrecently became independent. The company holds several agreements in Chinafor projects similar to those in Jiangsu Province, but Kinnie said detailswill not be released until the project development process is moreadvanced.   The company is searching for other joint venture partners, Kinnie said.   In a separate joint venture in Pakistan, Sceptre Power is nearingfinancial close on a 157-MW, gas-fired project in Lahore (IPR, 29 Dec '95,5). Partners in that project include Pakistan's Fauji Foundation and Intragof Wellesley, Mass.   Other projects are sought in Brazil, Peru and elsewhere in SouthAmerica.   Contact: Sceptre Power Co., L.W. Ken Kinnie, vice president-Asianproject development, Suite 1200, 6 Hutton Center Dr., Santa Anna, Calif.,92707; phone, (714) 546-1800; fax, (714) 546-1801.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   KEY PHILIPPINE SENATOR WANTS PROBE OF LINE DELAYS AFFECTING CEPA PLANT   The president of the Philippine Senate said Monday he wants a probe onwhy state-run National Power Corp. (Napocor) failed to provide neededtransmission lines, leading to delays in operation of two completed powerplants, including one built by Consolidated Electric Power Asia (CEPA) ofHong Kong, a unit of Hopewell Holdings.   The plants involved are the 700-MW, coal-fired Pagbilao facility builtby CEPA, and the 300-MW Calaca coal plant owned by Napocor, both completedin 1995.   Senate President Neptali Gonzalez said the government has so farincurred losses of $891.69-million due to the continued non-operation ofthe two coal-fired facilities.   Gonzalez filed a Senate resolution calling for an investigation on``whether or not there is gross negligence or incompetence on the part ofthe National Power Corporation...due to the delay in the construction ofthe transmission lines and substations.''   The two power plants ``were installed and commissioned as scheduled butremain idle and inoperational due to unavailable transmission lines andsubstations,'' Gonzalez said.   However, Napocor vice president for projects management Antonio Corpuzpreviously said that under a contract signed with CEPA, the transmissionlines needed for the Pagbilao plant should be ready by March 1996, at thelatest.   Corpuz also said then that Napocor will not pay a single cent of the$26.34-million being claimed by CEPA as an early completion bonus ofPagbilao (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 5).   A CEPA source said the ``misunderstanding'' with Napocor is beingdiscussed by both sides, and that the issue will be resolved ``verysoon.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PHILIPPINES' NAPOCOR MAY SELL TWO WESTINGHOUSE TURBINES TO TEXACO   The Philippines' National Power Corp. (Napocor) said Monday it may sellto Texaco Inc. the two gas turbines totaling 320 MW to be delivered byWestinghouse in 1997 as part of a package that settled a nuclear plantdispute (IPR, 29 Dec '95, 18; 15 Dec '95, 10).   The two new 501F combustion turbines worth $30-million each could beused by Texaco for a 300-MW cogeneration plant planned in Batangasprovince, south of Manila, said Napocor spokeswoman Jane Subang.   Texaco officials were unavailable for comment.   Westinghouse had been accused of bribing former president FerdinandMarcos in the early-1980s to secure the contract to build the allegedlyfaulty nuclear plant in Bataan province, west of Manila.   Westinghouse equipment and technology were banned in 1993 after talks ona settlement failed. A $100-million out-of-court settlement that includedthe delivery of the two gas turbines was reached recently paving the wayfor the lifting of the ban.   The sale of the gas turbines to Texaco has not yet been finalized,Subang said. It is also possible the two turbines could be made part of theplanned bidding for a 1,200-MW gas-fired plant, she said (IPR, 15 Dec '95,10).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PHILIPPINE INVESTMENT BOARD GRANTS INCENTIVES FOR TWO PROJECTS, 160 MW   The Philippine government investment board has granted tax incentives totwo proposed geothermal projects totaling 160 MW that state-run PhilippineNational Oil Co. plans to turn over to the private sector.   The incentives, which include tax holidays and low duties on importedequipment, were granted to draw the attention of private investors in theproposed projects, the investment board said.   The projects are the 120-MW Mount Labo geothermal plant in Camarines Surprovince, south of Manila, and the 40-MW Negros Geothermal Project in thecentral province of Negros Occidental, said PNOC spokeswoman DebbieDiokno.   PNOC has not yet decided whether to offer the two projects to investorson a build-operate-transfer or build-own-operate basis, she said.   It is also eyeing the Japanese government's Overseas EconomicCooperation Fund as a source of funding for both projects, Diokno said.   The Mount Labo project will be implemented in two phases: a 20-MWfacility scheduled for operation by June 1998, and a 100-MW unit by March2000.   The Negros power plant is scheduled for commissioning by August 1998.   The government's investment board gave ``pioneer status'' to bothprojects, entitling their proponents to a six-year income tax holiday, a 3%duty on imported capital equipment and tax credits on local purchases ofmachinery.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH KOREA LIFTS 750-MW SIZE CAP; 1,600-MW RFP NOW SEEN IN FEBRUARY   South Korea's Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) has liftedits earlier 750-MW private power project size limit, effective immediately(IPR, 6 Oct '95, 12).   The timing of the change coincides with the release of an often-delayedinternational solicitation to be issued by Korea Electric Power Corp.(KEPCO) in February for two 800-MW thermal projects, Younghungdong units 1and 2, which will be developed on a build-own-operate basis.   The formal request for proposals was expected before the end of 1995,but was delayed. The RFP was originally scheduled to be released in June1995. All delays were blamed on personnel changes at the top of MOTIE.   The cost of each 800 MW is placed between $650-million and$700-million.   The policy change means the only restriction faced by private powerdevelopers is a 50% limitation on foreign ownership. Also, nuclear projectsare barred.   According to a tentative schedule, MOTIE will receive and evaluateproposals in early-1996 with selection of developers set for July 1996.Power-purchase agreements will be signed in August 1996, followingnegotiations. Development of selected projects will begin in September1996.   Those dates could slip into the future.   Virtually all private companies will be able to compete for theprojects, if the ratio of their net worth to capital during the previousthree years is at least 20% and they have some technical capacity for powerprojects.   KEPCO may not bid for the projects, but will buy the power under along-term, power-purchase agreement. Power-purchase negotiations will bebetween the selected bidders and KEPCO, which is warning prospectivebidders it will not pay a tariff higher than the cost of power from theutility's comparable existing plants.   Successful bidders will be guaranteed returns of 11%, compared to the 9%guaranteed to KEPCO.   Separate successful bidders will be selected for each project, and thesame company will not be allowed to participate in both generating plants.South Korea's largest and most powerful industrial groups are expected tooffer strong competition for the projects.   Further solicitations after the two 800-MW plants are almost certainbecause electricity demand in South Korea is projected to average 5.5%between 1996 and 2006.   Currently, installed capacity in South Korea is about 31,810 MW, with30,188 MW generated by KEPCO. About 62% is fueled by oil, coal or naturalgas, 28.7% is nuclear power and 9.3% is hydroelectric.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA, ENCOURAGING BAGASSE PLANTS UNDER NEW PROGRAM   Queensland, Australia, is promoting bagasse-fired, waste-to-energycogeneration plants among the state's sugar mills and is encouragingdomestic and international joint venture partners.   Under the just-created Queensland Sugar Power Pool Agreement, powerproduced by using the waste products of making sugar will be purchased atspecial tariffs under a long-term agreement by the Queensland Transmission& Supply Corp. (QT&SC) starting January 1998.   Up to 95 MW will be purchased by (QT&SC) when the program begins, but by2002, the limit will increase to 200 MW, said Queensland energy ministerTony McGrady.   The mills will make use of the thermal energy created by thecogeneration units, but only a very small portion of the electricgeneration.   The program is an effort by the government to explore ``all avenues ofenvironmentally friendly generation options,'' McGrady said.   The effort is expected to generate worldwide interest, the governmentsaid, and various private sector companies are welcome to participate, ifthey can strike a deal with one of the sugar mills agreeing to providefuel.   So far, sugar mills participating in the project include the three CSRLtd. mills located at Invicta, Kalamia and Inkerman and the mills of SouthJohnstone and Maryborough. The mills are the initial members of theQueensland Sugar Power Pool Agreement, but others are expected to join.   Bagasse is the part of the cane stalk remaining after the millingprocess.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NATIONAL POWER, POWERGEN MAY FACE MORE AGENCY-ORDERED PLANT SELL-OFFS   U.K. generation companies National Power and PowerGen may be forced tosell additional plants beyond the already-required 6,000 MW, if theirpending acquisitions of regional electric companies (RECs) are cleared.   PowerGen has bid to acquire Midlands Electricity (IPR, 22 Sept '95, 1)and National Power has proposed buying Southern Electric (IPR, 6 Oct '95,13). Both bids, accepted by the RECs, have been referred to the Monopolies& Mergers Commission (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 17). A decision is expected by March22.   London Electricity is pressing industry regulator Stephen Littlechild,director of the Office of Electricity Regulation (OFFER), for a reductionin the generating capacity of PowerGen and National Power.   According to a London Electricity spokesman, there is considerableconcern at the size and potential market share of the vertically integratedgroups. ``We are not against vertical integration,'' he said, ``but it mustnot be at the expense of stifling other suppliers. We would like to seemore generators and suppliers rather than less, which may happen if thesemergers go ahead.''   PowerGen is already disposing of 2,000 MW of capacity to the EasternGroup, while National Power is evaluating bids from Enron, AES Corp.,Eastern Group and Mission Energy for the 2,000-MW plant at West Burton inNottinghamshire and two, 1,000-MW plants at Ironbridge in Shropsire andRugeley in Staffordshire (IPR, 22 Sept '95, 8; 6 Oct '95, 1).   National Power forecasts its transaction will be complete by March 31.All four bidders want to acquire the three plants, but it is possible theywill be sold separately to individual bidders.   However, London Electricity said further sales are necessary to enablemore players to enter the market, although the two generators point totheir decline in market share since privatization and insist that furthersales are unnecessary.   The RECs are also concerned about the possible effects on the powerpool. Southeast distributor Seeboard said the workings of the pool shouldbe scrutinized along with other commercial issues and the voting structureto ensure that bigger groups do not dominate the market.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   UKRAINE GETS $1.8-BILLION WESTERN AID FOR POWER; BIG ABB PROJECT DEAD   A protocol signed by the Ukraine and the ``G-7'' Western industrialnations in Ottawa commits the West to provide $1.8-billion in loans forpower plant construction and rehabilitation projects in the Ukraine inreturn for closure of 3,000 MW of remaining nuclear capacity at theChernobyl site by 2000.   The west will also contribute $498-million towards Chernobyl cleanup anddecommissioning costs.   The protocol calls for much of the replacement power funding to be spenton completion of two 1,000-MW reactors at Khmelnitsky and Rovno and therest to go into thermal and hydro plant rehabilitation, pumped-storageprojects and energy conservation.   The agreement to fund the nuclear plants officially ends chances forconstruction at this time of a 2,300-MW, gas-fired combustion turbineproject near the Chernobyl site that was proposed in May 1995 by aconsortium led by Asea Brown Boveri (IPR, 16 June '95, 18).   The ABB group also included CMS Generation, Kawasaki, Skanska AB ofSweden, Mannesmananlangebau of Germany and Danish Power as well as localUkranian groups.   The group proposed a crash construction schedule, which would allow theproject to start generating power within 24 months of construction startand be fully completed within 36 months. They said this would be the bestway to insure new power supplies in time for the closure deadline of 2000.   However, the project met stiff resistance inside the Ukraine fromsupporters of nuclear power and the national utility Minenergo. Criticsargued the country could not afford the cost of gas from Russia that wouldbe needed to fuel the plant. The Ukraine has had chronic problems payingRussia for both gas and power supplies in recent years.   The gas project also was based on initial estimates the west wouldprovide up to $4-billion for the Chernobyl cleanup and replacement powerprojects. However, as talks continued during 1995, it became clear the westwas not willing to commit to such a large sum.   An ABB spokesman in Zurich said the gas project clearly now had a ``lowpriority'' in Ukrainian planning and that his company was looking atparticipation in various plant rehabilitation projects. Siemens of Germanyhas already been active in promoting such projects and it is possible ABBwill team with Siemens.   The European Community has already funded a study by Electricite deFrance, Tractebel Engineering and IVO of Finland on what will be needed tocomplete work on the two nuclear plants.   The Dec. 20, 1995, protocol also contains language committing theUkraine to continue developing a ``financially sound electric power marketwith market-based pricing'' that will encourage energy conservation andattract international investment.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   U.K.'S NATIONAL POWER PLANS 60-MW PROJECT IN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES   The U.K.'s National Power has signed a memorandum of understanding withAjman, a sheikdom operating as part of the federation of United ArabEmirates (UAE), to build, own and operate a $120-million, 50-MW to 60-MW,desalination and power plant.   National Power will hold a 49% equity stake in the project, while adomestic partner, Bin Sofan Trading Co., is expected to hold 51%.   When complete, the project will also produce about 5-million gallons/dayof desalinated sea water.   The project is considered the first private power plant in the UAE andthe first power project in Ajman.   National Power is holding power-purchase agreement negotiations with theUAE's Ministry of Electricity & Water. The agency is responsible forelectricity supplies in some of the UAE's northern emirates, includingAjman, Fujairah, Ras al-Khaimah and Umm al-Quwain.   Within the UAE, the Abu Dhabi Dept. of Water & Electricity, the DubaiElectricity & Water Authority, and the Sharjah Water & ElectricityDepartment supply power to their respective areas.   UAE power demand is projected to increase to 6,900 MW by 1999, based onload growth of about 20% annually. Current installed capacity is about4,350 MW, produced by six gas-fired power stations and seven smallgenerating units.   About 1,440 MW of government-owned projects are in some stage ofconstruction. Many of the planned projects are associated with desalinationplants.   Also, the Ministry of Electricity & Water and the Dubai Electricity &Water Authority are separately evaluating prospects for several moreprojects, totaling about 710 MW.   Within the UAE, the government is planning a large expansion ofliquefied natural gas production and transportation facilities. Theexpansion, estimated to cost about $3-billion, will be undertaken by theAbu Dhabi Gas Liquefaction Co..   The United Arab Emirates is a federation of seven small semi-autonomousprincipalities located on the Persian Gulf.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MET-ED MAY PAY UP TO $35-MILLION TO KILL 227-MW AIR PRODUCTS PACT   Air Products & Chemicals of Allentown, Pa., has ended talks withMetropolitan Edison aimed at restructuring the contract for a planned227-MW coal project (IPR, 6 Oct '95, 7).   After three months, the companies could not agree on new terms and willnow negotiate a buyout that could reach $35-million to cover Air Products'development costs.   To replace the capacity and 100 MW from another recent buyout, Met-Edmay seek new supplies, a spokesman said.   Air Products was pursuing the project strictly as a developer, and wouldhave operated it at the site of the P.H. Glatfelter paper company in YorkCounty, selling steam to the mill and power to Met-Ed, a unit of GeneralPublic Utilities.   Although Air Products worked alone, the project was being developedunder the name York County Energy Partners L.P., because it planned to seeklimited partners once the plant was operational.   According to Brad Hahn, Air Products director of business development,the company completed all of the design work and had received an air permitfrom the Pennsylvania Dept. of Environmental Protection, as well as afavorable environmental impact statement (EIS) from the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency.   He could not estimate how much the company spent on development costs,but said it would be covered by the final buyout figure.   When the parties began talking in September, Met-Ed estimated theexisting contract would cost $940-million above market rates during its25-year term. It proposed that Air Products switch its design from coal togas, since that would reduce capacity rates.   The utility also offered to let the developer participate in GPU's newgas pool, which was developed for utility peakers, but is being madeavailable to non-utility generators who agree to renegotiate contracts.   However, ``it became clear that we would not be able to agree,'' Hahntold Independent Power Report. The main sticking point was contract length,since Met-Ed wanted only eight to 10 years, while Air Products preferred aterm closer to the original 25 years. Other details also blocked theagreement, he added.   A Met-Ed spokesman said the utility will begin considering alternativesto replace the 227 MW, as well as the 100 MW it lost when it bought out theCrown/Vista coal contact from partners Mission Energy, Ahlstrom Developmentand Entergy Power Development for $30-million (IPR, 8 Sept '95, 5).   Met-Ed agreed to that buyout because it saw the contract costing$298-million over market rates during its 20-year life.   The spokesman did not say whether Met-Ed would seek bids for newsupplies.   Air Products & Chemicals has equity stakes of 176 MW in seven operatingplants that produce 303 MW, including three in-house projects. The firmalso has four projects in development, representing about 650 MW to 725 MW,including a coal gasification plant in the Czech Republic that is currentlyon hold.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PANDA TO REFILE LAWSUIT CHARGING FLA. POWER BLOCKED 115-MW PROJECT   Panda Energy, after voluntarily withdrawing its $345-million federalsuit against Florida Power without prejudice in mid-December, said it willfile the suit again (Case No. 95-992-CIV-T-24 C) (IPR, 11 Aug '95, 1).   The suit alleged the utility unfairly interfered with construction of a115-MW cogeneration plant in Polk County, which was to supply Florida Powerwith 74.9 MW of firm power under a standard-offer contract.   Florida Power has since filed a countersuit against Panda in the samecourt, U.S. District Court, Middle District of Florida, Tampa Division(Case No. 95-2145-CIV-T-25-B). In addition, the state Public ServiceCommission denied two requests made by Panda in a related action.   Panda's general counsel Bill Nordlund said the withdrawal was astrategic move, ``and we still plan to prosecute this matter and moveforward on it. I can't comment on when or what court. We don't want to givean advance of our intentions to the other side.''   The countersuit filed by Florida Power at the end of December soughtdeclaratory judgments against the facts alleged in Panda's suit, which wasa safeguard in case Panda refiled the case, according to Florida Powerattorney James Fama.   Florida Power asked the court to issue declaratory judgments rulingthat:   Panda did not have a superior legal right to negotiate for a natural gastransmission contract with the city of Lakeland, and that the utility didnot interfere with Panda's rights with the city;   Panda was not entitled to a standard-offer contract if it builds a unitlarger than 75 MW, the largest allowed under PSC rules;   Panda was not entitled to rates under a standard-offer contract beyondDecember 2016, rather than 2026 as Panda sought;   Panda breached its contract by failing to begin construction on theunit, which was scheduled to go on line in January 1997;   The utility also asked the court to declare remedies to Florida Powerfrom Panda's breach, plus additional relief.   On Jan. 3, the PSC refused to reconsider a decision the PSC made on Dec.5, which said the PSC had jurisdiction over standard-offer contracts andthe Florida Power/Panda dispute. It also refused to grant Panda a 90-dayextension beyond Jan. 5 to file testimony in that case (Docket No.950110-EI).   As a result, a hearing at the PSC was scheduled for Feb. 19, a staffrecommendation was due April 18, and the commission was scheduled to voteon April 30.   Nordlund said Panda made the deadline for filing testimony Jan. 5, andadded, ``We think Florida Power's suit is ludicrous.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENERGY INITIATIVES BEATS FLA. POWER IN COURT ON RATES FOR 112-MW PLANT   Energy Initiatives Inc. won a partial summary judgment Jan. 4 in a caseagainst Florida Power concerning rates for the developer's 112-MWcogeneration plant in Umatilla, Fla.   The project company, Lake Cogen, said the utility was paying it on anas-available basis at times when it should have been paying for firmcapacity and energy.   Florida Power attorney James Fama confirmed two other non-utilitygenerators, Pasco Cogen, also 112 MW and owned by Energy Initiatives, andthe 120-MW Orlando Cogen, developed by Air Products & Chemicals, havesimilar court actions pending.   The Lake Cogen case, filed in state circuit court in Lake County, willdetermine whether firm capacity payments should be made based on a modelused by Florida Power, or a separate method Lake Cogen said was called forin the contract (Case No. 94354 CA-01, Division 8).   Florida Power pays NUGs both capacity and energy payments when thetheoretically avoided generating unit would operate, but only as-availableor energy payments if the avoided unit would have been off line.   Florida Power claimed a theoretically avoided 500-MW pulverized coalplant equipped with a scrubber, which was used to determine capacity andenergy payments, would be used by the utility based on four criteria todetermine when the plant would be dispatched on an economic basis.   The four parameters were the cost of variable operations andmaintenance, the price of coal, the heat rate of the unit, and a fuelmultiplier of 1, the last of which Fama said was not a significant factor.   In its motion, Lake Cogen contended other factors, such as environmentalcompliance, should be used in determining economic dispatchability of agenerating unit. It said an actual, operating plant should be used forcomparison, which would be Florida Power's coal-fired Crystal River units 1and 2.   Judge Don Briggs ruled the parameters for dispatchability should bebased on a real unit and not only the four Florida Power was using. Heordered a more accurate model be developed, which would be used todetermine how much Lake Cogen should be paid.   That cost information will be compared to actual payments, which couldbe used to determine an award at a later date, assuming the model showsLake Cogen was underpaid. A schedule for further proceedings was not set.   Kelly Tomblin, legal director for Energy Initiatives, a unit of GeneralPublic Utilities, said Florida Power changed the method of payment inAugust 1994. Although the developer receives payments for firm capacity andas-available sales, firm capacity payments ``have been very limitedrecently,'' she said.   ``We believe Florida Power always believed it would be based on a realoperating unit and the judge agreed,'' Tomblin said. ``We think it is goodfor cogenerators and good for us in Florida.''   Tomblin said it would be very difficult to estimate the amount ofdamages Florida Power might have to pay until after the judge approves thefinal modeling and makes a ruling.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NIMO: PURPA PREEMPTS NEW YORK LAW REQUIRING TAX REIMBURSEMENT TO QFS   Niagara Mohawk Power has asked the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionto act against a New York State law that requires NiMo to pay natural gastax reimbursements to qualifying facilities.   NiMo has paid almost $18-million in reimbursements since the law waspassed in 1991, it said.   The company wants FERC to bring an enforcement action against the NewYork Public Service Commission to bar it from implementing the law, whichdirects the PSC to order utilities to reimburse QFs for natural gas importtax payments that the state requires QFs to pay on fuel used to generatepower sold to the utilities.   According to NiMo, the state law is preempted by the Public UtilityRegulatory Policies Act and FERC's PURPA rules. ``The PSC cannot both obeythe New York statute and heed its obligations under Sec. 210 of PURPA,''NiMo said (Docket No. EL96-26).   The legislature imposed a monthly ``privilege tax'' on certain gasimporters amounting to 4.25% of the price paid for gas imported into thestate for use or consumption. For cogenerators, the amount of gas taxed isthat used in producing power for sale to utilities, not the gas used toproduce power or steam for steam hosts.   Utilities may pass the payments through in fuel cost adjustments.   NiMo itself paid about $7.2-million in 1994 and $4.8-million in 1995through Sept. 30. The company projected it will pay between $7.2-million in1996 and $13.5-million in 2006.   FERC's 1995 rulings in cases involving Connecticut Power & Light (IPR,27 Jan '95, 10) and Southern California Edison (IPR, 24 March '95, 4)``leave no room for doubt that this New York statute is preempted'' becauseit requires utilities to pay above avoided-cost rates to QFs, NiMo said(IPR, 21 April '95, 1; 24 March '95, 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   N.Y. JUDGE SEES ISO AS KEY IN MOVE TO WHOLESALE COMPETITION, ACCESS   An administrative law judge has recommended New York set up anindependent system operator to formalize wholesale competition and ensure asmooth transition to retail competition.   Her recommended decision in the state's Competitive Opportunitiesproceeding also calls for separating transmission and distribution fromgeneration and for recovering stranded costs with an access charge imposedby a distribution company.   Administrative law judge Judith Lee of the state's Dept. of PublicService filed her recommendation Dec. 22 with Ronald Liberty, deputydirector for the Energy and Water Division. Subject to review by the PublicService Commission, it aims to lower New York's high electricity rates andkeep industry in the state.   Key parts of the more than 200-page review are:   -- Stranded costs ``may be made unrecoverable by the transition fromregulation to a competitive market for electricity.'' These costs could berecovered by a separate mechanism outside the market, such as anon-bypassable access charge or wires charge imposed by a distributioncompany.   -- Transmission and distribution should be separate from generation``to limit the exercise of market power,'' and T&D companies will need toserve all would-be buyers in the short term.   Lee said she saw as ``critical'' the reliability of the bulk powersystem, noting that it should not be sacrificed in any way to achieve thepotential price reduction that may be associated with a system of retailaccess. Therefore, ``effective competition at the wholesale level should beestablished first, with an eye toward adding retail access as rapidly aspossible once a market is established and reliability is ensured.''   No timetable for the ``as rapidly as possible'' transition to retailaccess is available, a PSC spokesperson told Independent Power Report.   Lee's recommendation was a ``tremendous disappointment'' to New Yorkindustrials ``and to any advocate of full and open retail competition,''said Barbara Brenner, counsel to Multiple Interveners, the industrial usersgroup. ``It delays, without schedule, retail competition and, in fact,appears to delay even the implementation of wholesale competition for twoyears.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PACIFIC GENERATION BUYS 25% INTEREST IN 100-MW ONTARIO PLANT FROM DESTEC   Pacific Generation, a unit of PacifiCorp, has acquired a 25% interest inthe 100-MW Kingston cogeneration project under construction in Ontario,Canada, from Destec Energy Inc.   Destec retains 50% ownership in the gas-fired project, located inErnestown Township. The plant will supply power to the Ontario Hydro gridand process heat to Celanese Canada's Millhaven polyester plant.   PanCanadian Petroleum holds the remaining 25% interest and will supplynatural gas to the plant, which will enter service in late-1996.   Pacific Generation and Destec are already partners in thealmost-completed 240-MW Crockett cogeneration plant near San Francisco,which will begin operation in April. Other partners are Tomen Power andEnergy Investors Fund. Pacific Gas & Electric will buy the power.   ``The Kingston project fits our plan for growing our business throughacquisition of existing facilities and the development of new powerprojects,'' said John Miller, Pacific Generation president and chiefexecutive officer.   In October, Miller had said that after several years of being in a``holding pattern,'' his company intended to aggressively expand itsindependent power activities (IPR, 6 Oct '95, 14). In November, the companysaid it was beefing up its top management by hiring five people fordomestic and international expansion (IPR, 17 Nov '95, 3).   The company, based in Portland, Ore., was formed in 1989 with the mergerof Pacific Power & Light and Utah Power & Light. Ownership and operatinginterests of projects developed by Pacific P&L affiliate Onsite Energy Inc.and UP&L affiliate Energy National Inc. were transferred to PacificGeneration.   Pacific Generation holds an interest in 11 power plants in the U.S.totaling 703 MW. Destec has equity in 19 operating plants totaling 2,810 MWand has seven projects with over 1,700 MW in construction or advanceddevelopment.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MISSION FORMALLY EXITS 400-MW PROJECT AT WEYERHAEUSER MILL IN WASH. STATE   Weyerhaeuser Co. of Longview, Wash., and Mission Energy told Washingtonstate regulators they have reached a stipulated agreement over developmentof a 400-MW, gas-fired cogeneration plant, that would give Weyco fullrights to develop the plant alone at its Longview paper mill (IPR, 1 Dec'95, 13; 29 Jan '93, 1).   Weyco asked the Energy Facility Site Evaluation Council to amend itscertification agreement to reflect its decision to proceed alone.   It also asked for an amendment that would extend the agreement for 18months.   EFSEC will make a decision in February on the request. If the councilapproves the deal, ``we will require the governor to sign the newagreement,'' said Jason Zeller, EFSEC manager.   Zeller said the two companies reached a stipulated pact after beingpressured by EFSEC to resolve their differences on their own. ``We wereunhappy'' that the companies had been unable to settle their dispute overthe development of the project, he said. The original permit expired inAugust.   Weyco officials indicated to the council they were still interested indeveloping the plant eventually, even though the company recently agreed topurchase 150 MW from the Bonneville Power Administration to cover part ofits 300-MW load at the Longview mill.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   AES, ONTARIO HYDRO UNIT IN TALKS TO BUY 2,700-MW ARGENTINE PLANT   A strategic alliance of Ontario Hydro International, a unit of OntarioHydro, and AES Corp. of Arlington, Va., has opened talks with thegovernment of Argentina concerning the acquisition of the 2,700-MW Yacyretahydro project, now under construction on the Parana River, which forms theborder between Argentina and Paraguay.   Other unidentified developers have also opened discussions on theproject, jointly owned by the governments of Argentina and Paraguay.   Previously, an international solicitation was scheduled for release inAugust 1995, but was not issued (IPR, 30 June '95, 1).   Analysts said it is unlikely Ontario Hydro and AES could acquire theplant via a negotiations, and would more likely have to compete in aninternational solicitation open to all.   The project consists of 20 turbines of 135 MW each.   Officials of Ontario Hydro International and AES met recently withArgentine government officials about the project.   Ontario Hydro officials said it and AES may form a consortium to enter abid for Yacyreta when and if it is offered via a solicitation.   Both companies have equity in other South American electric projects.   The plant will be completed by the middle of 1998.   Argentine officials confirmed representatives of the two companies metwith energy officials, but nothing substantive came of the meeting.Meetings with other private developers are taking place.   Separately, a consortium known as LISTA will build and operate atransmission system to move power generated by the Yacyreta plant.   LISTA consists of Jose Cartellone Construcciones Civiles SA(Cartellone), Sideco Americana SA (Sidecdeco), Italy's Impresa Frate SpA.(Frate), Pirelli Consultora Conductores e Instalaciones SA (Pirelli),Construccion Obras de Ingenieria SA (Codi), and Electroingenieria SA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TAIWAN FIRM PROPOSES 1,010-MW BOT HYDRO PROJECT IN HONDURAS   Oslow Associates Ltd. of Taiwan has proposed to the government ofHonduras development of a $2-billion, 1,010-MW hydroelectric project on abuild-operate-transfer basis.   Oslow, a large trading company based in Taiwan, submitted the proposalfollowing a government trade mission to Honduras.   The Honduran government tentatively accepted the proposal, pendingcompletion of a number of subsequent agreements.   The project will be financed through government-backed loans in Taiwanand with funds from foreign banks.   Additional equity partners are expected to be involved in the project,but none have been identified, Honduran officials said.   Load growth is high in Honduras, but the country is relatively small.Installed capacity--two-thirds hydro--is less than 600 MW. Honduras is saidto have an estimated untapped hydro potential of about 3,600 MW.   Overall, up to 800 MW could be available to the private sector inHonduras by 1999.   If the 1,010-MW hydro project is completed, it could export power toother countries in Central America via the 1,100-mile, high-tensiontransmission grid known as the Electricity Interconnection System forCentral America, now in development.   The Inter-American Development Bank is expected to eventually provide a$157-million syndicated loan to partially finance the transmission grid.   The government of Taiwan also agreed to provide undisclosed financingfor the transmission project, which would allow each country to supply orbuy electricity from all others, and serve as an emergency electric supplybackup.   Recently, Mosbacher Power Group (MPG) of Houston launched pursuit ofsmaller independent power projects in Honduras, mostly within theindustrial power niche for projects between 20 MW and 50 MW (IPR, 17 Nov'95, 16).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SPAIN'S ENDESA SELLS 9.7% OF EDENOR IN ARGENTINA FOR ABOUT $76-MILLION   Spanish electric utility Empresa Nacional de Electricidad SA (Endesa)said its Endesa Group sold a 9.7% stake in Argentine electricitydistribution company Edenor to Banco Santander de Negocios for about (U.S.)$76-million.   Less than two weeks earlier, Endesa paid $156-million to expand itsequity stake in Edenor by 19.5 percentage points, pushing total holdings to31% (IPR, 29 Dec '95, 12). Endesa bought that piece of Edenor from theArgentine government.   Endesa said the sale to Banco Santander de Negocios was made forfinancial reasons.   Endesa said it will maintain its 21.3% holdings in Edenor with jointventure partners, Astra CAPSA of Argentina, Electricite de France, SocieteD'Amenagement Urbain et Rural of France, Empresa Nacional HidroelectricaRibargozana of Spain, and J.P. Morgan.   Endesa officials said the company remains strongly interested inadditional equity roles in Latin American electricity projects.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-14IA059-000325-B005-4http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey68.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232349 text/html 87518HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:21:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:13 GMTContent-length: 87331Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey68.html Sample Issue Copyright INDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CLOSING PRICES FOR NATURAL GAS FUTURES CONTRACTS (325 words) INDUSTRIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES BY UTILITY (292 words) EARLY DECEMBER FUEL OIL PRICES (178 words) CITY ATTORNEY BLASTS TOLEDO EDISON'S NUMEROUS SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL DISCOUNTS (522 words) ELCON DETAILS PLAN FOR RESTRUCTURING, ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITIVE ERA (1292 words) NEES REACHES DEAL WITH N.H. PUC STAFF FOR WHEELING PILOT THAT WILL BEGIN IN MAY (455 words) MOJAVE PIPELINE PLANS NEW OPEN SEASON IN JAN. OR FEB. TO DECIDE FATE OF PROJECT (358 words) N.J. MOVES PSE&G LGAC TO MONTH BASIS, TO LET BIG USERS PLAY MARKET BETTER (187 words) RATE DESIGN IN WHAT MAY BE PG&E'S LAST GENERAL RATE CASE, INDUSTRIALS WIN 8% ELECTRIC CUTS (613 words) SOUTH CAROLINA INDUSTRIALS TO CHALLENGE BROAD RATE HIKES APPROVED FOR SCE&G (722 words) CONSUMERS INKS LONG-TERM DISCOUNT DEALS WITH THREE MICH. INDUSTRIALS (475 words) PUC CLOSES PECO INTERRUPTIBLE RIDER; INDUSTRIALS SAY GROWTH WILL SUFFER (496 words) N.C. MUNICIPAL SAYS COINCIDENT-PEAK RATES ATTRACT, RETAIN INDUSTRIALS (877 words) MONSANTO PHOSPHORUS UNIT INKS LONG-TERM DEAL WITH UTAH P&L (235 words) INTERVENTION NIPSCO INDUSTRIALS TO SEE $1.5-MILLION REFUND IN DISPUTED INSURANCE CLAIM (342 words) UTILITY RESTRUCTURING PA. FIRMS STRESS CHOICE OF SUPPLIERS; SEE UTILITIES CONTROLLING POWER POOL (558 words) ASSEMBLY SPEAKER BACKS RETAIL ACCESS IN N.Y.; NO GUARANTEE ON STRANDED COSTS (455 words) INDUSTRIAL DSM SEEN GETTING CUSTOMIZED, INCLUDING HELP ON PRODUCTION, POLLUTION (304 words) UTILITY COMPETITION INDIANA QUARRY'S REQUEST FOR SERVICE FROM PSI ENERGY OVER CO-OP IS APPROVED (417 words) WEPCO IN DISPUTE WITH UPPER PENINSULA POWER OVER SERVING MINE EXPANSION (712 words) ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT MAINE PS WINS APPROVAL FOR DISCOUNTS FOR INDUSTRIALS CREATING NEW LOAD (419 words) SIGECO CREDITS DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS FOR WINNING MAJOR NEW TOYOTA PLANT (288 words) WABASH VALLEY REORGANIZES ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT RATES FOR INDUSTRIALS (388 words) TROUBLED VERDIGRIS VALLEY CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT (417 words) NYPA ASKS PSC TO KEEP OTHER UTILITIES FROM COMPETING ON INDUSTRIAL RATES (473 words) CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CLOSING PRICES FOR NATURAL GAS FUTURES CONTRACTSCLOSING PRICES FOR NATURAL GAS FUTURES CONTRACTSNEW YORK MERCANTILE EXCHANGEDecember 27, 1995--January 8, 1996$/mmBtuDelivery Months        Contract    Open        Feb     Mar     April   MayDate    Volume      Interest    1996    1996    1996    1996Dec 27  41,781      162,606     2.868   2.298   1.999   1.849Dec 28  38,814      163,771     2.509   2.135   1.886   1.786Dec 29  18,382      162,783     2.619   2.195   1.901   1.796Jan 1                       Holiday; Market ClosedJan 2   21,117      162,763     2.859   2.295   1.971   1.861Jan 3   34,362      164,448     2.986   2.377   2.005   1.875Jan 4   25,754      164,251     2.964   2.376   2.023   1.888Jan 5   27,268      N/A         2.916   2.424   2.059   1.919Jan 8                       Market Closed Due to Weather                           Delivery MonthsDate    June    July    Aug     Sept    Oct     Nov     Dec        1996    1996    1996    1996    1996    1996    1996Dec 27  1.784   1.759   1.764   1.774   1.814   1.896   1.983Dec 28  1.746   1.731   1.736   1.751   1.799   1.891   1.978Dec 29  1.756   1.741   1.746   1.761   1.809   1.901   1.988Jan 1                       Holiday; Market ClosedJan 2   1.811   1.776   1.776   1.786   1.836   1.929   2.016Jan 3   1.820   1.785   1.785   1.795   1.845   1.938   2.025Jan 4   1.833   1.798   1.799   1.810   1.861   1.954   2.041Jan 5   1.859   1.824   1.819   1.827   1.882   1.976   2.063Jan 8                Market Closed Due to WeatherNote: The standard NYMEX gas futures contract represents 10,000 mmBtu. Forexample, a single contract, purchased on Wednesday, January 3, for deliveryin December, 1996, was valued at $2.025/mmBtu or $20,250.   Volume represents the total number of contracts traded that day.   Open Interest is the number of contracts in existance on that day whichhave not been satisfied by an offsetting sale or purchase. The minimumprice change is one-tenth of a cent per mmBtu; the maximum daily pricechange is 10 cents per mmBtu,or $1,000 per contract. Trading terminates atthe close of business, eight business days prior to the first calendar dayof the delivery month. Delivery point is Sabine Pipe Line Company's HenryHub in Erath, Louisiana.   Source: New York Mercantile ExchangeCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   INDUSTRIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES BY UTILITYINDUSTRIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES BY UTILITYNew England/Mid-Atlantic   Industrial electricity prices for  April 1994 and April 1995 for majorelectric utilities in the New England/Mid-Atlantic region of the UnitedStates. Prices (cents/kWh) include demand, fuel adjustment, and othercharges, and are intended as a general index rather than a specific pricefor industrials on-line with a given utility.                                             April   April     %                                             '94     '95     Change 1.      NY--Consolidated Edison            11.04   11.23      1.7 2.      MA--Commonwealth Electric           8.54    9.68     13.3 3.      NH--PS New Hampshire                9.40    9.49      0.9 4.      CT--United Illuminating             9.01    8.88     -1.5 5.      MA--Boston Edison                   7.95    8.69      9.3 6.      MA--Western Mass Electric           7.80    8.46      8.5 7.      CT--Connecticut LIght & Power       8.38    7.93     -5.4 8.      NJ--Public Service Electric & Gas   7.21    7.91      9.7 9.      NJ--Jersey Central P&L              9.06    7.87    -13.110.     MA--Massachusetts Electric           7.58    7.67      1.211.     RI--Narragansett Electric            6.85    7.61     11.012.     PA--Philadelphia Electric            7.37    7.05     -4.313.     ME--Central Maine Power              6.15    5.66     -7.914.     PA--Pennsylvania Power & Light       5.56    5.46     -1.815.     NY--Niagara Mohawk Power             5.62    5.43     -3.516.     VT--Green Mountain Power             5.86    5.20    -11.217.     DE--Delmarva Power & Light           4.25    4.53      6.618.     PA--West Pennsylvania Power          4.49    4.51      0.419.     NY--New York Power Authority         2.14    2.09     -2.1   Prices are based on gross revenue and sales figures given to the Dept.of Energy each month via form EIA-826. Figures are preliminary and subjectto  revision at the end of the year.   Industrial Electricity Prices by Utility appears  in alternate issues,each time presenting one of six different regions of the country in thefollowing order: New England/Mid-Atlantic; Southeast; East Central; WestCentral; Mountain; Pacific. Each region is updated every six months. TheNew England/Mid-Atlantic region last ran in the May 19, 1995 issue, page5.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   EARLY DECEMBER FUEL OIL PRICESEARLY DECEMBER FUEL OIL PRICES   Refiners' posted prices at end of month. No. 6 and No. 4 fuel oil are indollars per 42-gallon barrel. Prices are generally for tank cars goingdirectly to consumers rather than for resale.                                 Dec     Nov     Dec                                 '95     '95     '94No. 6 Fuel Oil ($/bbl)0.3% sulfur     Hess, New York             24.95   21.45   21.65        Coastal, New York       24.10   22.10   22.150.5% sulfur     Hess, Philadelphia         22.65   20.15   20.85        Coastal, Boston         25.00   21.25   21.751.0% sulfur     Hess, Philadelphia         20.65   18.55   19.802.1% sulfur     Hess, Wilmington           19.15   17.05   18.102.5% sulfur     Global, New York           18.40   17.90   18.05     High sulfur        Global New York         18.05   17.80   18.35No. 4 Fuel Oil ($/bbl)0.3% sulfur        Hess, Philadelphia      25.20   22.45   22.000.5% sulfur        Global, Boston          29.80   24.80   --        Alliance Boston         29.80   24.80   26.001.0% sulfur        Global, Boston          28.80   24.60   --        Alliance, Boston        28.80   24.60   25.00No. 2 Fuel Oil (cents/gallon)Coastal, Boston                 64.50   56.50   55.50Coastal, New York               65.00   57.00   59.00Hess, New York                  62.05   54.85   53.60Hess, Wimington                 62.15   57.10   55.75Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CITY ATTORNEY BLASTS TOLEDO EDISON'S NUMEROUS SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL DISCOUNTS   Toledo Edison's practice of negotiating special discount contracts withlarge industrials is coming under heavy fire from the city of Toledo as theutility's $35.2-million electric rate case moves slowly through the OhioPublic Utilities Commission.   Cleveland Electric Illuminating, a Centerior Energy subsidiary as isToledo Edison, is seeking a $83-million rate hike. Together, the twocompanies whose electric rates already are among the highest in the Midwestare asking for $118-million (Case No. 95-300-EL-AIR) (IEB, 21 April '95,5).   In written comments filed recently with the PUC, the city of Toledo tooka dim view of Toledo Ed's request, especially in light of what the cityclaims is an over-reliance on special contracts by the utility.   Toledo city attorney Kerry Bruce objected to a recent PUC staff reportthat recommended the commission approve the full $118-million increase forthe Centerior companies. The report, Bruce said, ``fails to considerwhether the number of incentive contracts and the magnitude of thediscounts provided violate the prohibition (under Ohio law) against thesetting of special rates.''   According to Bruce, the report also ``fails to determine whether theextensive use of incentive contracts to industrial customers exceeds thepurpose of retaining load and instead establishes a rate which is unjustlydiscriminatory and unjustly preferential'' in violation of state law.   Bruce asserted that more than 71% of the potential customers and 92% ofthe potential kWh sales under Toledo Edison's Large Power Rate PV-44 are onspecial contracts. Under such a scenario, ``it is not clear what purposethe tariff rate serves,'' he said.   A Toledo Edison spokeswoman acknowledged that ``yes, we do have a largenumber of our large load customers on special contracts.'' She said specialcontracts often are the best way to address the individual needs ofcustomers, not just with price but with other utility services as well.   Of the 87 large industrials that qualify for Toledo Edison's PV-44 rate,62 either have special contracts or are receiving the utility's economicdevelopment rates, she confirmed. Under the PV-44 rate, a primarytransmission customer pays a monthly demand charge of $18.25/kVA for thefirst 1,000 kVA, $18.05/kVA for the next 29,000 kVA and $17.16/kVA for eachadditional kVA. For sub-transmission, the comparable charges per kVA are$17.48, $17.20 and $16.18.   Despite the relatively high rate, the number of special contracts, Brucetold Industrial Energy Bulletin, is simply unacceptable. ``It violatesratemaking policy to have more load under special contracts than under atariff,'' he said. ``It shows the company is subject to market pressuresand really can't implement its regulatory rate.''   The Toledo Edison spokeswoman defended the special contracts.``Obviously, it is a competitive marketplace,'' she said. Her company``recognizes the need to keep large customers in our service area. It'simportant to keep those jobs and economic development here instead ofletting it leave.''   Bruce summed up the city's position by insisting that the utility shouldnot increase its rates ``because it's bad for business.'' Instead of askingcustomers to pay an additional $118-million annually, both Toledo Edisonand CEI should eliminate heir dividend, he said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ELCON DETAILS PLAN FOR RESTRUCTURING, ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITIVE ERA   Industrials' major national representative on electric power issues, theElectricity Consumers Resource Council, last week issued its detailed``Road Map for the Transition,'' which fills in gaps that critics found inits ``Blueprint for Customer Choice'' (IEB, 6 Oct '95, 1).   The biggest feature of the transition document is a plan for dealingwith utilities' stranded investment. Under ELCON's proposal, utilitieswould be able to recover up to 50% of their costs stranded by competition,but in practice, few if any would be able to get back that much.   The Edison Electric Institute quickly denounced the road map as ``fullof dead ends and some pretty deep potholes.'' EEI criticized the proposalas a one-size-fits-all imposition of a federal structure on the country'selectric system that will benefit ELCON's members ``at the expense ofeveryone else.''   Still, the road map puts ELCON once again in the vanguard of therestructuring movement; its proposal is the first one offered in suchdetail for consideration by Congress and states as they approach majordecisions this year and next. It is surely not the last, however.   Rep. Dan Schaefer (R-Colo.), chairman of the House energy and powersubcommittee, told Industrial Energy Bulletin Monday that the fullCommerce Committee will vote out restructuring legislation this year.Anyone who thinks it will not do so is mistaken, he declared. He urgedinput from all sectors of the industry.   Schaefer reacted only briefly to ELCON's plan. ``I thought they broughtin some good points,'' he said, although he took issue with ELCON'sproposed three-year transition to retail competition, which he called toofast. ``Real comprehensive legislation--you have to give it time,'' hesaid. ``I'm not sure three years is the answer.'' He suggested a phased-inapproach so as not to ``upset things.''   When ELCON released its blueprint in September, it purposely glossedover the stranded-cost issue. Shortly thereafter, Schaefer and WilliamMassey of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission challenged the group tocome forward with specific proposals addressing stranded-cost recovery.   ELCON's answer to those challenges is a five-step process featuring aformula for dividing up responsibility for unmitigable stranded investment.The formula assigns a ``responsibility factor'' to utilities, to bedetermined by state regulators according to how efficiently a utilityresponded to regulatory mandates and whether the company opposed themandates in the first place.   A utility would be required to absorb at least 50% of its unmitigablestranded costs, but in practice it probably would have to bear a greatershare. In a nutshell, the formula starts by assigning stranded costsequally between ratepayers and shareholders, with the responsibility factordeciding how much of the ratepayers' 50% share the utility would berequired to absorb in addition to its 50% share.   But the formula only would be applied after state regulators conductwhat ELCON is billing as ``the last great rate case'' to determine whatsunk costs are not mitigable. In the alternative, the utility could opt tosell its generation assets as a means of determining stranded costs.   Stranded-cost recovery mechanisms would be subject to negotiation withindividual customers and classes of customers. Regulators would deciderecovery in the absence of a negotiated settlement. The utility would haveno more than five years to recover its stranded costs.   ELCON executive director John Anderson called the road map's strandedcost provisions a ``statesmanlike'' effort to end the impasse between ELCONand EEI over stranded-cost recovery. Historically, ELCON has rejected anylevel of stranded-cost recovery in response to EEI's position thatutilities are entitled to 100% recovery. With its proposal on the table,the issue of stranded-cost recovery is now open to negotiation, Andersonsuggested.   But EEI president Thomas Kuhn called ELCON's proposal on stranded costsa nonstarter.   ``I don't see that there's anything new in the ELCON proposal,'' Kuhnsaid in an appearance before the Washington International Energy Group.``We don't see a bargaining chip here at all.''   Kuhn cited ``leading economists,'' FERC and most states as endorsingEEI's position that utilities are entitled to 100% recovery. He predictedthat states will reject ELCON's complicated proposal.   ELCON's road map proposes a three-year transition featuring a ``customerelection period'' based on the telephone industry experience. No later thanthe mid-point of the three-year transition period, state regulators wouldfeature a ``Day One'' designating the beginning of the customer electionperiod. As of that date, every customer would have the right to choose anelectric service provider. Customers would be notified at least six monthsprior to Day One of their right to switch from their utility provider.   At the end of the transition, all generation assets will have beenremoved from rate base. The generation company may continue to sell theasset's power to its affiliated--or previously affiliated--distributioncompany beyond the transition period under terms of a transition contractapproved by the state.   Transition contracts also would provide for ancillary and backupservices to qualifying facilities under the Public Utility RegulatoryPolicies Act. The utility PURPA Reform group criticized this aspect of theproposal as setting the stage for ``the last great PURPA land rush.'' Thegroup called it inconsistent to deny utilities stranded costs whilecommitting them indefinitely to the purchase of QF power.   But ELCON's Anderson rejected utility complaints about uneconomic QFcontracts as ``a thing of the past.'' No utility is entering into high-costcontracts with PURPA facilities today, he said. The importance of PURPA'sSection 210 is not its mandatory purchase provision, but the section'srequirements that utilities provide backup and ancillary services to QFs.   As a check against market power, ELCON's road map calls for operationalunbundling of vertically integrated utilities using the Dept. of Justice'smethodology. While free market entry is an important check, it is notsufficient in and of itself, the group said. Transmission assets would beturned over to an independent system operator and controls would be placedon interaffiliate pricing of transmission services and interaffiliatedistribution transactions.   EEI's Kuhn dismissed as ``specious'' ELCON's concerns about utilitymarket power and industry concentration. The electric utility industry is agreat deal less concentrated than the telephone industry or most ELCONmembers, Kuhn asserted.   ELCON further proposed that, during the first two years of thetransition, owners of FERC-regulated transmission facilities would berequired to file regional transmission group proposals. Siting of newinterstate transmission systems would become FERC's responsibility. ELCONalso proposed establishment of unregulated Private Delivery Systems, orPDSs, such as a line linking two industrial facilities.   If a new transmission line is built privately and without the exerciseof eminent domain, then the line would be unregulated. Owners of existingtransmission systems could petition FERC for a license to opt out from rateregulation if the owner can show it does not exercise market power and theline was not sited through the power of eminent domain. The unregulatedprivately owned transmission facilities would provide competitive pressureson monopoly transmission providers, ELCON suggested.   Independent System Operator franchises would be granted for finiteperiods in order to allow others the opportunity to competitively bid forthe right to serve the franchise, ELCON proposed.   Local distribution services would be unbundled with traditionaldistribution functions split between the ``wires'' business and theelectric services merchant business under the proposal.   ELCON also proposes establishment of joint federal-state boards to makerecommendations for state legislative actions to ensure universal service.   The road map places much of the responsibility for the outcome of thetransition with state regulators, said ELCON's Anderson. The proposal isintended to put to rest concerns of state regulators that ELCON advocates``federalizing the system,'' he said: ``The states are going to have awhole lot to do'' if the road map is implemented.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NEES REACHES DEAL WITH N.H. PUC STAFF FOR WHEELING PILOT THAT WILL BEGIN INMAY   New England Electric System has reached an agreement with the NewHampshire Public Utilities Commission staff on conditions for its localaffiliate, Granite State Electric, to carry out a retail wheeling pilotprogram starting in May 1996.   NEES announced the breakthrough Jan. 5 during a briefing to thecommission on collaborative talks between the staff and all utilities inthe state on the two-year pilot, which had been proposed in October tocover 3% of utility load.   No other utility announced on Jan. 5 that it had come to terms with thestaff and, therefore, the commission permitted an extra week until Jan. 12for negotiations.   In the NEES agreement with the staff, only general outlines were madepublic. But sources familiar with the deal said the two sides split thedifference on the key stranded cost issue and that Granite State would beallowed to recoup 75% of its losses caused by the pilot.   Granite State will use an access charge to recover the stranded cost andsaid the level would be low enough to give customers a ``meaningful'' levelof savings from the pilot. Currently, Granite State's average prices are10.3 cents/kWh for residential and 7.9 cents/kWh for industrial users.   In its September draft guidelines, the PUC had proposed 50% recovery oflosses, and NEES and the other utilities had replied by demanding full 100%recovery before they would cooperate on the plan.   Once the NEES deal with the staff is formally proposed to the PUC, it issure to draw fire from both industrial groups that support the original 50%level and probably Public Service of New Hampshire, which has held out for100% recovery.   In a statement, NEES said the agreement was meant to allow the retailwheeling pilot proceed as scheduled in May for Granite State customers evenif it is delayed for other utilities in the state. NEES also said that oncethe plan was approved by the PUC, it would communicate with its customersabout how they could participate in the pilot.   Participants would receive unbundled rates for transmission anddistribution and could chose their power supplier. They also would continueto receive energy conservation programs from the distributor.   In its October proposal, the PUC allotted 3.75 MW of Granite State'sload to the statewide pilot, which would cover a total of 60 MW. PSNH is byfar the largest participant with 44 MW, although this level may be reducedto 33 MW.   While reaching a final deal with PSNH is clearly the top priority of thePUC, the agreement with NEES appears to be a breakthrough that could makeit harder for PSNH to maintain a hard line in future talks.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MOJAVE PIPELINE PLANS NEW OPEN SEASON IN JAN. OR FEB. TO DECIDE FATE OFPROJECT   Mojave Pipeline will hold a new ``open season'' auction in January orFebruary, and the outcome could decide the fate of the controversialCalifornia natural gas pipeline project.   Mojave, the Bakersfield, Calif., subsidiary of El Paso Natural Gas, hasbeen trying since 1992 to break into the California market, providing theonly major transportation alternative to Pacific Gas & Electric for bigusers. The line would extend from the Arizona border to Sacramento, withlaterals running to the industrial area around San Francisco Bay. With itsfirm rate of 47 cents/decatherm, the line drew a number of largeindustrials eager to escape PG&E's intrastate transport rates, which canexceed $1/dt.   But the project got bogged down by regulatory demands at both the stateand federal levels (IEB, 8 Sept, 2). Meanwhile, PG&E began discounting itsrates to large users and a number of industrials took those offers, ratherthan wait out the regulatory uncertainty.   In the most recent development, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionordered Mojave to hold an open season for shippers on Mojave's existingline--which only extends as far as Bakersfield--to release capacity toprospective northward expansion customers.   Although this does not directly affect the expansion itself, Mojavedecided to throw open the whole project to auction in order to gauge theremaining market interest, according to president Michael Holland.   The existing contracts call for a firm rate of 47 cents/dt, escalatingat 1% annually, for 15 years. That, however, was based on a project of 475million cubic feet per day (mmcf/d). ``If the market supports a smallerproject, rates may hve to go higher,'' Holland said, and he added thatMojave will need at least 325 mmcf/d to proceed at all.   On a positive note, the recent FERC order favored Mojave on a naggingpricing issue that threatened to repel more customers (Docket No.CP93-258-007).   Previously, the commission ruled that Mojave would have to file new ratecases each year, instead of fixing 15-year contracts. But the companycomplained that neither Mojave nor its customers could abide that kind ofuncertainty and the condition was overturned on rehearing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   N.J. MOVES PSE&G LGAC TO MONTH BASIS, TO LET BIG USERS PLAY MARKET BETTER   The New Jersey Board of Public Utilities has approved a proposal byPublic Service Electric & Gas to switch gas price calculations from ayearly to a monthly basis.   This will affect the levelized gas adjustment clause (LGAC), which letsutilities recover their actual fuel costs. Traditionally, utilities haveupdated the LGAC on an annual basis, but the market is now so vibrant, thatcustomers need more frequent price signals, according to the BPU.   ``The monthly pricing scheme reflects the current market price and willallow customers to make more informed decisions concerning their energyneeds,'' said BPU president Herbert Tate.   With the LGAC changing on a monthly basis, large users will be able todecide whether to buy from the utility, or from outside suppliers.   Very large industrials mostly buy exclusively from suppliers ormarketers, using the local utility only for transportation. However,smaller industrials may still take gas supplies from their localutilities.   PSE&G, which proposed the alteration, is indifferent to the pricechanges, since utilities only pass along fuel costs on a dollar-for-dollarbasis, and earn no profit.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   IN WHAT MAY BE PG&E'S LAST GENERAL RATE CASE, INDUSTRIALS WIN 8% ELECTRICCUTS   Pacific Gas & Electric's large industrial customers will enjoy an 8%reduction in electric rates this year while the utility also will reduceits gas rates and pipeline tariffs for core and noncore customers andcogenerators.   The California Public Utilities Commission December 20 ordered PG&E toreduce its 1996 electric rates by $434-million, or an average 5.5%, and gasrates by $262-million, or an average 11.77%, effective January 1. Thecombined rate cuts incorporated PG&E's general rate case with several otherelectric and gas revenue and pipeline expansion proceedings.   The rate cuts will be shared by all customer classes, with all classesgaining at least 50% of the average reduction and large customers limitedto 150% of the average reduction. The PUC reduced PG&E's electric rates forcommercial and small industrial customers 7%, agricultural rates 2.6%, andresidential rates 2.9%.   ``This is great news for PG&E customers,'' said PUC Commissioner JessieKnight, Jr. ``As industrial customers see lower electric costs the economybenefits,'' as higher earnings stimulate job growth, he said   This is expected to be PG&E's last three-year general rate case sincethe PUC plans to adopt performance-based ratemaking in implementing itselectric restructuring order providing incentives for utilities to operatemore efficiently and rewarding productivity.   The PUC has adopted a PBR mechanism for San Diego Gas & Electric and iscurrently considering a PBR proposal by Southern California Edison.Moreover, the PUC has already severed fuel costs, Diablo Canyon ratemaking,and rate of return issues from PG&E's general rate case and reviews them inseparate proceedings.   The PUC noted that the decision represented its first step towardremoving large commercial customers from averaging of core residential andnonresidential gas rates and tariffs. The PUC accordingly approved a slightshift in PG&E's gas revenue requirement from noncore to core customers.   The commission adopted PG&E's proposal to reinstate a seasonal ratedifferential for noncore industrial and cogeneration gas customers. At thesame time, the PUC rejected the Sacramento Municipal Utility District'sproposal for an unbundled backbone transmission rate, noting that PG&Eplans to unbundle tranmission and storage services.   The PUC adopted the recommendations of Administrative Law Judge KimMalcolm, trimming PG&E's 1996 rates more than the utility had requested.PG&E had proposed reducing its 1996 electric rates by $128.7-million andits gas rates by $203.6-million.   The utility had initially sought to reduce its electric rates by$200.8-million and its gas rates by $119.1-million, but modified itsrequests several times. PG&E has proposed rate cuts to reduce its electricrates to 10 cents/kWh by December 1999 from its current rates of 10.5cents/kWh.   ``It is unusual for a utility to request substantial rate reductions inits general rate case but a welcome one,'' PUC President Daniel Fesslersaid. ``This represents significant progress (in reducting electric rates),but it is a beginning.''   PG&E maintained that its final revenue request was a ``bare bones''proposal in line with its ongoing corporate-wide programs to reduceoperating costs and rates. However, ALJ Malcolm found that PG&E's estimatesof doing business in 1996 and $4.6-billion revenue requirement request weretoo high. She stressed that it would be unfair for ratepayers to helpfinance the utility's transition to a competitive electric industry.   Malcolm determined that PG&E had overestimated its future costs fornuclear decommissioning, employee compensation and pension fund, andpipeline replacement. She also found that PG&E's timing of recovery forfossil and geothermal decommissioning costs was unreasonable.   The ALJ also denied PG&E's request for nearly $30-million in ratepayersubsidies for marketing programs designed to retain customers, saying thatthose costs should be paid by shareholders or customers that benefitdirectly from such programs.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH CAROLINA INDUSTRIALS TO CHALLENGE BROAD RATE HIKES APPROVED FORSCE&G   An industrial group in South Carolina will challenge the Public ServiceCommission's late-December decision to approve virtually all of the generalrate increase requested by South Carolina Electric & Gas (Docket No.95-1000-E).   Arthur Fusco, a Columbia, S.C., attorney who represents the SouthCarolina Energy Users Committee, said the group will urge the PSC toreconsider several key aspects of its ruling, which granted SCE&G a 7.34%,$67.5-million general rate increase to be implemented in two phases--a$59.5-million hike as soon as its new, 385-MW baseload plant in Cope, S.C.,begins commercial operation later this month, and an $8-million increasenext Jan. 1.   The investor-owned utility had requested a two-step increase totaling$76.7-million, or 8.35%, primarily to recoup the $436-million cost of theCope plant.   The commission also said it will allow SCE&G to earn a 12% rate ofreturn on common equity, which is lower than the 12.25% rate the utilityhad requested, but higher than both the 11% it had been permitted to earnand the 11.25% to 11.75% range proposed by most of those who testified tothe PSC.   Fusco took issue with the 12% rate of return, noting that even aquarter-percent increase in that rate results in ``significantly higher''rates for industrials and others. He also criticized the PSC's decision tosupport SCE&G's proposals to establish a $50-million, customer-funded stormdamage reserve fund, and to transfer nearly $256.7-million in depreciationreserves from the utility's transmission and distribution assets to itsnuclear generation assets.   The depreciation-reserve shift, Fusco said, will artificially reduceSCE&G's nuclear generation costs, but increase the utility's T&D costs and,presumably, its transmission-access and wheeling costs. That, he continued,would give SCE&G an unfair competitive advantage over other generators, andwill force anyone who seeks access to the utility's T&D system to paymore.   Belton Ziegler, SCE&G's general counsel, said the transfer is anecessary preemptive step to ensure that any industrials that leave theutility for other suppliers help pay for assets SCE&G had developed toserve them.   Without the shift, he said, residential and small-commercial customerswould likely end up paying for ``100%'' of the utility's strandedinvestment, ``and we don't think that would be fair.''   Ziegler continued, ``If you look at the natural gas industry, thebenefits of deregulation went--for the most part--to large customers whocould move off the system'' and avoid, as much as possible, theresponsibility for paying off the investments their old gas companies hadmade to serve them.   ``We are telling industrials that if they leave as generation customersthey still will have to pay [for the nuclear assets SCE&G developed forthem] as transmission and distribution customers.''   Ziegler also dismissed assertions that the storm fund is unfair. He saidthat after Hurricane Hugo battered SCE&G's service territory in September1989, the utility looked into ways it could prepare for the next bigstorm.   ``It became clear that commercial insurance would be prohibitivelyexpensive, and that would make more sense to set up a fund'' like the onethe utility proposed and the PSC just approved.   Fusco said the industrial group is likely to support the South CarolinaDept. of Consumer Affairs' newly announced plan to ask the PSC toreconsider its ruling.   Nancy Vaughn Coombs, DCA's deputy consumer advocate, told IndustrialEnergy Bulletin said the DCA took issue with virtually all aspects of thePSC's ruling, asserting that the rate increase is more than three timeslarger than it should be, and that South Carolina law does not allow thecreation of a storm fund like the one the commission approved.   But Coombs said her agency is most concerned about thedepreciation-reserve transfer, which she said would have the effect ofshifting SCE&G's costs away from its generation sector, which is likely toface increasing competition as electric-industry deregulation takes hold,to its transmission and distribution sector, which is likely to remain amonopoly.   As a result, she said, SCE&G will have ``a significantly increasedprobability'' of recouping--through T&D rates--nuclear investment coststhat ``otherwise would have been subjected to an uncertain policy regardingthe recovery of costs of uneconomic generation capacity.''   Coombs said that if the commission fails to reverse this and other keyelements of its ruling, her agency is likely to file a legal challenge instate court.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CONSUMERS INKS LONG-TERM DISCOUNT DEALS WITH THREE MICH. INDUSTRIALS   Three large industrial firms in Consumers Power's territory have strucklong-term power agreements with the utility in exchange for specifieddiscounts.   On Dec. 7, the Michigan Public Service Commission granted ex parteapproval to Consumers' request to become the sole supplier of electricityto Dow Corning and its affiliate Hemlock Semiconductor (Case U-10997).   The PSC also granted ex parte approval to Consumers to provide power toBundy Tubing on a sole-supplier basis (Case U-10995). A contract betweenthe utility and Pharmacia & Upjohn is pending.   Under the agreement between Consumers and Dow Corning, Consumers will besole supplier over an eight-year period. Although specific dollar figureswere not disclosed, Dow said it would save several million in energy costsover the life of the agreement.   The deal covers three key industrial facilities and is crafted to retainan existing load and to meet new power requirements between now and 2003.According to a Consumers spokesman, the utility currently supplies a totalof 50 MW to Dow's corporate center, Hemlock Semiconductor and Dow's Midlandsite, which contains an operating 18-MW, wood-fired cogeneration plant.   Over the eight years of the agreement, this 50 MW gradually be increasedto 110 MW, as the cogeneration unit is shut down next year and HemlockSemiconductor expands its facility, the spokesman said.   A separate agreement calls for the Midland Cogeneration Venture, aConsumers Power affiliate, to supply approximately one billion lbs. ofsteam annually to Dow Corning.   The special contract with Bundy Tubing has an initial term of fiveyears, after which time it is subject to automatic renewal for successiveone-year periods. However, after the initial term either party may cancelthe contract by providing the other with timely written notice.   The contract requires Bundy Tubing to purchase all of its electricityfrom Consumers except for back-up generation. Rates and terms of thepurchase are governed by Consumers' Rate D less 15%. Rate D has a charge of$100/customer/month and an on-peak billing demand charge of $7.85/kW. Inaddition, there is a maximum demand charge of $1.85/kW for primary service,$0.97/kW for subtransmission service and $0.52/kW for transmissionservice.   The special contract with Bundy contains provisions to encourage theindustrial to implement demand and energy savings programs. Consumers hasagreed to reimburse Bundy for the cost of such programs up to $20,000,provided the programs are completed to Consumers' satisfaction before Jan.1, 1996, are designed to improve the industrial firm's operations inColdwater, Mich., and are performed in accordance with applicable laws andregulations.   On Dec. 4, Consumers signed a contract with Pharmacia & Upjohn, itssecond largest industrial customer, to become the sole supplier of 75 MW atdiscounted rates for 10 years. The contract applies to the industrialfirm's research facility in Kalamazoo, Mich., and its manufacturing plantin Portage, Mich.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PUC CLOSES PECO INTERRUPTIBLE RIDER; INDUSTRIALS SAY GROWTH WILL SUFFER   The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission ruled that PECO Energy mayclose its interruptible rate program to new load (Docket No. R-943281). Themove was opposed by the Philadelphia Area Industrial Energy Users Group(PAIEUG) and Scott Paper Co., who said interruptible rates help attract newload, and that freezing the program will hurt economic development (DocketNos. R-943281C002 and R-943281C0003).   The Large Interruptible Rate Option (LILR) provides a discount rate ofapproximately 57%, reducing charges from PECO from 7.493 cents/kWh to 3.217cents/kWh. Although the PUC approved an alternative rate (IR-1), this willprovide a discount of only 5%, to new interruptible customers.   When PECO proposed freezing LILR, it asked to limit interruptible ratesto customers who were under contract by Oct 1, 1995 (IEB, 25 Aug '95, 7).It argued that interruptible rates were meant as a load management tool.However, the utility now has up to 1,000 MW of excess capacity, and thevalue of interruptible load has diminished. Since 1984, it has onlyinterrupted the LILR customers 12 times, PECO pointed out.   However, industrials responded that the interruptible program isimportant for economic development, and was never meant primarily as a loadmanagement tool. Closing out this program will deter firms from startingnew plants in PECO territory or expanding existing plants, they said. Inaddition, industrials fear that PECO will use the freeze as the first steptoward phasing-out existing interruptible rates altogether--basing thisprospect on statements by the company. PAIEUG noted that some of itsmembers have invested millions of dollars to expand in PECO territory, withthe expectation of interruptible service.   In its decision, the PUC pointed out that PECO has other economicdevelopment tariffs, such as flexible rate options, and that ``PECO iswell-equipped, without the LILR, to attract new load to the territory.'' Itadded that electric rates are rarely the sole decisive factor in acompany's location decision and said that LILR has only been a significantfactor in only one firm's decision to move into the area--Lukens Steel.Taxes, transportation and telecommunications are usually more importantfactors, according to the PUC.   It added that ``Continued availability of [LILR] would...produce areduction in PECO's revenues, which would ultimately cause the rates ofother customer classes to increase, which would not help to preserveexisting employment and investment.'' Because the economic developmentargument is ``a bald assertion'' by PAIEUG, ``there are no direct benefitsto balance the cost of providing a subsidy of over 3.5 cents/kWh to LILRcustomers,'' the PUC said.   The commission also rejected PAIEUG's assertion that interruptiblecustomers should not incur generation-related capital costs since theutility does not have to plan to meet their needs--it can simply interruptthem any time it needs the capacity. The PUC noted that these customers areonly curtailed at times of peak demand, so that interruptible load onlydisplaces relatively low capital-cost peaking capacity, and cannotsubstitute for baseload or intermediate capacity.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   N.C. MUNICIPAL SAYS COINCIDENT-PEAK RATES ATTRACT, RETAIN INDUSTRIALS   Coincident-peak-based rates that all larger industrial customers ofGreenville, N.C.'s municipal utility must pay are not only enablingexisting industrials to lower their electric bills, they are also helpingthe muni lure new industrial firms to the city.   So says John D. Chaffee, executive director of the Pitt CountyDevelopment Commission, adding that industrials that take full advantage ofwhat the CP rates can offer generally pay no more--and sometimes less--thanthey would for electricity from investor-owned utilities and electriccooperatives that serve areas around Greenville.   The Greenville Utilities Commission (GUC), as the muni is known,purchases all its wholesale power from the North Carolina Eastern MunicipalPower Agency, which in turn buys most of its power from Carolina Power &Light. Because a significant portion of NCEMPA's and the muni's wholesalepower costs is based on their demand during CP&L's highest systemwidedemand hour each month, the muni agency and Greenville have been workinghard to minimize their monthly peaks through, among other things,aggressive residential load control programs, and programs to helpindustrials install peak-shaving generation (IEB, 29 Dec `95, 4).   GUC general manager Roger Jones said the Greenville muni also inmid-1994 replaced its traditional industrial rate schedule with a new menuof CP-only rates that all customers with a demand of 750 kW or more mustchoose from.   They include an ``A'' rate for 750 kW-plus customers whose energy usemust be relatively constant, a ``B'' rate for 750 kW-plus industrials withmore flexibility, and a ``C'' rate for 8 MW-plus customers that arewilling--and able--to make significant reductions in their energy useduring coincident-peak periods.   Under each rate, the customer pays a basic monthly charge of $440, plusa relatively high per-kW rate for its demand during the 60 minutes eachmonth when CP&L--the muni's ultimate power supplier--experiences itshighest systemwide demand. The customer also pays a much smaller per-kWcharge for difference between that coincident-peak level and its highestdemand for all that month, plus energy charges.   For instance, under the ``C'' rate, a 8-MW customer that reduces itscoincident-peak demand to 2 MW pays the $440 basic charge, plus demandcharges of $21.34/kW on the 2-MW coincident-peak demand and $2.86/kW on the6 MW above that level. The customer also pays an energy charge of 3.323cents/kWh.   ``B'' rate customers, in turn, pay demand charges of $20.16 percoincident-peak-hour kW and $4.25/kW of demand above that level, and energycharges of 3.583 cent/kWh for the first 250 MWH and 3.278 cents/kWh foradditional energy.   ``A'' rate customers, finally, pay a CP-hour demand charge of $18.36/kW,$7.77/kW for excess demand, and the same energy charges as ``B'' ratecustomers.   [The GUC typically notifies its industrial customers by automated signalwhen it expects a potential coincident-peak period to be approaching; atthat point, the rate agreement says, the customer ``may utilize any meansdeemed suitable to reduce its coincident peak demand,'' including, forinstance, temporary production cuts and/or the use of muni-approvedpeak-shaving generators.]   Jones said that the muni's 750-kW-plus customers, who also include somelarge commercial and institutional accounts, together comprise aboutone-quarter of Greenville's total energy use, and that the CP rates haveencouraged them to reduce their peak-period demand by 15 to 20% from whatit typically would have been without the coincident-peak rates.   The magnitude of reductions in coincident-peak demand varies widely fromcustomer to customer, the muni manager said. Some are able only to trimtheir demand slightly, while others have been ``very aggressive'' and haveslashed peak-period demand by more than 50%. For example, a large Proctor &Gamble manufacturing plant in Greenville that typically demands about 8 MWreduces its demand to between 1 and 1.5 MW during coincident peaks, Jonesnoted, saving both P&G and the muni thousands of dollars in monthly powercosts.   Chaffee said P&G ``basically shuts down production [during forecasted CPhours] to achieve the maximum possible savings.'' To make the best use ofits down time, he noted, the manufacturer performs required maintenance onits production and other equipment.   The development commission head said his panel and GUC work closely withpotential industrial recruits to explain the CP rates and to demonstrateprecisely how the industrial could make the fullest use of the rate to itsadvantage.   Chaffee gave as an example the new automobile parts plant that Japan'sASMO Co. Ltd. in 1994 developed--and in 1995 expanded--in Greenville. Thecombined $50-million facility demands about 2.5 MW.   ``An important issue for ASMO in deciding where to site the [initial]plant was power costs,'' he said. ``We were able to demonstrate that byutilizing Greenville's CP rate and installing [a 1-MW peak-shavinggenerator to further reduce CP demand] that they would be paying ratescompetitive with'' industrial rates offered by Duke Power and otherlow-cost, investor-owned utilities in the Southeast.   Chaffee added, finally, that in his view the CP has been a significantfactor in enabling Greenville to draw increasing numbers of new industries.He noted that while industrial firms announced $20-million in newinvestments in the city in 1992 and $33-million the year after that,industrial investment jumped to $43-million in 1994 and $55-million in1995--the first two years the CP rates were mandated.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MONSANTO PHOSPHORUS UNIT INKS LONG-TERM DEAL WITH UTAH P&L   Monsanto Co. and Utah Power & Light have signed a new power supplyagreement extending to 2001 service that was scheduled to expire inmid-1997 for Monsanto's elemental phosphorus manufacturing plant at SodaSprings.   Approved by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission, the new agreementincludes payment of $30-million to the utility for early termination of theexisting contract, a $66,600 monthly minimum charge and 1.85 cents/kWh forall energy delivered. (Order No. 26282).   The new contract allows for delivery of about 1.66 billion kWh annually.UP&L will supply Monsanto with 9 MW of firm power and up to 206 MW ofinterruptible power. UP&L may interrupt or curtail service to Monsanto, itslargest Idaho customer, at any time to maintain its system integrity.   ``The company's new agreement with Monsanto,'' the commission said,``reflects changes required by manufacturing and supply options availableto Monsanto, and market and regulatory changes within an increasingly morecompetitive electric industry.''   Monsanto has alternatives to continuing its current levels of electricuse such as acquiring power through the Soda Springs municipal electricsystem or changing to a much less energy-intensive, purified wet-acidchemical process of producing phosphorus.   The commission said, ``Our acceptance and approval of the proposed newagreement should in no way be interpreted as preauthorization of retailwheeling, accounting, ratemaking treatment or any rates other than thosespecifically identified in the new agreement.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NIPSCO INDUSTRIALS TO SEE $1.5-MILLION REFUND IN DISPUTED INSURANCE CLAIM   Industrial customers of Northern Indiana Public Service are expected toreceive at least a $1.5-million refund from a disputed insurance settlementstemming from the July 2, 1991, collapse of a water pipe at NIPSCO's 480-MWBailly coal plant on Lake Michigan.   Bailly was knocked out of commercial operation for nearly five monthsfollowing the collapse of its main circulating water pipes leading intoLake Michigan. The 15-foot-diameter pipes gave way while Pure Air Inc.worked nearby to construct a $110-million scrubber at Bailly.   During the outage, NIPSCO was forced to purchase surplus power fromother utilities at prices higher than what Bailly's industrial customershad been paying. NIPSCO eventually recovered $9.65-million from itsinsurance carrier, but flowed back only $2.75-million to compensateratepayers for fuel increases in excess of $6-million as a result of theaccident.   According to industrial attorney Jack Wickes, of the Indianapolis lawfirm Lewis & Kappes, ratepayers paid an additional $6.1-million in fuelcosts during Bailly's outage. Wickes told the Indiana Utility RegulatoryCommission in a hearing late last year that ratepayers should be ``madewhole'' for their higher costs, meaning they should get an additional$3-million (Cause No. 387-06-FAC 18-S1) (IEB, 16 Dec '94, 10).   In a 3-2 vote Dec. 19, the commission ordered NIPSCO to refund anadditional $3.35-million. The IURC based its refund amount on the actualexpenses and required the insurance proceeds to be applied first to theincreased fuel charges, which are covered by the insurance policy.   Wickes told Industrial Energy Bulletin the order ``makes sense...[NIPSCO] carried insurance for an eventuality that occurred and NIPSCOwanted some of the money.'' Of the $3.35-million refund, industrials areexpected to receive at least $1.5- million because they represent ``45% to50% of the consumption'' at the Bailly plant. The money will be refunded asa credit on industrials' fuel-adjustment charge.   Two commissioners--David Ziegner and Richard Klein--dissented from theorder. They agreed with the majority that a further refund was due, butsaid only about $2-million should be refunded.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PA. FIRMS STRESS CHOICE OF SUPPLIERS; SEE UTILITIES CONTROLLING POWER POOL   Pennsylvania industrials told the Public Utilities Commission thatretail competition would provide the choice of suppliers that they enjoy inall other purchasing decisions and while a wholesale pool would providesome rate benefits, it would be dominated by the utilities, who would keepprices artificially high.   The Industrial Energy Consumers of Pennsylvania (IECPA) stressed thechoice issue during testimony in the PUC's Investigation into ElectricPower Competition (Docket No. I-00940032). In that case, industrials arecalling for a six-year transition to retail competition, beginning in 1997with customers over 5 MW (IEB, 17 Nov '95, 1).   During recent hearings, IECPA attorney David Kleppinger, of theHarrisburg law firm McNees, Wallace & Nurick, told the commission thatretail competition is ``a matter of sound public policy. Customer choicewill empower Pennsylvania customers with the ultimate regulator of price,namely the competitive marketplace.'' However, customers must have directaccess to utilities' transmission and distribution systems to exercise thatchoice, he added. Further, utilities should be required to provideancillary services on an unbundled, embedded cost-of-service basis. Thesewould include scheduling, dispatch, balancing, load following, voltagesupport, reactive power and loss compensation.   The issue of choice arose again when PUC commissioner John Hangerquestioned IECPA's analysis of the proposed wholesale pool. Assuming``perfect competition,'' the pool price would be 2.67 cents/kWh, IECPAfound, but industrial witness Randall Falkenberg added that utilities``could bid the price up to anything they want really, but I think thatthey would stop at a point just a little bit below what new generationwould be''--or 3.5 to 4 cents/kWh.   ``What is so bad about a price per kilowatt hour...of 3.5 cents/kWh or 4cents/kWh as compared to today's prices?'' asked commissioner Hanger. Evenwith another 1.2 cents added on for retail distribution, Hanger continued,``[A]s to the prices people are paying right now in Pennsylvania, is this adisaster?''   Falkenberg, with the Atlanta firm Kennedy & Associates, responded, ``Theproblem is how you get there. You get to that price because that is theprice at which the market-dominant utilities--principally PECO orPP&L--decide that they want to charge. That's the problem. It's not that itfalls out of the competitive market. It's that a few people at PECO candecide that's what we want the price to be, and they can enforce that.'' Headded that the utilities could set the price ``at a level just enough belowthat a new entrant could build a generating unit at'' in order to keep outcompetition.   In a pool, Falkenberg explained, there would be seven main utilitysellers and one buyer--the independent system operator (ISO). But withretail competition, ``what you've got is hundreds of thousands of buyers,each one playing off one seller against another.''   The hearings also covered stranded investment. IECPA argued that thesecosts should be shared, with ratepayer contributions limited to costs thatresult directly from deregulation, and which cannot be mitigated byutilities. Industrials would probably be willing to bear some cost ofmitigation strategies such as accelerated depreciation of plants andbuyouts of overpriced contracts from non-utility generators, according toFalkenberg. Utilities might also mitigate stranded costs by selling assetsand downsizing, he added.   The PUC expects to wrap up the case by April, when it will makerecommendations to the governor and legislature.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ASSEMBLY SPEAKER BACKS RETAIL ACCESS IN N.Y.; NO GUARANTEE ON STRANDEDCOSTS   Several New York legislators, including the speaker of the assembly,have proposed an electric restructuring plan that would open up retailcompetition by the year 2000, but the plan would not give utilities anyguarantee that they could recover all of their stranded investments--aposition that industrials have long taken.   Democratic Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver announced the proposal lastweek, along with Assembly Majority Leader Michael Bragman and EnergyCommittee Chair Paul Tonko. An aide to Silver said that legislation isbeing drafted and is expected to be introduced by the middle of January.Sponsors would then be sought for a senate version of the bill.   The ``Competition Plus'' plan would immediately freeze electric rates,and would phase-in competition over the next seven years. The first phaseof the transition would begin in September 1997, when all utilities wouldbe required to purchase power in a competitive wholesale market. In thesecond phase, beginning in September 2000, all customers would be allowedto choose their power suppliers, and utilities would be required to providetransmission and distribution service. In September 2002, utilities wouldbe required to divest their generating resources.   A key aspect of the plan is that it would provide ``no guarantee thatutilities will recover all previously incurred costs.'' The strandedinvestment issue is one of the biggest disputes in the restructuringdebate. Utilities demand full recovery of stranded costs, saying they havebeen required to build enough capacity to meet load forecasts, and thatregulators approved the expensive projects, such as nuclear plants, thatcould become financial millstones in the competitive market.   Industrials, however, argue that many high costs result frommismanagement and that utility shareholders should absorb some of theburden. They say utilities should only be allowed to collect costs thatresult directly from deregulation and which cannot be mitigated (IEB, 3 Nov`95, 10).   The legislators' initiative comes as the Public Service Commission movestoward resolution of the ``Competitive Opportunities'' proceeding (Case No.94-E-0952). It challenges the recent ruling in that case by AdministrativeLaw Judge Judith Lee, who recommended only wholesale competition until someunspecified date when retail competition is proven not to harm smallratepayers and reliability. Industrials bitterly condemned that decision,saying it preserves the status quo and lets utilities control the directionof change (IEB, 29 Dec `95, 4).   In announcing the proposal, Assemblyman Tonko stated, ``As the electricindustry moves to a competitive environment, it is clear that thelegislature has a role in the process. Lessons learned from around thecountry--specifically in California and the New England states--indicatethat a purely administrative solution to this complex challenge will notachieve the desired goal of reducing energy prices.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   INDUSTRIAL DSM SEEN GETTING CUSTOMIZED, INCLUDING HELP ON PRODUCTION,POLLUTION   Utilities must transform their industrial demand-side managementprograms to meet the demands of the competitive market, according to a newreport. This means shifting from a ``resource procurement'' focus to acustomer service approach, says IRT Environment Inc., a Basalt, Colo.,information and consulting firm.   IRT states that ``Utilities must provide enhanced, rather than reduced,services to their industrial customers to satisfy them as customers in adirect-access environment.'' It notes that industrials are utilities``least captive'' customers, with options for fuel switching, cogeneration,and shifting loads to other regions. Therefore, utilities must heed theircomplaints about rate-subsidized DSM, the report says. Most bigmanufacturers have been pursuing conservation for years, so they seerate-based DSM as a form of socialism to subsidize others--includingcompeting industrial firms that have not taken the same initiative.Utilities should also realize that prescriptive rebates are not appropriatefor industrial users, the report adds. Up to now, utilities have generallyprovided industrials very basic services, such as audits and rebates formotors and lighting. But process work has not been widespread, partlybecause processes vary greatly from industry to industry and from firm tofirm. This demands customized approaches, which should include not justenergy efficiency, but help with power quality, productivity improvementsand environmental compliance.   Some industrials interviewed for the report doubted that utilities canprovide effective energy services, since they have no entrepreneurialskills. They think utilities can best promote efficiency throughinformation, rate design and financing. However, some utilities arecontracting with or even acquiring existing energy service companies.Others may use consultants with expertise in particular industries to helptheir customers.   The report, ``Industrial Efficiency Programs: Building StrategicPartnerships,'' is available for $100 from The Results Center, IRTEnvironment Inc., P.O. Box 2239, Basalt, Colo. 81621; (970) 927-3155.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   INDIANA QUARRY'S REQUEST FOR SERVICE FROM PSI ENERGY OVER CO-OP ISAPPROVED   Citing reliability concerns, an Indiana industrial has prevailed in itsrequest to the state Utility Regulatory Commission to be served by PSIEnergy, the state's largest electric company, instead of a small ruralelectric cooperative (Cause No. 40008).   In a mid-December ruling the URC authorized PSI to serve a 1.1-MW loadat U.S. Aggregates' Delphi Quarry, a limestone and gravel quarry nearDelphi, Ind., over the objections of Carroll County Rural ElectricMembership Corp.   Kenneth Robinson, vice president of operations for U.S. Aggregates, saidhis company bought the quarry in 1993 and has been expanding it. Thecurrent site consists of a ``primary'' plant located in Carroll County'sservice territory and a ``secondary'' plant located in PSI's territory.   U.S. Aggregates based its preference for PSI on a number of factors: Thepresent service from PSI has been good; PSI's energy-only rates with nodemand charge, allowing U.S. Aggregates to forecast its usage and utilitycosts accurately; PSI offers a larger industrial base and more stable ratesin the future; U.S. Aggregate's concern with possible brown-outs during thesummer, its peak season; and its belief that PSI's capacity and resourcesensure a continuity of service, even during peak demand periods.   Carroll County manager Ron Kennedy told the URC that even though hisco-op only has five industrial customers, those customers comprise 35% ofits total load. One customer, Indiana Packers, has a peak demand of 5 MW.   Also, Carroll County, apparently to quell concerns over the possibilityof outages, noted that its office is located only one-half mile from theDelphi Quarry. The commission issued its ruling somewhat grudgingly, sayingit discourages the practice of ``rate shopping'' by electric utilitycustomers. The URC said it has been ``reluctant to base determinations ofpublic convenience and necessity matters relative to service boundarydisputes on rate differentials.''   To do so, ``could encourage `rate shopping' at the expense of prudentplanning and good utility practice.'' In this case, however, the URC agreedwith U.S. Aggregates that PSI ``can better provide adequate and reliableservice.'' The investor-owned utility, a subsidiary of CINergy Corp., has a``marginal benefit'' with regard to reliability over the co-op.   A URC spokeswoman stressed that the agency's comments about ``rateshopping'' do not mean the commission is necessarily opposed to retailwheeling. ``We have to go by our interpretation of the existing law,'' shesaid. ``Until and unless we have a different direction from theLegislature, we have to follow existing laws.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WEPCO IN DISPUTE WITH UPPER PENINSULA POWER OVER SERVING MINE EXPANSION   Wisconsin Electric Power and Upper Peninsula Power are currently insettlement talks trying to resolve a dispute over a proposed retailwheeling agreement that would have allowed WEPCO to supply electricity tothe White Pine mine in Michigan's Upper Peninsula--one of UPPCo's currentcustomers.   White Pine is one of the facilities of Copper Range--a corporationengaged in the mining, refining, and selling of copper in the UP. Itconsists of an underground copper mine and related ore processingfacilities located in Carp Lake Township, Ontonagon County, Michigan.   Until recently, the mine utilized two 20 MW coal-fired generating unitsto supply most of its electric energy requirements while occasionallypurchasing small amounts of energy from UPPCo.   In its application to the Michigan Public Service Commission forapproval of a special contract with the mine, WEPCO said that because ofincreased competition, White Pine began exploring the possibility ofexpanding its mining operations or, in the alternative, temporarilyshutting down the mine in order to install a new ``solution'' miningproject while pursuing the construction of a new smelter.   Solution mining injects a slightly acidic liquid into the rockformations and brings the copper up in liquid form, to be recovered lateras a precipitate.   Whether White Pine expands operations or builds a new smelter, it hasconcluded that the best way to reduce its operating costs, protect jobs,and provide the greatest likelihood for expanded operations in the futureis to shut down its generating plant and purchase electricity from WEPCO,the utility stated in its special contract application.   If approved, WEPCO would supply curtailable electric service to WhitePine. However, WEPCO does not have transmission facilities to serveincreased loads so in order to service to the mine, the utility, on June 1,entered into a joint use transmission agreement with UPPCo that wouldobviate any necessity for WEPCO to build new facilities to serve the mineuntil the new smelter is built.   In its special contract application, WEPCO stated that it was seeking nocertificated authority to render retail service to any resident or businessin Carp Lake Township other than White Pine. The utility also told the PSCthat the proposed agreement was advantageous to the mine because WEPCOmight buy the mine's generating plant.   UPPCo said it entered into the joint use transmission agreement withWEPCO at a time when it was believed that UPPCo's transmission facilitiesalone would, in the future, be unable to provide reliable service to WhilePine. UPPCo noted that if the mine had shut down its two generating units,installed the new ``solution'' mining project, and constructed the newsmelter, demand might have increased to more than 100 MW. UPPCo does nothave transmission facilities in place that are capable of serving loads ofthis magnitude and an investment would have been required to construct suchfacilities. To make such an investment ``in a volatile industry would havecreated a substantial risk for a small utility such as UPPCo,'' the companytold the PSC in its petition to intervene.   When it learned that WEPCO was willing to assume the risk of buildingnew transmission facilities, UPPCo said it decided to cooperate with thelarger utility and entered into the joint use agreement.   However, according to UPPCo, there has been a subsequent change incircumstances that makes the joint use agreement no longer ``necessary orappropriate'' for its purposes. Specifically, Copper Range shut down itsWhite Pine mining operations, including the 40 MW generating plant,retaining only the experimental solution mining project and maintenanceoperations.   ``As a result, the resulting curtailed White Pine mine load can beadequately served by UPPCo over its existing transmission facilities, andthe participation of Wisconsin Electric is no longer necessary ordesirable,'' UPPCo told the PSC in its intervention petition. Accordingly,UPPCo asked the PSC not to approve WEPCO's special contract petition.   In a similar argument before the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,UPPCo declared that the changed circumstances led it to decide not to filethe joint use agreement with FERC and that WEPCO was not authorized to filethe agreement on UPPCo's behalf. Regulatory proceedings at both FERC andthe PSC are on hold, pending the outcome of settlement talks, sourcessaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MAINE PS WINS APPROVAL FOR DISCOUNTS FOR INDUSTRIALS CREATING NEW LOAD   Maine Public Service has won approval from the Maine Public UtilitiesCommission for a new targeted economic development rate that would givetemporary discounts for new and existing industrial customers creating newload.   Under a special rate proposal approved Dec. 1 (Doc. No. 95-802), newcustomers with average demand of at least 50 kW who take full load from MPSwill get a credit on their monthly bills equal to 20% the first year of thecontract, 15% the second year, 10% the third year and 5% the fourth year.   Also, existing customers adding at least 20 kW of new load and meetother criteria will receive 20% credits for the new supplies in the firstand second contract years, 15% in the third year and 10% in the fourthyear.   The PUC said it would cap the special credits at a cumulative amount of20 MW of new supplies and that requests for the discounts for individualcustomers would be considered in the order they were received.   At the same time, the PUC approved a separate 10% permanent discount foragricultural storage facilities, which will especially help the localpotato industry. In both cases, the PUC also ordered that any revenuelosses due to the discounts will be borne totally by MPS shareholders andnot ratepayers.   Early in 1995, MPS asked the PUC for an 18.5% rate hike spread over fiveyears to meet revenue losses caused by the closing of a local air base andloss of a major wholesale customer. In November, the PUC approved afour-year, 12.8% hike but left open for a decision next year how the costswill be allocated among customer classes. MPS has asked that the mainburden be placed on residential users, to bring industrial rates more inline with cost-of-service levels.   The new discounts will enable the company to partially offset the costof the rate hike for new and expanding businesses and aid industrialrecruiting while the allocation issue is being debated. They also may helpbring new industrial users to the former Loring Air Force Base and restoresome of the revenues lost due to the closure.   In early January, MPS said it had signed its first economic developmentcontract under the new system with the Happy Farms cold storage facility inCaribou, Me. It said the company had increased business activity and loadneeds and qualified for the discounts starting at 20% and dropping to 10%by the fourth year.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SIGECO CREDITS DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS FOR WINNING MAJOR NEW TOYOTA PLANT   Toyota Motor Corp.'s decision to build a $700-million truck assemblyplant near Princeton, Ind., is expected to generate a 25-30 MW electricload, at least initially, for Southern Indiana Gas & Electric, and ifhistory is any guide, the load is likely to increase dramatically over theyears.   SIGECO credited its economic development efforts with contributing toToyota's choice of a 1,100-acre site in Gibson County for its new plantinstead of competing sites in Kentucky, Ohio and other parts of Indiana.All of the site, located along U.S. 41 about 20 miles north of Evansville,is within SIGECO's service territory. PSI Energy, another IOU, serves anarea just north of the plant site.   In announcing their selection of the Princeton site, Toyota officialssaid the plant would employ 1,300 people and begin producing pickup trucksin 1998. SIGECO worked closely with the Princeton Chamber of Commerce,which played a vital role in building a relationship with Toyota, as wellas regional economic development agencies and state government, includingthe Indiana Department of Commerce.   The utility will be building additional transmission facilities,including a transmission line extension and a new substation, to serveToyota. Likewise, SIGECO also will be making similar enhancements to itsnatural gas system.   Although SIGECO would not disclose the plant's projected load, Toyota'sautomotive assembly plant near Georgetown, Ky., about 200 miles away,started out with an approximately 30 MW load in the mid-1980s. Since then,Toyota has built a second plant at Georgetown, and the site's total loadhas mushroomed to 112 MW.   Kentucky Utilities, which serves the plant, said Toyota's electricalusage has increased from 166,055,040 kilowatt hours in 1989 to 552,122,640kilowatt hours in 1994.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WABASH VALLEY REORGANIZES ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT RATES FOR INDUSTRIALS   The Wabash Valley Power Assn. has restructured its economic developmentrates, replacing its old catch-all EDR-2 rate with three rates designed toappeal to a broader range of industrial and commercial customers.   Wabash Valley's three new EDR tariffs were contained in a settlementagreement recently approved by the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission(Cause No. 40298). ``In some ways, we're modeling what we're doing on whatPSI/CINergy is doing'' in the area of economic development, said a WabashValley spokesman. PSI Energy is headquartered in Plainfield, Ind., just afew miles from Wabash Valley's Indianapolis office.   Under its EDR-2 rate, only new customers with a load in excess of 750 kWcould qualify for its provisions: a demand charge of $10.70/kW fordistribution and $9.70/kW for transmission and an energy charge of 18.81mills. The discount rate expired after three years. Now, eligible new loadsor existing plant expansions can obtain the revised rates for five years.   The new EDR-3 rate applies to loads from 300 kW to 749 kW, a load that amachine shop or Laundromat might have. It carries a demand charge of$10.72/kW for distribution and $972/kW for transmission and an energycharge of 18.733 mills.   The new EDR-4 rate applies to loads from 750 kW to 1.499 MW. It carriesa demand charge of $8.45/kW for distribution and $7.45/kW for transmissionand an energy charge of 17.571 mills. The final rate--EDR-5--applies toloads in excess of 1.5 MW. This rate is negotiable on a case-by-casebasis.   Wabash Valley, a generation and transmission cooperative that plans toemerge in 1997 from more than a decade in Chapter 11 reorganizationproceedings, negotiated the terms of the new tariffs with the state Officeof the Utility Consumer Counselor. Wabash Valley and the OUCC said the newEDRs are intended to encourage new and expanded industrial and commercialloads to locate or remain in Indiana.   ``Based upon this and the evidence presented, the proposed tariffs arefound by this commission to be in the public interest,'' ruled the IURC.   The Wabash Valley spokesman said the new rates should help the co-opcompete for business against other utilities in a deregulated industry.``We're stepping up to the plate, and we're going to become as much of aplayer in this as anyone else.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TROUBLED VERDIGRIS VALLEY CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT   Verdigris Valley Electric Cooperative, its economic developmentsubsidiary and four current and former trustees have formally deniedallegations of gross negligence, breach of fiduciary duty and violation ofstate and federal laws or regulations in connection with one of the largesteconomic development losses ever sustained by a distribution co-op.   The allegations were raised in a class action lawsuit filed in Octoberby Cal McKinney, a member and harsh critic of the Collinsville, Okla.-basedco-op that in October 1993 announced a $5.68-million writeoff from aneconomic development loan to Precision Tubulars, a metalworking firm thatwent bankrupt without ever reaching full production (District Court ofTulsa County, Case No. CJ-95-04552) (IEB, 20 Oct, 11).   McKinney's suit was designed to make co-op members financially whole.   In his answer on behalf of the co-op, Tulsa attorney Stephen Riley alsoasserted that losses from the Precision deal were ``due to circumstancesbeyond [the defendants'] control.'' He also asserted that an Oklahoma lawrequiring member approval before a co-op can encumber or otherwise disposeof a ``substantial'' portion of its assets does not apply in this case.   The co-op admits to loaning Precision $6.79-million, but it denies thatthis constituted a substantial portion of its assets. VVEC's current annualreport lists total assets of $57-million.   Riley also contended that McKinney lacks standing to represent otherco-op members and that the suit is barred by the two-year statute oflimitations. He said McKinney knew or should have known of the losses toVVEC members before it was officially announced at the October 1993 annualmeeting because of news accounts of Precision's problems starting in 1991.   Riley said that former general manager Doyle Fulton and five current andformer trustees also named as defendants are not covered by the answerbecause they have not yet been officially served with copies of thelawsuit. An amended answer will be filed once they are served, he said.   Riley's answer listed nine grounds on which he contends the suit shouldbe dismissed but also indicated that the defendants acknowledge a need forfurther discovery and investigation. No procedural schedule has been setfor the case, but the discovery process is expected to be lengthy andcomplex.   This litigation marks the first time that all aspects of the Precisiondeal and VVEC's involvement in it have been subject to court review. AWashington County civil case involving much narrower issues generated oneof the largest court files in that county's history.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NYPA ASKS PSC TO KEEP OTHER UTILITIES FROM COMPETING ON INDUSTRIAL RATES   The New York Power Authority (NYPA) has asked the New York PublicService Commission to prevent other utilities in the state from offeringindustrial incentive rates that compete with its economic developmentprograms. It warns that if investor-owned utilities cut rates toindustrials, other ratepayers will absorb the burden of the lost revenues,while those customers would suffer no such impact from the NYPA discountrates.   Although NYPA mainly supplies wholesale power to utilities and publicagencies, it provides some low-cost power directly to industrials under aneconomic development program set up by the state Legislature. This powercomes from the FitzPatrick nuclear plant and is normally given to firmsthat pledge to create or retain a certain number of jobs. It runs about 4cents/kWh, and the industrials must then pay wheeling charges to theirlocal utilities for delivery.   NYPA now complains that some utilities are competing with those economicdevelopment rates, and it wants the PSC to stop them. It has asked thecommission to review the economic development tariffs of Rochester Gas &Electric (Case No. 94-E-0757), Niagara Mohawk Power (Case No. 94-E-0651)and New York State Electric & Gas (Case No. 94-E-0990).   In its petition to the PSC, NYPA states, ``The rationale for thiscommission having barred the use of flexible rates to compete withNYPA's...was clear--to avoid a conflict between complimentary statepolicies encouraging the expansion and retention of business and to assurethat customers did not unduly benefit by playing suppliers off each otherto obtain discounts subsidized by other customers.''   NYPA's petition was triggered by a dispute with RG&E over Amplaco Inc.,a plastic molding company in the Rochester, N.Y., area. In March of thisyear, NYPA trustees approved a 350-kW allocation for the firm, which agreedto create 29 jobs and protect 186 existing positions. The NYPA allocationwas expected to save the firm $49,000 annually on its electric bills. Butin May, Amplaco notified NYPA that it intended to take power from RG&E atan undisclosed, negotiated rate.   NYPA responded that, ``Amplaco was satisfied with the rate it hadobtained from the authority and was prepared to make the job commitmentsassociated therewith. The state's economy therefore gained nothing fromRG&E's flex rate response.''   RG&E has not formally responded to NYPA's petition, but a utilityspokesman stressed that the company's shareholders will pick up the lostrevenues for the Amplaco discount, not other ratepayers. Nevertheless,retaining the manufacturer will help other ratepayers because lost loadforces remaining customers to absorb stranded fixed costs. The move willalso benefit the local economy.   In earlier discussions of the issue, industrial group MultipleIntervenors had asserted that the PSC should encourage utilities to competeas much as possible, including with NYPA. The group is not activelyinvolved in the NYPA-RG&E dispute.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-15IA059-000325-B005-59http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey69.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232447 text/html 81091HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:22:24 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:14 GMTContent-length: 80904Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey69.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES A PUBLIC MEETING ON GAS VALUATION ISSUES IS SET FOR JAN. 22 in Houston. The (102 words) ONSHORE OIL AND GAS WESTERN STATES PLAN TO MEET OVER POSSIBLE ADOPTION OF BLM ROLES (835 words) ENVIRONMENTS WILDERNESS SOCIETY FINDS NEW CONGRESS `WORST EVER' ON ENVIRONMENT (755 words) SURFACE MINING OSM PLANS TO CONDUCT EMERGENCY INSPECTIONS IF FURLOUGH CONTINUES (289 words) ENVIRONMENT CONSERVANCY FINDS ONE-THIRD OF NATION'S PLANTS, ANIMALS THREATENED (284 words) OCS THE DEADLINE IS MARCH 7 TO FILE COMMENTS ON SURETY RULES under revision by (158 words) IBLA DIGEST IBLA DIGEST (19 words) ENERGY DOE ISSUES FINAL RFP FOR HANFORD WORK (750 words) BOB ALCOCK HAS BEEN NAMED ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY for congressional, (161 words) GAO SAYS SPENDING GAPS TYPICAL FOR DOE (1175 words) O'LEARY ATTEMPTS TO CLEAR AIR OVER IMPACT OF OVERSEAS EXCURSIONS (803 words) E. SHIRLEY THOMAS, DOE OMBUDSMAN AND FRIEND OF SECRETARY HAZEL O'LEARY, has (165 words) BUDGET CUT FORCES LAYOFF OF PART-TIME AND STUDENT WORKERS AT DOE (441 words) ERVIN SAYS DIVISION WILL CUT STAFF BY ONE-THIRD OVER NEXT FIVE YEARS (619 words) HOUSE BID TO OVERRIDE CLINTON VETO OF INTERIOR SPENDING BILL FAILS (355 words) DOE WILL PROVIDE $100,000 TO JAMES E. RUSSELL PETROLEUM INC., to improve a (375 words) THE NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE MISTAKENLY LISTED A CONSUMER GROUP among (256 words) EEI PRESIDENT THOMAS KUHN WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF CONGRESS waits until (403 words) A PANEL CHAIRED BY DOE AND EPA HAVE SELECTED EIGHT PROJECTS involving four (359 words) SECRETARY O'LEARY'S CHIEF ADVISER ON RUSSIA, ROBERT BERLS JR., left DOE (130 words) ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ENVIRONMENTALISTS CLAIM DOE IS `BACKSLIDING' ON REPROCESSING POLICY (684 words) REPORT BY SRS CONTRACTOR APPEARS TO ADVOCATE REPROCESSING AT SITE (756 words) SAIC EXECUTIVE ALM NOMINATED AS DOE'S ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP CHIEF (416 words) EM DIVISION TELLS CONGRESS OF ITS PLAN FOR COPING WITH BUDGET CUTS (620 words) A SWAP OF WASTE OIL FROM TVA TO DOE SAVED TAXPAYERS $100,000, according to (179 words) CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   A PUBLIC MEETING ON GAS VALUATION ISSUES IS SET FOR JAN. 22 in Houston. TheA PUBLIC MEETING ON GAS VALUATION ISSUES IS SET FOR JAN. 22 in Houston. TheMinerals Management Service said the session is meant to gather publiccomment on a proposed rulemaking, published in the Nov. 6 Federal Register,which would implement the recommendations of the Federal Gas ValuationNegotiated Rulemaking Committee. The panel's recommendations would amendthe rules governing the value of gas produced from federal leases.   MMS also extended the comment period on the proposed rule until Feb. 5.   For more information on the meeting, contact MMS' David Guzy at (303)231-3194; E-mail, Davidzy@smtp.mms.gov .Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WESTERN STATES PLAN TO MEET OVER POSSIBLE ADOPTION OF BLM ROLESBy:Sheryl MorrisRepresentatives of several Western oil and gas producing states will meetlater this month near Denver to discuss a proposal by the Clintonadministration to relinquish some of the Bureau of Land Management'sinspection and enforcement functions to the states.Although larger producing states like New Mexico and Wyoming still havesome unanswered questions over the proposal, they believe the plan has somemerit.   The meeting will be the first for the Interstate Oil and Gas CompactCommission's BLM Oil and Gas Inspection and Enforcement Transfer Committeesince an organizational session at the IOGCC annual meeting in Houston lastmonth. Ten states have representatives on the special panel.   Committee member, William LeMay, described the upcoming Denver sessionas a ``strategy meeting'' to formulate an IOGCC consensus for presentationto the administration. LeMay is the director of the New Mexico OilConservation Division and the New Mexico governor's designatedrepresentative to IOGCC.   ``We think a lot of those [I&E] functions could be performed moreeconomically and efficiently at the state level,'' LeMay said. The keyelements, he added, are adequate funding and site-specific regulations.   ``The same thing that's required on federal lands on the Californiacoastline wouldn't apply to some of the deserts in New Mexico,'' LeMaypointed out in urging tailored regulations. ``We don't want to just be anenforcement arm of federal rules and regulations,'' he added.   Wyoming may be interested in the transfer if the move saves money andboth the federal government and the state benefit, said another committeemember, Donald Basko, supervisor of the Wyoming Oil and Gas ConservationCommission.   ``But if we have to follow in their footsteps'' as the land manager andno savings result, ``then there may be no interest in taking it over,''Basko said. ``We can maybe accomplish the same thing with fewer people andless money, but that remains to be seen.''   As part of Vice President Gore's campaign to re-invent government, theInterior Dept. last year proposed the transfer of some BLM I&E functions,as well as the abolishment of the Minerals Management Service. The latterwould have included distribution of MMS royalty functions to states andtransfer of the MMS offshore program to another agency.   When the so-called MMS ``devolution'' was hastily retracted in the faceof intense criticism, states were caught somewhat flatfooted (IE/FL, 7 Aug,14).   LeMay acknowledged some fear now that Interior may repeat the MMSscenario; what he called a ``whoops, we're sorry'' withdrawal of theproposal involving the BLM activities.   ``We put a lot of effort'' into studying the MMS abolishment and how NewMexico might assume the royalty function on federal lands within itsborders, said LeMay, who noted that state officials felt Interior did notact in ``a lot of good faith'' in offering and then retracting the MMSplan. Because MMS is the royalty center for Interior and the BLM I&E issueis tied to costs and revenues, there may be ``some resurrection of thosearguments'' about MMS and state assumption of royalty duties, LeMay said.   Wyoming ranks first in revenue on mineral royalties from federal lands,and New Mexico has the largest number of wells on federal tracts, LeMaysaid in explaining the particular interest of the two states in maximizingefficiency in governing those properties.   While the administration has suggested the I&E transfer, LeMay said,``we kind of need to tighten it up'' in terms of how the move would beaccomplished. States want answers regarding potential savings, fundingoptions and personnel needs, he said. ``Each state may have a littledifferent viewpoint,'' LeMay noted, but the object is consensus ``so we donot have five or six of the largest states each proposing somethingdifferent.''   Nevada's representative on the committee said ``conceptually it makes alot of sense for states to play a greater role in I&E on public landsbecause, for the most part, many of us are either doing it concurrently ordoing that work in some sort of cooperative memorandum of understandingwith BLM right now.''   Russell Fields, administrator of the Nevada Division of Minerals,pointed out that his state and BLM have an MOU to reduce duplication andeffort. Were the state to take a larger role, it would have to be``adequately compensated for work done on federal lands,'' he said.   Beyond I&E, states may be ``interested in what other oil and gasfunctions they rightfully should take on,'' Fields said, such as authorityto issue and maintain leases and collect royalties.   Nevada would not be interested ``in just becoming the cops for thefeds,'' Fields said. States may be more interested if the government wantssomething more than just I&E transfer, Fields said, such as an integratedprogram with the goal of more efficient use of resources.   The I&E Committee session is slated for Jan. 26 in Aurora, Colo. Otherstates represented on the panel include Utah, Louisiana, California, NorthDakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota and Nebraska.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WILDERNESS SOCIETY FINDS NEW CONGRESS `WORST EVER' ON ENVIRONMENTSupport for bills to open the Arctic National Wildlife coastal plain to oiland gas development and reform the Endangered Species Act are just twoelements of a grievous environmental record that makes the 104th Congressthe ``worst Congress ever,'' The Wilderness Society has charged in a newreport.   ``The hard-liners in this Congress make James Watt look timid,''Wilderness Society President Jon Roush said in releasing the study Dec. 27.``They have a playbook written by the mining, logging, and ranchingindustries, and they're hacking away at everything except the subsidiesenjoyed by those industries.''   In the report, the Society termed the new Congress ``a worseenvironmental accident than the Exxon Valdez,'' and said the ``election ofmany zealots whose allegiance is to the extractive industries'' threatensmany of the nation's natural resource treasures.   The study singled out for criticism the record of some newly powerfullawmakers, including Rep. Don Young, R-Alaska, chairman of the HouseResources Committee, Rep. James Hansen, R-Utah, chairman of the HouseResources subcommittee on national parks, forests and lands, Rep. JohnDoolittle, R-Calif., chairman of the House Resources subcommittee on waterand power resources, Sen. Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, chairman of the SenateEnergy Committee, and Sen. Slade Gorton, R-Wash., chairman of the SenateAppropriations interior subcommittee.   The leadership changes have placed in power members who have tried foryears to rewrite environmental protection laws, the society warned.   ``The most threatening aspect of this realignment is that thedevelopment-at-all-costs Alaskan delegation heads both resourcescommittees,'' the report said. In addition, should Sen. Ted Stevens,R-Alaska, replace retiring Sen. Mark Hatfield, R-Ore., as chair of theSenate Appropriations Committee, the Wilderness Society warned that``[s]enators casting swing votes will be under enormous pressure to goalong with the Alaskan delegation's agenda.''   Environmental groups have strenuously opposed any oil development in the1.5-million-acre ANWR coast plain, but the Alaska delegation managed toinclude language authorizing ANWR leasing in the budget reconciliationpackage that President Clinton vetoed last month. The future of theprovision remained uncertain last week as Congress and the presidentcontinued discussions on the budget and partial government shutdown.   The GOP-led Congress appears intent on gutting the nation's endangeredspecies statute, the report added, with major ESA reform bills introducedby Sens. Gorton (S. 768) and Dirk Kempthorne, R-Idaho, (S. 1364), and Reps.Young and Richard Pombo, R-Calif., (H.R. 2275).   While the three bills differ, the report charged they all would allowsome species to go extinct, curtail ESA's protections of species' habitaton private land, limit protection for subspecies, and require taxpayers topay developers not to destroy habitat if protections would diminish theproperty value.   The report also attacked the language in two FY-96 Interiorappropriations bills, both vetoed by the president, that would place atemporary moratorium on listing of new endangered species and designationof critical habitat.   Republican lawmakers' intent to dismantle the National BiologicalService also drew criticism, as The Wilderness Society noted the oppositionof extractive industries and real estate interests to NBS. The service wascreated by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt in 1993 to consolidate thebiological science expertise within the department.   NBS would be eliminated and its functions transferred to the U.S.Geological Survey under the Interior appropriations measures vetoed byClinton.   In other complaints, the report objected to what it termed ``give-away''legislation, supported by some GOP lawmakers, that would allow states totake over Bureau of Land Management lands within their borders. It alsoattacked ``takings'' measures passed in the House and by the SenateJudiciary Committee that would compensate landowners when environmentalprotection actions by the government degrades their property values.   Lifting of the Alaskan oil export ban was folly, the report added. WhileStevens argued for repeal of the ban, saying it forced shipment of Alaskancrude to West Coast markets where it created a glut and depressed prices,the report noted the senator, in contrast, ``insists that there is an oilshortage'' when he advocates drilling of ANWR.   The Society group noted, overall, ``The most important question as 1995turns to 1996 is probably how vigilant and outspoken Americans will be'' onenvironmental issues. It said polls indicate the ``public is firmlycommitted to environmental protection and wants to see more progress ratherthan an unraveling of current law.''   The report, ``The Worst Congress Ever: A Review of the EnvironmentalRecord of the 104th Congress at Mid-point and the Outlook for 1996,'' isavailable from The Wilderness Society at (202) 833-2300.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   OSM PLANS TO CONDUCT EMERGENCY INSPECTIONS IF FURLOUGH CONTINUESA limited number of federal inspectors will visit surface mines on federaland Indian lands on an emergency basis this week if the partial governmentshutdown continues, Office of Surface Mining Deputy Director Ed Kay saidThursday.   Fewer than 10 OSM inspectors will likely be involved in the effort afterthey have been designated essential personnel by agency officials.   The reason for the special designations is that ``nothing is beingdone'' to oversee lands where OSM has the primary inspection functionbecause of the government closure, Kay said. Partial visits are needed ``tomake sure everything is okay,'' the deputy director added, noting that theInterior Dept. solicitor has approved such inspections on a limited basis.   Although primacy states conduct the necessary inspections within theirborders, OSM is responsible for assuring health and safety on lands inWashington and Tennessee, where it is the primary enforcer, as well as onIndian lands in New Mexico and Arizona and federal lands in Kentucky.   At OSM's Western Region Coordinating Center in Denver, processing of 100Indian and 50 federal permits has stopped, its director, Richard Seibel,said.   The federal shutdown may also hamper issuance of permits by states,which have been unable to use OSM's Applicant Violator System since theagency closed, Seibel said. States check companies through AVS foroutstanding permit violations before issuing new permits, he noted. Losingaccess to AVS may delay the states' issuance of new permits.   OSM is dealing with emergency situations with a skeleton staff, Kaysaid. The fact that most surface-mining crises occur during other parts ofthe year, when there is typically more rain, makes coping with the currentsituation somewhat easier for the agency, he added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   CONSERVANCY FINDS ONE-THIRD OF NATION'S PLANTS, ANIMALS THREATENEDThe Nature Conservancy issued a 1996 species report card last week in whichit warned that the survival of one-third of the nation's plants and animalsis threatened, particularly those species dependent on rivers, lakes andstreams. More than 500 scientists examined more than 20,000 U.S. species.   The troubles of freshwater aquatic species were attributed to poor waterquality and long-term effects of dams and other water diversions. ``Thesefigures clearly show that efforts to protect the nation's water qualitywill not only benefit people, but also these species,'' said John Sawhill,president and chief executive of the Nature Conservancy.   The data compiled in the annual report is used by federal and stateresource managers to decide on land use, and by private businesses andindividuals to design projects that do not harm sensitive species andhabitat, the Conservancy said.   The Conservancy described the report, ``Priorities for Conservation:1996 Annual Report Card for U.S. Plant and Animal Species,'' as the ``mostcomprehensive assessment to date on the conservation status of U.S.species.''   The group found that one species, the Merriam's Bearpaw Poppy, a desertwildflower, is doing better than thought. The wildflower is more abundanton a Nevada military base than previously known, it said.   ``Based on this find by Conservancy botanists, the plant probably willnot need to be listed under the federal Endangered Species Act,'' the groupsaid.   The animal groups listed as most at risk were: freshwater mussels,crayfish, freshwater fish, and amphibians.   The report was a NatureServe publication, sponsored by Canon U.S.A. Inc.as part of its Clean Earth Campaign. Information on the report is availablefrom the Conservancy's Larry Carpman at (703) 841-8740.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   THE DEADLINE IS MARCH 7 TO FILE COMMENTS ON SURETY RULES under revision byTHE DEADLINE IS MARCH 7 TO FILE COMMENTS ON SURETY RULES under revision bythe Minerals Management Service. The agency said it is considering creationof a deadline of two years for all Outer Continental Shelf oil and gaslessees to bring their bond coverage into compliance with new levels ofcoverage established in 1993.   The proposed regulations would clarify MMS' position that ``assignees,assignors, and co-lessees are jointly and severally liable for compliance''with OCS lease requirements. The rules also would establish a framework forlease-specific abandonment accounts and acceptance of a third-partyguarantee, and would update the bond coverage required for right-of-wayholders and geological and geophysical exploration permittees.   MMS said the changes were needed in order to ``reduce the risk ofdefault by an underfunded company operating a lease or holding aright-of-way.''   For more information, contact Gerald Rhodes of the MMS engineering andtechnology division at (703) 787-1609.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   IBLA DIGESTDue to the continuing government shutdown, no IBLA decisions were releasedlast week.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   DOE ISSUES FINAL RFP FOR HANFORD WORKBy:Mary Powers, Birmingham, Ala.DOE Thursday released a final request for proposals for a five-yearmanagement and integration contract at its Hanford Site that for the firsttime includes specific performance objectives and measures.   The RFP is the latest large site management contract issued under theagency's two-year-old contract reform initiative and is the first toinclude performance objectives specified by DOE. Until now, DOE has reliedon bidders to propose such benchmarks.   DOE said it will attach incentives to a number of the performancemeasures to reward contractors for making progress toward cleanup. Thecomplete fee structure is open for negotiation, however, and will beproposed by each bidder. Proposals could include a base fee or could be100% incentive fee. ``We don't want to discourage any innovative thinkingby bidders,'' said a DOE spokesman. The contract has an estimated value of$4.6 billion over its five-year duration.   The language in the final RFP was strengthened from that contained in adraft RFP released last year to emphasize cost-effective innovativeapproaches and to include cost reductions in specific areas, such asoverhead and indirect costs, the agency said. Bidders' past performance aswell as their proposed approach to cost reduction will be weighed duringselection. The RFP specifically outlines an aggressive ``make-or-pay''program that requires work to be contracted out or privatized if it is moreefficient to do so.   The contract covers all work at Hanford that is not included in theenvironmental restoration management contract now held by Bechtel HanfordCorp. It includes the cleanup of the waste tanks and spent fuel, as well asinfrastructure management, base operations, construction and constructionmanagement. The statement of work included in the final RFP is organizedaround what DOE calls ``Project Hanford,'' an effort to duplicate the bestadministrative and management controls found in the private sector.   Proposals are due March 15. DOE says it will make a final selection inJune, with the winner to take over operations Oct. 1. Three, and possiblyfour, companies have lined up teams to bid on the Hanford management andintegration contract.   California-based Fluor Daniel Inc.. is leading a team that includesLockheed-Martin; Rust Federal Services; Babcock and Wilcox; Duke Energy andServices, Numatec and International Technology Corp. Bechtel Corp., whichhas the environmental restoration contract at Hanford now, is leading ateam that includes Westinghouse; BNFL Inc.; Computer Sciences Corp., andJohnson Controls. A third team led by Boston-based Raytheon Corp. includesCH2M Hill; ICF Kaiser; Tenneco Boeing Information Services Corp., andSiemens Power Corp.   Sources last week said a fourth team may be organizing under TRW Inc.'sand Parsons Corp.'s lead. None of the three teams are final yet, and thesources said other companies will be added as the final RFP is examined. ABechtel spokesman said its team will include several more pre-selectedsubcontractors, but that most of the subcontracted work will becompetitively bid after the contract is awarded.   The contract out for bid is now held by Westinghouse and ICF Kaiser. Atleast one industry source gives Bechtel the best odds at winning. ``It hasthe strongest team because it includes two large contract holders therenow,'' the source said. Others, however, argue the opposite, saying thatBechtel can't win because Westinghouse is on its team. ``That company isthe kiss of death out there,'' he said.   Meanwhile contractors are waiting for the RFP that will replace EG&G atDOE's Mound site. DOE has promised a draft will be issued between Jan. 15and Feb. 8. Sources said a number of teams want to bid on the much smaller$500 million contract.   ``We're lucky that these two are coming out close together. The bigplayers are looking at Hanford, leaving the smaller companies to pursueMound,'' one source said. The job will include cleaning up the site andreturning the assets to the City of Miamisburg, Ohio, and is expected to bevalued at $80 to $100 million a year for five years.   International Technology Corp. is planning to lead a team, while sourcessay Fluor Daniel's management team at DOE's nearby Fernald EnvironmentalManagement Project will also bid the job. Other players looking to lead orjoin teams include ICF Kaiser, Babcock & Wilcox, Parsons, Morrison Knudsen,Weston, SAIC, Foster Wheeler, and TRW.    ``There's lots of mating dances going on here,'' said an industrysource, who along with other company officials are in Ohio planning theirstrategy.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   BOB ALCOCK HAS BEEN NAMED ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY for congressional,BOB ALCOCK HAS BEEN NAMED ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY for congressional,intergovernmental and public affairs at DOE. Alcock, who most recentlyworked as deputy assistant secretary for intergovernmental affairs,replaced Carolyn Herr Watts, who left the agency for the private sectorlast month.   The White House has nominated and the Senate Energy Committee hasconfirmed Derrick Forrister. a former special assistant to Energy SecretaryHazel O'Leary, for the assistant secretary job, but the nomination has beenblocked in the Senate since last summer.   Alcock worked as former Texas Democratic Rep. Barbara Jordan'slegislative assistant from l1973 to 1979 and, after two years in theprivate sector, returned to Congress as chief of staff to CaliforniaDemocratic Rep. Esteban Torres.   He was named deputy assistant secretary in February 1994. In thatposition, he was responsible for providing liaison between DOE and variousstate and local government officials including governors, mayors, statelegislators, county supervisors and tribal leaders.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   GAO SAYS SPENDING GAPS TYPICAL FOR DOEDOE's inability to document $255,000 in expenses it incurred on two trademissions to India and South Africa are part of a ``systemic''record-keeping problem at the department that may date back to theManhattan Project, an official with the General Accounting Office saidThursday.   At a hearing before the House Commerce subcommittee on oversight andinvestigations, Victor Rezendes, GAO's director of energy, resources andscience issues, said his office found DOE was unable to provide records for$80,000 in expenses it claimed for an October 1994 trade mission to Indiaand $175,000 in charges made during a similar trip to South Africa inAugust.   In both instances, GAO said, the money was paid by U.S. embassies in thecountries for goods and services purchased on behalf of the DOEdelegations.   Rezendes, whose office looked into the cost of the two trips at therequest of Ohio Republican Rep. Martin Hoke, a critic of Energy SecretaryHazel O'Leary's overseas travel, told the subcommittee that DOE did nothave written procedures in place during either of the trips specifying whattypes of records were to be kept or the process to follow when obtainingtravel support from the State Dept.   For both trips, Rezendes said, embassies reported charges to DOE thatlisted the amounts paid to vendors. ``The lists sometimes, but not always,provided a brief description of the nature of the charges,'' he said.   ``DOE's accounting office recorded the charges in DOE's accounts, butrelied on the responsible program office to approve the charges. However,the program officials did not maintain supporting documents of the expensesincurred,'' he said. Further, Rezendes said that in some cases, the programofficials ``could not provide an explanation for the embassies' charges.''   DOE, Rezendes added, could not provide GAO auditors with supportingdocuments to ``give assurances of what the money was spent for. This is nota new problem at DOE and without the documentation, we don't know, nor doesDOE know, what the money was spent on.''   ``We want to ensure that double billing did not occur, and maybe therecharges are perfectly okay, but the point is we don't know,'' he said.   Rezendes said the problem of shoddy bookkeeping at DOE precedes O'Learyand may, in fact, have its origins in the Manhattan Project. ``This goesback a long time and probably predates DOE, the [Atomic Energy Commission]and goes back to the Manhattan Project. The United States government, inits effort to build the atomic bomb, agreed to total cost reimbursement.Everything was allowable and after the war the same total costreimbursement system was retained,'' he said.   ``Anytime we have looked at DOE with a microscope we have found a lackof documentation and an understanding of what it is paying for,'' Rezendesadded.   Questioned by Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., Rezendes said hisinvestigation failed to turn up any evidence of improper or illegal use offederal funds, but he added that the problem is there is insufficientdocumentation available yet to make a conclusive determination.   Rezendes credited O'Leary for making ``the most aggressive changes'' ofany of her predecessors in the agency's contracting process and said DOE,working with GAO, is working to develop written procedures that wouldrequire DOE officials traveling abroad to follow specific steps, such ascompleting certain documents and vouchers and submitting all requiredreceipts in support of travel expenses to the agency's accounting office.``If properly implemented, these procedures should prevent similar problemsfrom occurring in the future,'' he added.   The GAO report was critical of DOE's decision to change the source offunding for security staff accompanying O'Leary on overseas trips from theagency's administration account to its Defense Programs account. DOEtransferred $400,000 from the DP account to pay for the security costs inFY-95.   The decision, Rezendes said, ``is inconsistent with a long-standingprinciple of appropriations accounting.'' DOE acted improperly, GAO said,by using the Defense Programs money to cover the security costs withoutfirst informing Congress.   Congress has already acted to address the problem, Rezendes said. In theFY-96 energy and water development appropriations act, Congress directedthat all costs to support the travel of any security detail accompanyingO'Leary are to be paid out of the departmental administration account.   House Republicans used last week's hearing to reissue a demand thatO'Leary resign.   Hoke, in an opening statement, said DOE, under O'Leary's leadership,``has unfortunately become a glaring symbol of government waste.''   ``Up until now, most of the media focus has been on Secretary O'Leary'slavish excessive travel -- 100 trips -- which in itself is a seriousproblem.   However, that is just the tip of a mismanagement iceberg that masks themuch larger problem of profound agency chaos, with tens of millions ofdollars in lost computers and other property, hundreds of thousands ofdollars unaccounted for, special perks for special friends, a useless andstupid waste of $43,000 to rate the friendliness of reporters, editorialboards, and members of Congress, illegal lobbying, hundreds of full-timeemployees devoted to public relations and the secretary's personalimage-building, and countless other examples of waste, fraud and abuse,''he said.   House Commerce Committee Chairman Thomas Bliley, R-Va., joined hiscolleagues in condemning O'Leary's travel. ``It is becoming more and moreclear to me that under the current leadership, [DOE] has little respect forthe American taxpayer. The secretary and her entourage of hundreds travelin luxury at taxpayer's expense throughout the world.   ``Yet, according to the findings in the GAO report, they don't even careenough to keep a single, solitary receipt for more than a quarter-milliondollars expended on just these two trips alone. And when they run short oftravel funds, they violate nearly a century's worth of budget principles todrain other funds to pick up the tab,'' he said.   Subcommittee Democrats voiced support, arguing that no evidence had beenprovided that showed money had been misused and that the problem may benothing more than an accounting glitch.   Dingell, in his opening statement, questioned why the panel had notasked DOE or State Dept. officials to testify about the trips. ``I hope itdoesn't show that we are more interested in a political hatchet job than weare in finding the truth,'' he said. State Dept. employees have beenfurloughed by the government shutdown.   DOE said Wednesday that it had received ``summary statements that showthat each expenditure incurred was certified by a State Departmentofficial.'' While DOE said it had not received every voucher to determinewhether it should have paid all of the certified expenses, it expects toreceive those documents when the federal shutdown ends.   DOE also said it disagreed with GAO's criticism of its decision to payfor security on foreign trips with $400,000 from Defense Program accounts,which officials noted have been used for some time for security on domestictravel. ``We stand by our decision to use the same appropriation accountfor security for both foreign and domestic travel,'' DOE said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   O'LEARY ATTEMPTS TO CLEAR AIR OVER IMPACT OF OVERSEAS EXCURSIONSExactly how much new business has been gained by U.S. companies by virtueof DOE's four overseas trade missions was still an open question lastweek.   In a Dec. 28 letter to Congress, Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary saidcompany executives who accompanied her on the trips have told the agencythey have completed, or are close to finalizing, $4.3 billion in deals thatcould be tied to the missions.   O'Leary's letter came in response to a Dec. 20 request from the chairmenof seven House Committees and subcommittees asking the secretary to explainwhat they described as apparent multibillion-dollar discrepancies in theeconomic benefits she said companies have gained from her overseas travel(IE/FL, 25 Dec, 1).   At various times, O'Leary has claimed the trips have resulted in as muchas $27.7 billion and as little as $2.4 billion in new business for U.S.companies.   At a hearing last week before the House Commerce subcommittee onoversight and investigations, however, Ohio Republican Rep. Martin Hokesaid his own survey of company officials put the value of the trips atabout $1.4 billion. Hoke suggested, moreover, that even that figure may begenerous.   Hoke, who has been a harsh critic of O'Leary's travel, said thesecretary's trade missions are the product of an agency undergoing a``bureaucratic midlife crisis, desperately pretending to be something it isnot in an attempt to find a new purpose to justify its continuedexistence.''   O'Leary, he continued, ``often acts more like the head of a statechamber of commerce trade delegation ... than a member of the president'sCabinet charged with the profoundly important, if somewhat dull,responsibility of safeguarding the nation's nuclear weapons stockpile.''   Just how much new business the trade missions have returned to U.S.companies is important to determining how effective the trips have been,Hoke said.   The congressman said O'Leary originally claimed that the trade missionsto India, Pakistan, China and South Africa resulted in $19.7 billion worthof contracts for U.S. companies. Recently, however, in response to anewspaper inquiry, DOE said $2.4 billion in deals had been signed. On Dec.19, the agency revised the figure to $4.3 billion.   Hoke said he believes the actual number is probably closer to $1.4billion. Even that number is ``guesswork,'' Hoke said, adding that most ofthe contracts were won by large U.S. companies with strong internationalrepresentation. They were capable, he said, of securing the contractswithout DOE's help.   In her letter to Congress, O'Leary attempted to clear the air. Intestimony she delivered to the Senate in March, O'Leary estimated thatenergy-related business agreements advanced during DOE and CommerceDept.-sponsored trade missions had a combined potential and realized valueof $27.7 billion.   A later estimate of $19.7 billion represents realized and potentialagreements of energy-related deals that have come out of DOE trademissions. They include, she said, ``memoranda of intent or understanding ... , power purchase agreements, fuel supply agreements and other stepsnecessary to advance business deals. The $19.7 billion estimate representsthe total potential value of the deals advanced by the trade missions thatI headed and is an important guidepost for tracking the long-term successof the missions.''   As for the $4.3 billion figure, O'Leary said that represents the numberof deals that have been completed. The $2.4 billion estimate DOE gaveearlier this year in response to an inquiry from the Los Angeles Times didnot include several deals companies later reported as completed.   In her letter, O'Leary told members that while the trade missions haveprovided U.S. companies with new contracts and have created American jobs,business deals are not the only benefits that have accrued.   DOE trade missions ``help shape policies that support the success ofU.S. competitiveness, democratization and market economies,'' she said.   ``Our missions have encouraged countries to create the necessary legal,financial, and regulatory policies that are the cornerstone of marketeconomies, while also enabling projects with U.S. energy companies to reachclosure. ... Every nation in which we have conducted trade missions hasfurther endorsed market reforms in the energy sector, and I believe ourwork has greatly contributed to that progress.''   The trips have also helped create a ``level playing field'' for U.S.business, O'Leary said. U.S. businesses have asked for DOE's help andCongress has given DOE the authority to provide assistance, ``because thesemarkets are important to their future and because foreign competitors enjoystrong support from their governments.''   O'Leary said DOE will continue to track the progress of the dollar-valueof the trade missions, but warned that because the emerging marketsinvolved in the trade missions have little experience in competitivemarkets, the final dollar figure for successful projects advanced duringthe trips may not be known for five to 10 years.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   E. SHIRLEY THOMAS, DOE OMBUDSMAN AND FRIEND OF SECRETARY HAZEL O'LEARY, hasE. SHIRLEY THOMAS, DOE OMBUDSMAN AND FRIEND OF SECRETARY HAZEL O'LEARY, hasbeen notified she will have to repay between $20,000 and $25,000 she hasreceived as a living allowance for nearly two years, but for which she wasineligible.   A department spokeswoman said Thomas was informed by the agency's Officeof General Counsel that she will have to pay back a $35 per day allowanceshe had received as an allowance for maintaining her principal residence inNewark, where she was employed as a social worker before being tapped byO'Leary for the $93,000-a-year DOE post. In fact, Thomas moved to theWashington area in December 1993.   DOE spokeswoman Barbara Semedo said Thomas was said to be ``eager'' torepay the funds. Thomas could not be reached for comment.   O'Leary in November defended Thomas against charges from HouseRepublicans that her job is unnecessary and that she was appointed to thepost chiefly because of their longtime friendship.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   BUDGET CUT FORCES LAYOFF OF PART-TIME AND STUDENT WORKERS AT DOEAlthough a DOE plan to meet congressional cuts in the agency'sadministration budget spared full-time employees from layoffs, 32 part-timeworkers and student interns were not as lucky.   DOE last week said it will lay off nine part-time workers, eight of whomwere employed in the agency's mailroom, and 23 college and high schoolstudents, to help it comply with a congressional directive that it cutadministrative staff by 15% this year.   In its FY-96 energy and water development appropriations bill, Congressreduced funding for DOE's administration $41 million below what thedepartment had sought. In report language accompanying the bill, thelawmakers said the funding level assumed a 15% cut in DOE's workforce.   The administration budget pays the salaries and other operating expensesfor about 2,900 employees in non-program offices, including humanresources, the office of congressional and public affairs, policy fieldmanagement and the Idaho, Oak Ridge and Chicago field offices.   DOE managers and union representatives signed off on a plan shortlybefore Christmas that would comply with the congressional requirement yetspare forced layoffs through such actions as increasing the number ofworkers opting for early retirement, eliminating overtime spending andperformance bonuses, continuing a hiring freeze and furloughing eachemployee for at least 48 hours spread out over the current fiscal year(IE/FL, 25 Dec, 12).   The plan, however, does call for some forced reductions. A DOE officiallast week said 32 workers will be laid off. Under the plan, the ninetemporary employees will be dismissed from the agency on or before Jan.26.   Twenty-three student employees -- including college students working inthe department's cooperative education program and high school studentsemployed under the agency's ``Stay in School'' program -- will get theirwalking papers.   Under the cooperative education program, DOE gives college students theopportunity to gain professional experience while they work toward theirdegrees. Upon graduation, the students have the opportunity to move intofull-time permanent positions at the agency.   The Stay in School program involves clerical work largely for highschool students, whose financial situation may otherwise force them to dropout before matriculating.   Eligibility for both programs is based on financial need. Students inboth programs will be asked to leave their jobs by April 19, the officialsaid.   Department-wide, DOE will retain 40 college students in the cooperativeeducation program and six under the Stay in School program, the officialsaid. In addition, officials are hoping that some of the 23 students willbe picked up by DOE program offices that are not facing the same salaryrestrictions as is the department administration account.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ERVIN SAYS DIVISION WILL CUT STAFF BY ONE-THIRD OVER NEXT FIVE YEARSBy:Lira BehrensAs part of its effort to comply with DOE's Strategic Alignment Initiative,DOE's Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy division is aiming to cutstaff by a third and reduce administrative costs by 50% over the next fiveyears.   EERE Assistant Secretary Christine Ervin told reporters in a briefingThursday that it was unclear where the cuts would be made, but two-thirdsof them would likely be made in the first two years. Many of the cuts alsowill come from closing four of the 10 EERE Regional Support Offices thatwas announced in August.   The administrative improvements will come from a new computerizedpersonnel center the division hopes to unveil in February, as well as apartnership with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, which Ervin saidhas ``its own aggressive program to reduce administrative costs.'' A teamof EERE employees has already identified 67 processes where ``there mightbe major savings,'' she said.   Ervin described the restructuring of the division as ``not a dramaticreorganization, but a natural evolution.''  One major effect of the change, Ervin said, would be to decrease theratio of managers to staff within the division from 1:5 to 1:15. Doing so,she said, would ``push decisionmaking down in the organization, giving moreauthority to the staff.''   The other major change effected by the reorganization is what she termed``graduation day'' for the division's Office of Technical and FinancialAssistance. The office, which deals primarily with state and localassistance programs, has previously been in a ``separate box,'' which shesaid had been an obstacle to deployment of EERE's r&d programs.   Under the new organization, OTFA's Weatherization Assistance Program andState Energy Conservation Program grants would be housed with thedivision's building energy programs under a new Office of Building Systemsand State and Community Programs. Mary Fowler, who had been OTFA's actingdeputy assistant secretary, is now the associate deputy assistant secretaryfor the new office.   Ervin said the lack of an Interior appropriations bill (which funds thedivision's efficiency programs) has not required employee furloughs orcutbacks in grants because the department has money left over from FY-95and so-called ``no-year money.'' According to Ervin's Chief of Staff BrianCastelli, the programs could operate ``a few more months'' on the outyearfunding.   One program Ervin said has been delayed by the government shutdown isthe implementation of an agreement reached in early December with theEnvironmental Protection Agency to consolidate the two agencies' applianceefficiency labeling programs. EPA, whose funding bill has not beenapproved, has an ``energy star'' program that labels computers and otherappliances as energy efficient, while DOE is responsible for setting energyefficiency standards for appliances.   According to Ervin, DOE and EPA have worked with retailers such asCircuit City, Sears and Home Depot on what the new labels should look like.The department had hoped to complete the label consolidation by the end ofthe year, but has been unable to meet with EPA because the agency'semployees are furloughed.   In other programs, Ervin said the department plans to issue finalguidelines for Home Energy Rating Systems by January 31. The department hasasked the Home Energy Ratings Systems Council and several state-run HERSprograms known as the Residential Energy Services Network, to resolve theirdifferences on technical issues related to the guidelines before then.   Members of the HERS Council, which submitted recommended guidelines toDOE in October 1994, late last year expressed concern that the disagreementthreatened the program (IE/FL, 30 Oct, 7). The groups have now apparentlynarrowed the list of issues over which they disagree and have tentativelyscheduled a series of meetings for mid-January.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   HOUSE BID TO OVERRIDE CLINTON VETO OF INTERIOR SPENDING BILL FAILSHouse Republicans failed to override President Clinton's veto of theInterior appropriations bill Thursday, garnering only 239 of the 278 votesneeded to pass the bill over Clinton's objections.   Among the reasons the president said he vetoed the bill (H.R. 1977) wasthat it did not contain enough funding for DOE's energy efficiency programs(IE/FL, 25 Dec, 4). According to administration sources, the bill's futurewill likely hinge on the White House's negotiations with Congress on theoverall budget agreement.   Sources familiar with the negotiations last week said advocates of theefficiency programs in the White House were asking for $75 million inadditional FY-96 funding to be split between three efficiency programs: theWeatherization Assistance Program, the Partnership for a new Generation ofVehicles program, and the programs aimed at implementing theadministration's Climate Change Action Plan.   A congressional aide, however, denied that the overall budgetnegotiations would affect the FY-96 Interior appropriations bill. The aidesaid it was unclear what appropriators would do with the interior bill. Thetwo options, she said, were to either move another stand-alone bill, orroll funding for the programs into a long-term continuing resolution.   The FY-97 budget request process is apparently on hold until the FY-96budget levels are settled. DOE has submitted a budget request to the Officeof Management and Budget of $915 million for EERE, but it was unclear atpress time how that may have been changed during the ``passback'' process.   Of the outlook for FY-97 funding for her programs, DOE AssistantSecretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Christine Ervin toldreporters last week that ``a lot of it is hinging on the negotiations forFY-96.''   While she would not divulge details of the FY-97 request until it hasbeen submitted to Congress by the president, Ervin said the ``historicpercentage increases [in efficiency and renewable energy programs] in pastyears are not likely to continue. We do know that energy efficiency andrenewable energy remain a high priority for the secretary and theadministration.'' And she added there will be ``some decent continuationsfor programs.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   DOE WILL PROVIDE $100,000 TO JAMES E. RUSSELL PETROLEUM INC., to improve aDOE WILL PROVIDE $100,000 TO JAMES E. RUSSELL PETROLEUM INC., to improve anew process to clean water used in oil field operations.   The ``air flotation process'' emerged from an earlier DOE co-sponsoredproject with Russell Petroleum and the University of Kansas. RussellPetroleum, Abilene, Texas, will contribute $102,000 of its own to continueresearch on the project. DOE's award will be made through the NationalInstitute for Petroleum Energy Research in Bartlesville, Okla.   According to DOE, water produced with oil is often reinjected into thereservoir to increase the efficiency of the oil recovery operation. Butimpurities in the water can plug the tiny pores in the reservoir rock,often blocking the water from reaching the target zones.   In the air flotation process, air is bubbled through a flotation column.Waste impurities cling to the air bubbles and are removed from the water.The technique, a modification of a process originally developed to cleancoal and other minerals, has been used in some offshore oil operations. Itwas unclear, however, whether the process would be cost-effective foronshore oil fields, particularly those operated by smaller, independentproducers.   According to the department, the original Russell Petroleum projectshowed that the air flotation device may make economic sense for manyindependent producers. The company credits the technology with contributingto the recovery of some 300,000 barrels of oil that otherwise would havebeen left in the ground.   Under the second phase of the project, which will last 18 months,Russell Petroleum will develop screening criteria to help other producersdetermine where and when the process can be applied; develop optimum designand operating guidelines for the technology; determine the cost ofimplementing critical design improvements; and communicate the correctmethod of applying the technology and its benefits to other operators.   The original project was funded under DOE's Reservoir Class FieldDemonstration Program, which is aimed at demonstrating ways that oilproducers can avoid prematurely abandoning their wells. The RussellPetroleum follow-on project is the result of a solicitation DOE issued tothe 33 participants in the ``near-term'' category of the program. Thedepartment has recently requested proposals for follow-on projects fromparticipants in ``mid-term'' and other categories of the program.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   THE NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE MISTAKENLY LISTED A CONSUMER GROUP amongTHE NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE MISTAKENLY LISTED A CONSUMER GROUP amongsupporters of a bill aimed at fixing DOE's high-level nuclear wasteprogram.   In an ad NEI placed in the Dec. 12, 13 and 14 Washington editionS of theLos Angeles Times, the industry group included the Consumer Federation ofAmerica in a list of organizations it said support the bill (H.R. 1020). Ina letter to the paper's editor, CFA Executive Director Stephen Brobeck saidthe group did not approve the use of its name in the ad and that it has noposition on the bill.   Brobeck, who asked the paper to print a correction, said NEI ``hasadmitted their error and apologized to us.''   The ad was brought to the attention of CFA by several state PublicInterest Research Groups, who are members of the federation, and who opposethe bill.   U.S. PIRG said the incident ``is just one more example of the brazenexcess the nuclear industry uses to ram a destructive bill throughCongress.''   An NEI spokeswoman Friday acknowledged the group made a mistake inincluding CFA among those groups endorsing the bill. She, however, said CFAwas included because the group had passed a resolution urging Congress toensure that money paid by consumers into the nuclear waste fund was usedfor the program. That provision, she added, is a key part of thelegislation.   The spokeswoman criticized PIRG, saying the group was allowing its``anti-nuclear views to get in the way of protecting consumers.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EEI PRESIDENT THOMAS KUHN WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF CONGRESS waits untilEEI PRESIDENT THOMAS KUHN WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF CONGRESS waits untilthe end of the session to decide on nuclear waste legislation. That's whenthe first two laws addressing the topic passed in 1982 and 1987, Kuhn saidduring a briefing last week for the Washington International Energy Group,and he suggested that history may repeat itself this year.   Nevertheless, the Edison Electric Institute chief said a bill reportedoverwhelmingly by the House Commerce Committee in August could be the startof a new law this year. He said he thought the measure (H.R. 1020), whichwould require DOE to open an interim site for nuclear waste in Nevada by1998, may pass the House handily if it gets to the floor. That, he added,would ``motivate'' the Senate to respond similarly.   ``Hopefully, the issue is important enough that it will percolate up andbe finished this year,'' Kuhn said of a nuclear waste bill. ``There is acritical need for it.''   Kuhn was less sanguine that Congress will reconsider proposals to sellDOE's power marketing administrations, which EEI supported in 1995, butwhich failed because of opposition in the regions where the PMAs operate.He credited the public power and rural cooperative portions of the electricutility sector for their successful fight against the proposals.   ``I don't really believe there will be a very active discussion of theissue this year, but I do believe it will be back in the next Congress,''Kuhn said of the PMAs. The fact that the PMAs operate with a federal``subsidy'' will draw more scrutiny as the notion of competition in theoverall utility sector gains support nationally, he added.   While EEI wants lawmakers' help on nuclear waste and the PMAs, the groupwould prefer that they abstain from addressing retail wheeling orcompetition in the utility industry, he said. Kuhn acknowledged thatproposals by House Commerce Committee Chairman Thomas Bliley Jr., R-Va.,and other lawmakers that address those issues likely will be discussedfurther this year, but he said he hoped nothing would come of them.   ``We very strongly feel we don't need federally mandated wheeling,'' hesaid. ``We don't need a federal solution regarding competition.'' Accordingto Kuhn, utilities in conjunction with state regulators and other interestsare likely to find solutions to problems related to competition that willbe better than any prescriptions from Washington.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   A PANEL CHAIRED BY DOE AND EPA HAVE SELECTED EIGHT PROJECTS involving fourA PANEL CHAIRED BY DOE AND EPA HAVE SELECTED EIGHT PROJECTS involving fourcountries and 13 U.S. companies under the second round of the U.S.Initiative on Joint Implementation.   The pilot program encourages partnerships between U.S. companies anddeveloping countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. According to DOE,the program ``spurs technology cooperation by increasing the access ofdeveloping countries to energy-efficiency and renewable energytechnologies. Industrialized countries benefit through the expansion ofexport markets.''   Should a greenhouse gas control program be implemented in the future,U.S. companies hope they would be able to get credit for reducing emissionsoverseas, where such reduction measures are cheaper to implement.   The projects announced last week, which are financed by the privatesector, will employ geothermal, biomass, hydroelectric and wind energytechnologies, as well as forest management practices in Costa Rica,Honduras, Nicaragua and Russia.   Five of the eight projects -- selected from 21 proposals submitted --are located in Costa Rica. At a ceremony announcing the selected projectslast month, DOE Deputy Energy Secretary Charles Curtis attributed thenumber of projects in Costa Rica to its president, Jose Maria Figueres, whohas created a special office of joint implementation and has vowed to``make Costa Rica a showplace'' for such projects.   Curtis said Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary has ``worked hard to gaingreater acceptance'' of joint implementation projects. The first round ofseven projects were selected in February 1995.   The projects announced last week are: a forestry project in Costa Ricainvolving U.S. partner Newton Treviso Corp.; a geothermal project inNicaragua, with Trans-Pacific Geothermal Corp.; a biomass generationproject in Honduras with U.S. participants Nations Energy, a subsidiary ofTucson Electric, the Edison Electric Institute and Add on Energy 1; ahydroelectric project in Costa Rica with New World Power Corp.; a windfarmin Costa Rica with New World Power Corp.; a wind facility in Costa Ricawith Power Systems Inc. and EnergyWorks; a forest restoration project inCosta Rica with the Nature Conservancy; and a fugitive gas capture projectin Russia with Oregon State University, Sustainable Development TechnologyCorp., Sealweld Corp., and EPA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SECRETARY O'LEARY'S CHIEF ADVISER ON RUSSIA, ROBERT BERLS JR., left DOESECRETARY O'LEARY'S CHIEF ADVISER ON RUSSIA, ROBERT BERLS JR., left DOEDec. 29 to join the department's former deputy secretary, William White, ina new international company based in Houston. Berls will be the vicepresident of corporate development for Howe-Baker Development Co., whichWhite formed after he left DOE earlier this year, the department announcedlast week.   No replacement for Berls at DOE has been named, a spokesman said. Berlscoordinated DOE programs involving Russia and other former Soviet states.In his new position, he will concentrate on business opportunities in thosenations, he said.   Howe-Baker Development is a limited-liability company that specializesin marketing and project development for small-scale refining andprocessing units built by Howe-Baker Engineers, Inc., Tyler, Texas, DOEsaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ENVIRONMENTALISTS CLAIM DOE IS `BACKSLIDING' ON REPROCESSING POLICYBy:David KramerEnvironmental groups charged last week that DOE is ``backsliding'' on a20-year-old U.S. commitment to end reprocessing activities by pursuing aplan to use chemical separations ``canyons'' to treat spent fuel and othernuclear materials at the Savannah River Site.   Led by the Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, whichreleased a report on the issue Thursday, the groups claimed that bygenerating additional waste, reprocessing will cause more environmentalproblems than it solves and will undermine the credibility of U.S. effortsto convince other nations such as North Korea, India and Russia to endtheir reprocessing activities.   ``How is the United States going to convince these countries and othersto halt reprocessing if we're plunging into it ourselves?'' asked IEERresearcher Noah Sachs, author of the report: ``Risky Relapse intoReprocessing.'' Though DOE has pledged not to use the plutonium or highlyenriched uranium separated through reprocessing for weapons, othercountries will not be able to verify this, he noted.   ``It creates a kind of reprocessing double standard,'' Sachs said,adding that other nations will be unable to verify DOE's pledge not to usethe fissile materials that are separated through reprocessing for nuclearweapons.   After exhaustive environmental analyses, DOE has elected to reprocessmuch of the spent fuel and solutions containing fissile materials at SRS tostabilize the material for long-term storage. Moreover, a number ofinfluential Republican lawmakers, notably Sen. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C.,chairman of the Armed Services Committee, have consistently advocatedreprocessing as a solution to spent fuel management problems at SRS andother DOE sites.   But the environmental groups, which also included the Energy ResearchFoundation, an SRS watchdog organization, and Snake River Alliance, agrass-roots group located near the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory,argued that DOE should instead place the spent fuel into dry storage untiltechnical solutions to problems facing long-term disposition have beenresolved.   Beatrice Brailsford, executive director of SRA, also criticized DOE'scontinuing support at INEL of experimental technology known aselectrometallurgical processing, calling it a ``back door flirtation withreprocessing.'' The technology ``poses a peril to nonproliferation goals,''she said, and also fails to respond to any clear need.   ``DOE's bad interim storage policy is being driven by a bad long-termstorage policy,'' said Arjun Makhijani, IEER president. DOE should startfrom scratch in its efforts to find a high-level waste repository, he said,and abandon its trouble-plagued effort to characterize the Yucca Mountain,Nev., site. In so doing, the agency ought to resurrect its deep seabeddisposal research program, which was terminated when Congress ordered theagency to focus all its efforts on the Nevada site.   DOE need not rush into a repository, Makhijani maintained, since interimdry storage for a period of up to 100 years would permit the decay of mostof the highly radioactive and heat-generating fission products such asstrontium and cesium. That in turn would eliminate many of the technicaldesign concerns that face the Yucca Mountain project.   IEER also rejected reprocessing advocates' contention that DOE spentfuel, which unlike commercial fuel is in metal form, must be stabilizedprior to its permanent storage. Alternatives to reprocessing could bedeveloped over the next few decades, or special containers might bedesigned specifically for the DOE material, they said.   ``There is no spent fuel management option that is without risks,''Sachs said, ``but DOE's own data show that the storage option poses farfewer risks than reprocessing.''   According to Sachs, DOE data show that the radiation dose to thepopulation surrounding SRS during reprocessing activities would be four tofive million times higher than from continued storage of the materialthere. DOE estimates in the report indicate an exposure level of 15person-rem per year via air pathways, and a further 2.2 person-rem per yearvia water pathways to the population within 50 miles of SRS.   DOE's current reprocessing plans will add three million gallons ofhigh-level liquid radioactive wastes to the tanks at SRS, increasing thetotal volume of those wastes by around 10%, according to the report.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   REPORT BY SRS CONTRACTOR APPEARS TO ADVOCATE REPROCESSING AT SITEBy:David KramerThe operator of DOE's Savannah River Site prepared a report for a localcongressman that suggests reprocessing of spent commercial nuclear fuel atthe facility to prepare the material for permanent disposal.   An internal report by Westinghouse Savannah River Co., the managementand operating contractor, said reprocessing the nation's commercial spentfuel for disposal in a permanent repository could be accomplished at SRSfor as much as ``several billion dollars'' less than it will cost todispose of it directly in a repository, as the current plan calls for.Moreover, Westinghouse said, reprocessing would ``increase the technicalassuredness of the spent fuel management program, and potentially couldyield recyclable uranium feedstock.''   The report, which was prepared in August, was made public by the EnergyResearch Foundation, an SRS watchdog environmental group, last week. A DOEspokesman at Savannah River said the report was requested by Rep. CharlesNorwood, R-Ga., and took about a week to complete. He added that DOE hadnot sought the study.   ERF Director Brian Costner expressed outrage at the report, calling itscost estimates ``absolutely absurd.'' They do not include any expenses toupgrade the two 40-year-old reprocessing ``canyons,'' he said. Further, headded, they fail to account for additional wastes that would be generatedby reprocessing and do not consider ongoing problems with SRS' DefenseWaste Processing Facility, which would be used to vitrify the high-levelwastes that are separated from the spent fuel.   According to the report, DOE could dispose of the current inventory ofcommercial spent nuclear fuel for about $8 billion, including the estimatedrepository fees for the canisters that contain the vitrified waste. While afinal repository would still be required, the cost and technicaluncertainty would be cut significantly by the 20-fold volume reduction thatwould be achieved through reprocessing, as well as the conversion of thewaste to a single form containing only short-lived non-fissile fissionproducts, the paper said.   Reprocessing opponents point out that the procedure would result in ahuge volume of low-level waste that Westinghouse proposes to form into aconcrete-like ``saltstone'' for storage. The report argues that thesaltstone is ``a non-hazardous, non-regulated waste form which has noenvironmental impact,'' a characterization disputed by Costner.   Costner also charged that SRS was ``toying with U.S. nonproliferationpolicy,'' and ``trying to redefine reprocessing without a clear opendebate.''   The Clinton administration generally opposes reprocessing on the groundsthat it encourages proliferation of nuclear weapons-usable materials. DOE,however, plans to resume reprocessing activities at SRS in order tostabilize some of its spent fuel and other nuclear materials left over fromweapons production (related story above).   The administration has been especially adamant in opposing thereprocessing of commercial spent fuel, however, and has never considered itas an alternative for civilian spent fuel disposal.   However, a number of Republican congressmen and senators, particularlythose in the region surrounding SRS, have advocated reprocessing. Norwoodand Sen. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C., chairman of the Armed Services Committee,are two such proponents.   The report said SRS has documented that the canyons can operate until2015 ``with normal capital upgrades.'' SRS, said the report, ``has theimmediate capability to assist the DOE and the nuclear power industry inaddressing the nation's spent fuel crisis by beginning the immediatereceipt of commercial spent fuels.''   The DOE spokesman said Norwood's request came after Senate EnergyCommittee Chairman Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, proposed using SRS and DOE'sHanford Site in Washington as interim storage facilities for commercialspent fuel. ``We get a lot of requests from our congressional delegationand we respond to them,'' he said.   The Westinghouse report, however, was well-detailed and appeared to bewritten with a pro-reprocessing slant. For example, it indicates that thedirect disposal route for spent fuel is fraught with technicaluncertainties, commenting, ``this uncertainty has not provided the publicwith any confidence that the DOE can successfully manage spent fuels.'' Bycontrast, the reprocessing route ``offers a technologically proven,cost-effective solution to the spent fuel disposal problem,'' it said.   The report also examined the feasibility of reprocessing spent fuel fromother DOE facilities -- the Hanford Site and the Idaho National EngineeringLaboratory. It concluded that the cost of disposing of DOE's Naval Reactorspent fuels could be cut by nearly two-thirds, to $5 billion, compared to$14 billion for direct disposal. The cost of disposing of DOE's stainlesssteel and zirconium-clad spent fuels could be cut to around $700 million,from $1.2 billion, it said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SAIC EXECUTIVE ALM NOMINATED AS DOE'S ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP CHIEFIn an action widely expected for months, the White House Dec. 27 nominatedScience Applications International Corp.'s Alvin Alm to take over DOE'senvironmental cleanup program. Alm, a director and senior vice presidentfor SAIC's Environmental Business Area, will replace Thomas Grumbly asassistant secretary for environmental management at DOE if he is confirmedby the Senate.   President Clinton Dec. 20 nominated Grumbly as DOE under secretary, thethird most senior position at the agency (IE/FL, 25 Dec, 10).   Prior to joining SAIC in 1989, Alm was the chief executive of AllianceTechnologies Corp. and served as the board chairman and chief executive ofThermal Analytical Corp. From 1983 to 1985 he was the deputy administratorof the Environmental Protection Agency.   In 1970, ALM served as the first staff director of the newly createdWhite House Council on Environmental Quality and in 1973 became EPA'sassistant administrator for planning and management, a position withresponsibilities for strategic planning, budgeting, policy and internalmanagement.   If confirmed by the Senate, Alm's new position would mark his secondstint at DOE. In 1977, he joined the agency as assistant secretary forpolicy and evaluation. Alm now serves as co-chairman of DOE's EnvironmentalManagement Advisory Board and is on the board of the Energy andEnvironmental Policy Institute and the Environmental Export Council.   Alm will inherit from Grumbly a roughly $6-billion-a-year program thathas come under increasing pressure in Congress and the administration toreduce its costs. Although it largely escaped deep spending cuts proposedby the House last year, the program is certain to come under still morescrutiny from congressional budget cutters this year. In addition, EnergySecretary Hazel O'Leary is moving ahead with a promise she made early lastyear to reduce the program's costs by more than $4 billion over the nextfive years.   Just how quickly the Senate will act on the two nominations is an openquestion. An aide to the Senate Energy Committee last week said Grumbly hasa good reputation among committee members and should have little difficultywinning confirmation. Less is known about Alm, he said, but there is littlereason to believe he will prove controversial.   Although Committee Chairman Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, prefers to movequickly on nominations, the aide said it could be several months before thecommittee and Senate take action, largely because the Senate has beenoperating for several weeks without a full contingent and may do so forsometime longer.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EM DIVISION TELLS CONGRESS OF ITS PLAN FOR COPING WITH BUDGET CUTSDOE's Environmental Management division last week told lawmakers how itplans to allocate the $476 million in cuts Congress made to its FY-96budget.   In letters sent to about 100 senators and representatives, ThomasGrumbly, the assistant secretary for environmental management, said EM hasslashed its headquarters costs by 37%, to $222 million, in response todirectives contained in the conference report accompanying the FY-96 Energyand Water Development Appropriations Act. It also used prior-year balancesas much as possible, also as directed by the appropriators, and acceleratedcleanup activities to reduce long-term costs both at the FernaldEnvironmental Management Project and the Rocky Flats EnvironmentalTechnology Site, he added.   Congress appropriated 7.3% less than DOE's amended budget request for EMthis year -- providing just over $6 billion. But lawmakers earmarked $135million in EM expenditures, further reducing the amount available toallocate among the DOE cleanup sites.   ``The bottom line for most sites is that in virtually all cases thefield office budget reductions were less than 10 percent,'' Grumbly wrotein the Jan. 2 letters. Reductions at each site were made after consultingwith and reaching agreement among all the field managers, he said.   Grumbly said the actual percentage cuts among all the sites varied forthree reasons. First, the level of prior-year balances varied among thesites, and reducing these was one of the goals set by Congress. Second, DOEsought to maximize the level of compliance at the sites with regulatory andother requirements, which also vary. And finally, the congressionalearmarks required the department to add funding to certain sites forspecific projects.   A direct comparison between FY-95 and FY-96 funding levels for each siteas a percentage of the EM budget is not possible due to the increase inresponsibilities of the EM progam in FY-96, he said. These new dutiesinclude site management at the Savannah River Site, Mound Plant andPinellas Plant, as well as additional nuclear materials managementactivities across the complex.   Among DOE's largest cleanup operations, funding for the Hanford Site isbeing cut 6.3%, to $1.3 billion, while the Savannah River Site's budgetwill decline 8.6%, to $1.2 billion. Funding for the Oak Ridge Reservationwill fall by 9.2%, to $782 million, while that for Rocky Flats will declineby 8.7%, to $573 million. The Ohio Field Office, which funds cleanup bothat Fernald and Mound, will decline by 3.5%, to $509 million, and IdahoNational Engineering Laboratory's budget will fall by 7.2%, to $471million.   Funding for Albuquerque Operations, which funds cleanup projects at twoDOE weapons labs as well as operation of the Waste Isolation Pilot Project,will decline 4.5%, to $608 million, according to the letter.   In a letter to Washington Republican Sen. Slade Gorton, Grumbly warnedthat additional job reductions beyond the 4,800 that have already beenannounced by DOE for the Hanford Site are likely. He added that a precisetally of cuts was not possible at this time.   Congressional earmarks included a $50 million increase to the budgetrequest for EM's technology development program to provide funds to bemanaged by DOE's Office of Energy Research to develop a research programthat uses the national laboratories and universities; a $25 supplement tothe technology development account for electrometallurgical r&d; $59million for the maintenance of funding levels at the Morgantown EnergyTechnology Center to fund contracts associated with private sectorinvolvement in developing improved technologies that address needs of thetechnology development ``focus areas'' and crosscutting programs; and $1million in additional funds to the Western Environment Technology Office inButte, Mont., to meet EM's commitment to maintain funding level required toaccomplish previously initiated activities.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   A SWAP OF WASTE OIL FROM TVA TO DOE SAVED TAXPAYERS $100,000, according toA SWAP OF WASTE OIL FROM TVA TO DOE SAVED TAXPAYERS $100,000, according toDOE. While trying to dispose of 75,000 gallons of mineral oil that wasslightly contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls, officials at theTennessee Valley Authority found that DOE could use the material at its OakRidge K-25 Site.   The oil is now being used as a first step in cleaning out three largestorage tanks that previously held liquids containing much higher levels ofPCBs. Flushing the 22,500-gallon tanks with oil is a standard initial stepin removing PCBs from the tank walls.   According to Vince Adams, the DOE manager of the site's Toxic SubstanceControl Act Incinerator, where the storage tanks are located, thedepartment would have purchased commercial fuel oil, at a cost of about$80,000, to do the job, if not for TVA's offer. TVA estimates it saved$20,000 in disposal costs by finding a user for it.   The oil eventually will be burned in the incinerator, which was built inpart to destroy PCB-contaminated liquid wastes.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-16IA059-000325-B005-108http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey70.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232553 text/html 98409HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:23:20 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:14 GMTContent-length: 98222Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey70.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ALJ SAYS GREAT PLAINS COAL-GAS SETTLEMENTS UNFAIR TO RATEPAYERS (1099 words) GAS PRICES TO CONSUMERS FELL MORE THAN WELLHEAD PRICES over the past 10 (426 words) PIPELINES WILLIAMS STEPS IN AS FULL KERN RIVER OWNER AFTER FTC KNOCKS QUESTAR OUT (1477 words) NEW PIPELINE SERVICES WITH CONDITIONS, FERC SIGNS OFF ON PARKING SERVICES FOR THREE PIPES (606 words) SERVICE REVISIONS GIVING TENNESSEE SHIPPERS MORE FLEXIBILITY took effect (179 words) FERC'S NOI SHOULD NOT HOLD UP OFFSHORE EXPLORATION PLANS, Shell Gas (526 words) LATE TO THE GAME, EASTERN SHORE FILES INITIAL RESTRUCTURING PLAN (736 words) INDUSTRY STRUCTURE CONSOLIDATION OF GAS COMPANIES WILL CONTINUE IN '96, ANALYSTS PREDICT (505 words) ELECTRIC UTILITIES AGA ANNOUNCED ITS SUPPORT OF THE D'AMATO BILL TO REPEAL PUHCA, saying that (338 words) UNION ELECTRIC, CIPS WANT STOCKHOLDERS TO GET CUT OF MERGER SAVINGS (909 words) ELECTRIC POWER THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY ``IS NOT AT ALL BAD'' (451 words) NEPCO CAN'T CHARGE A FIRM RATE FOR CURTAILABLE TRANSMISSION even though the (209 words) ELCON OFFERS STRANDED-COST RECOVERY PLAN; NO THANKS, SAYS EEI CHIEF (1749 words) ISOS, CAPACITY RELEASE, ALTERNATIVE RATES HIGHLIGHT FERC'S 1996 AGENDA (2167 words) BRIEFLY... COMMENT DEADLINE EXTENDED (121 words) NAME CHANGE (163 words) GAS STORAGE EQUITRANS AGREED TO BE PLACED AT RISK FOR ITS STORAGE EXPERIMENT involving (343 words) AVOCA'S CERTIFICATE AMENDMENTS WERE APPROVED WITH ONLY A FEW adjustments, (242 words) PLEASE LET US FINISH CONSTRUCTING OUR FACILITIES, EGAN TOLD FERC in an (396 words) PIPELINE RATES SHIPPERS CAN CHOOSE TO PAY KOCH GATEWAY DIRECTLY FOR FUEL USED to transport (279 words) AFTER FIVE MONTHS OF ACTIVE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE EL PASO RATE CASE, ``there (352 words) ANR IS DOUBLE-CHARGING FOR SERVICE TO A PLANT IN OKLAHOMA, Amoco Production (321 words) FERC WILL DETERMINE RATE TREATMENT FOR NORTHERN BORDER'S proposed (419 words) CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ALJ SAYS GREAT PLAINS COAL-GAS SETTLEMENTS UNFAIR TO RATEPAYERSControversy over the Great Plains coal-gasification project, which hashaunted Ferc virtually since it was first approved in 1979, lingers on.After Administrative Law Judge Michel Levant refused to approve the termsof settlements negotiated by pipelines to resolve years of litigation, theplant's owner warned last week that, if unchanged, Levant's decision couldclose down the synthetic gas facility.   Four pipelines that signed 25-year, high-cost contracts to buy theplant's output thought they had finally resolved their problems when inearly 1994 they negotiated deals with Dakota Gasification Co. to lower theprice they must pay. But in a Dec. 29 initial decision, Levant pointed to``an abundance of post-settlement evidence'' confirming his view that thesettlements ``depart from the carefully crafted balance'' achieved inFerc's 1981 ruling, opinion 119, and do so ``at a grossly disproportionatecost to ratepayers.''   But in a statement, Dakota Gasification Vice President Kent Janssen saidLevant's decision would breach the original deal among pipelines,ratepayers and DOE. ``Pricing language in the gas purchase agreements wasdrafted by the ratepayers themselves,'' he said. ``Judge Levant's decisionwould allow them to break that deal. That simply isn't right.''   Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of America, Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.,Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp. and ANR Pipeline Co. had asked thecommission to endorse their deals with Dakota Gasification and DOE, theprevious owner of the plant, and rule that the resulting costs are eligiblefor full recovery under terms of order 636. The commission subsequentlysevered Natural from the proceeding because of a settlement between thepipeline and its customers. Ferc set the case for hearing in October 1994,instructing the ALJ to keep in mind the commission's cost-passthroughcommitment to the pipelines and its vow to ratepayers that costs would bemarket-based (IF, 17 Oct '94, 13).   The settlements committed the pipelines to pay a total of $504 millionin demand charges over seven years. The gas price would be pegged to thespot price at Ventura, Iowa, as reported in published indexes.   To begin with, Levant chided the pipelines for failing to confer witheither the commission or their customers during negotiations. It is``incomprehensible that the pipelines made no effort to consult with thecommission'' about their disputes with Dakota Gasification, which spawnedextensive litigation. And ``it is even more remarkable that even though theratepayers would be expected to pay the costs of any settlement agreement,the pipelines made no effort to bring them into the settlementnegotiations,'' said the decision (RP93-100, et al.).   What's more, the pipelines apparently did not conduct ``any meaningfulstudies or comparative analyses to evaluate the resultant costs andbenefits . . . to ratepayers'' under the original agreements and thesettlements. The ``thrust'' of the pipelines' argument in support of thesettlements ``was that they compared favorably with potential litigationoutcomes,'' Levant continued. But he characterized the pipelines'litigation scenarios as ``highly speculative.''   The bottom line is that the settlements ``do not reflect a reasonablecompromise,'' said the judge. There is ``simply no evidence in the record . . . which supports the imposition upon ratepayers of an obligation to pay$504 million in demand charges in seven years,'' he said, noting thatratepayers already had paid about $490 million in above-market gas costsover the past decade to support demonstration of the coal-gasificationtechnology.   Levant suggested that in weighing their options, the pipelines shouldhave paid more attention to their other high-cost gas supply contracts,which ``served to elevate the price'' of synthetic natural gas purchasedfrom Dakota Gasification under terms of the original pricing formula. Atthe time of the settlements, these contracts were being reformed, leadingto a natural decline in the SNG price. The option of continuing to buyunder the original agreements, ``with necessary and appropriatemodifications by the commission'' to reflect the restructured pipelineservices market, ``yields a more favorable result for the pipelines and,more importantly, for the ratepayers who must ultimately pay the bill,''Levant concluded.   At one time speculative, the coal-gasification technology developed atthe Great Plains project is now ``a great success,'' Levant asserted. Hesaid ``there has been no persuasive showing in the record that continuedoperations of the plant cannot be sustained'' under modified versions ofthe original agreements approved in opinion 119.   Levant also held that an appropriate ``top-of-the-market'' pricingformula for the period commencing May 1, 1993, would be based on an averageof Gulf Coast spot-price indexes plus a 5% premium. Testimony during thehearing by a ratepayer witness ``recognizes a reasonable premium for SNG intracking the natural-gas market, which is supported by [a] survey ofLDCs,'' said the decision.   The formula endorsed by Levant would have produced a 1995 average priceof around $1.65/MMBtu, using figures from Inside F.E.R.C.'s Gas MarketReport. In his statement, Janssen said that Dakota Gasification's cost ofproduction currently is $2.60/MMBtu, ``and the pricing Judge Levantsuggests comes nowhere near covering costs. For the judge to suggest[Dakota Gasification] can survive with that price is ludicrous.''   Levant ruled that the pipelines' purchase obligations should be limitedto the original total of 137,500 MMBtu/day, rather than the settlements'153,520 MMBtu/day. Even though the contract-demand language in the originalagreements is pegged to the total output of the plant, which has sinceincreased, Dakota Gasification ``has made no showing to justify unlimitedexpansion of the original contract obligations for the purchase of SNG bythe pipelines or the ratepayers,'' the judge said. Excess volumes producedat the plant can be made available for sale by Dakota Gasification ``atcompetitive market prices or for production of the more lucrativebyproducts and co-products.''   Dakota Gasification said the plant's average production since 1988 hasbeen 157,000 Mcf/day.   Finally, the rate charged by Dakota Gasification for transporting gasfrom the plant to an interconnection with Northern Border Pipeline Co. atHebron, N.D., should be 5.5 cents/MMBtu, rather than the 22 cents/MMBtuproposed by the plant owner, Levant said. According to an estimate by Fercstaff, Dakota Gasification already has collected some $46 million intransportation revenue, which has ``fully compensated'' the company fortransportation ``for the entire [25-year] life of the project,'' thedecision said.   If the decision is upheld, the pipelines would have to refund tocustomers all amounts above the price and volume specified in the ordersince May 1, 1993. Dakota Gasification, which vowed to file exceptions toLevant's decision within 30 days, noted that the commission has promised toact in the case by the end of 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   GAS PRICES TO CONSUMERS FELL MORE THAN WELLHEAD PRICES over the past 10GAS PRICES TO CONSUMERS FELL MORE THAN WELLHEAD PRICES over the past 10years, according to a study released last week by the American Gas Assn.While some classes of customers enjoyed greater savings than others, allcustomers experienced lower prices in real terms during the decade endingin 1994, said AGA President Michael Baly.   ``Over this 10-year period, the actual average price of natural gas toall customers declined by 93 cents/Mcf,'' while wellhead prices fell by 78cents/Mcf, he said. Industrial customers saw the largest savings, averaging57%, ``as regulators and utilities moved toward reflecting the actual costof service for a customer and toward eliminating the historic subsidizationof residential prices by large-volume users,'' the report said. During thesame period, residential gas prices fell by 24%, after having increased by111% the previous decade.   A recent Energy Information Administration study covering the period1988 through 1994 found that wellhead prices and the cost of transmissionto the city-gate fell roughly equally but that distribution markups did notdecline (IF, 4 Dec, 3).   Seeking to deflect criticism that the distribution and transmissionsectors of the industry have not done enough to reduce costs, Baly saidthat costs in these sectors declined by 33% during the 10 years. ``Thepricing structures of the different sectors of the industry are not thesame and they respond differently and at different times to the commodity,labor and capital markets, and to regulatory impediments,'' he said. Balyadded that ``this makes it unlikely that prices in each sector would moveidentically and simultaneously on a percentage basis.''   Offering a cost-cutting example, the report noted that the gas utilityindustry served almost 58-million gas meters in 1994 with about 187,000employees, compared with 49-million meters and 221,000 employees 10 yearsearlier. ``That's the equivalent of serving 18% more customers with 15%fewer employees, a personnel reduction of 34,000 across the utilityindustry,'' said the report.   The bottom line ``still is that all gas customers are benefiting fromincreased competition and lower gas prices,'' Baly concluded. Gas demandincreased by nearly 30% during the 10-year study period, the report noted.And to extend this trend in the face of growing competition from arestructured electric industry, ``all sectors of the industry will continueworking to reduce costs, to enhance product value to gas consumers and toresist attempts to fragment and weaken the industry.''   For more information on the study, ``The Effects of Competition onNatural Gas Prices,'' contact AGA at (703) 841-8400.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WILLIAMS STEPS IN AS FULL KERN RIVER OWNER AFTER FTC KNOCKS QUESTAR OUT   It all happened rather quickly. After the Federal Trade Commission latelast month moved to block Questar Pipeline Co.'s $225 million plan toacquire Tenneco Energy's 50% ownership interest in Kern River GasTransmission Co., the parties agreed not to challenge the decision andTenneco Energy promptly picked another suitor, reaching an agreement at alesser price with The Williams Cos. Inc. on Dec. 31.   Since it already owns the other half of Kern River, Williams would bethe sole owner of the Wyoming-to-California pipeline. The $205 million saleis subject to FTC approval, which is where Questar ran into problems in itsbid.   Reasoning that Questar's planned ownership in Kern River would translateinto a monopoly on gas service in the Salt Lake City area, the FTC on Dec.27 said it would bar the move. Questar owns Utah distributor Mountain FuelSupply Co. and the FTC was concerned that if it also held a portion of KernRiver, the pipeline would not bypass Mountain Fuel to serve customersdirectly, an FTC official noted.   If the purchase had gone through, ``Questar could discourage Kern Riverfrom competing in the area,'' according to William Baer, director of theFTC's Bureau of Competition. ``Kern River was soliciting business in theSalt Lake City area,'' and ``diminishing that threat of lateral bypass toKern River was our concern with the acquisition,'' Baer told InsideF.E.R.C. Industrial customers should view the ruling as a positivedevelopment, he asserted.   Following the decision, Questar decided to forgo the purchase ratherthan challenge the FTC. Litigation ``wasn't in our best interest,'' aQuestar spokesman said. ``Our interest was access to Nevada and Californiamarkets,'' he said. ``We are disappointed'' with the FTC ruling ``and don'tagree with it,'' Tenneco Energy Chairman and Chief Executive Officer SteveChesebro' said in a statement. But the company decided to contact potentialbuyers rather than fight the FTC, Chesebro' said.   The Questar spokesman noted that Questar and Tenneco Energy had fileddocuments with the FTC and conducted extensive discussions with FTC staffto demonstrate that the purchase would not reduce competition for gastransportation services in Utah. ``We said both Ferc and state regulatorswould pay attention to whether Mountain Fuel was acting in the customers'best interest,'' the spokesman explained.   Mountain Fuel does receive gas from Kern River to serve customers nearSalt Lake City, but ``Kern River has never sold gas in the area,'' headded. The Questar spokesman suggested that the FTC was ``using an obsoleteview of the pipeline industry'' that didn't include the open-accessprinciples of order 636. He noted that Questar had planned to have its KernRiver functions separate from its other operations to mitigate anyantitrust concerns.   According to a release from the FTC, the acquisition would``substantially reduce competition'' between Questar and Kern River, whichwould lead to ``higher prices and other anticompetitive effects.'' The factthat Questar owns Mountain Fuel ``enhanced its market power,'' Baer noted.He conceded that ``this is a somewhat unusual antitrust case'' because KernRiver is a competitive presence in the area ``even though they have zeropercent of the market.''   And ``we weren't convinced'' that Ferc regulation of Kern River wouldalleviate that market power, Baer said. What's more, Questar has said thatit faces competition from Kern River because Kern River has expressed itsintentions to expand to directly serve the Salt Lake City area, and theplanned purchase was like ``buying an insurance policy'' against thatcompetition, Baer asserted.   As for the sale to Williams, Tenneco Energy said the companies executeda binding $205 million agreement on the last day of the year. ``Weconcluded it was in Tenneco's best interest to avoid the time and expenseinvolved in restarting the bidding process and go ahead and finalize theterms of the transaction before year-end,'' Chesebro' said. The timing ofthe sale also allows Tenneco Energy to retain about $10 million of netoperating income accrued since September, when the company first announcedthe sale of its share of the system to Questar.   Williams is pretty confident that it will not run into trouble gettingFTC approval of its Kern River purchase, according to corporate spokesmanJim Gipson. ``I don't think they will have more of a problem with us owning100% of Kern River than they have with us owning 50%,'' he said. Williamssubsidiary Northwest Pipeline Corp., which transports gas from some of thesame Rocky Mountain production areas as Kern River, ``serves the PacificNorthwest,'' a market area completely different from Kern River's, henoted.   If the purchase is approved by the FTC, Gipson observed, ``we willwholly own five interstate pipelines'' -- Williams Natural Gas Co.,Northwest, Texas Gas Transmission Corp., Transcontinental Gas Pipe LineCorp. and Kern River.   Williams has had the right since last May to make an offer to purchaseTenneco Energy's half interest in Kern River. While the company ``has notcommented'' on whether or not it ever did, ``don't assume that we didn'tmake an offer,'' Gipson advised.   In September, when Questar agreed to pay $225 million for TennecoEnergy's portion of Kern River (IF, 18 Sept, 8), Williams declined a chanceto match that offer. But Keith Bailey, chairman, president and CEO ofWilliams, noted last week that lower interest rates, tax issues and otherfactors combined to change the economics of the acquisition since then.``We have always said that we were interested in [wholly] owning Kern Riverunder the right set of circumstances,'' Gipson pointed out.   Lower interest rates are key to the deal's viability, Gipson said.Williams and Tenneco Energy began working last year to refinance KernRiver's debt ``to take advantage of today's [low] interest rates,'' hestated, and that will help Williams finance its acquisition. When KernRiver was built in 1991, Williams and Tenneco Energy each paid $150 millionof the $1 billion cost, and the remaining $700 million was borrowed fromvarious banks at an average interest rate just over 9%, Gipson recalled.Williams plans to refinance the remaining $643 million of debt at aninterest rate that probably will be 2% lower, he said.   Tax issues also came into play in the structuring of the deal, Gipsoncontinued. While Questar's transaction with Tenneco Energy was to be a $225million stock purchase, Williams is buying Tenneco Energy's 50% partnershipinterest, rather than stock. For Williams, purchasing a partnershipinterest rather than stock is preferable for tax reasons, he said.   The stock-purchase structure of Tenneco Energy's deal with Questar wasone factor that discouraged Williams from matching Questar's offer when ithad the chance, according to Gipson. ``The deal we had to pass on lastfall, the only opportunity we had was to match [Questar's offer], instructure and price,'' he said. ``Every company is different, everycompany's financial profile is different. So what is a great deal for onecompany is not necessarily a great deal for another.''   Gipson also noted that Williams is paying $20 million less than Questarhad agreed to pay. Williams is paying $26 million more, however, forTenneco Energy's 50% partnership interest than its own 50% Kern Riverinterest carries in Williams' own books. Williams has appreciated itsinitial $150 million investment in Kern River to $179 million, Gipsonsaid.   As 100% owner of Kern River, Williams ``could monetize the 50%'' itbought from Tenneco Energy ``to an investor or to the public,'' Gipsonpointed out. ``We're not necessarily announcing that we are going to dothat,'' but the option would be there, he said.   If the purchase goes through, Williams will stop reporting income fromKern River as equity income and start reporting it as operating income. Thepipeline has been contributing $32 million to $33 million per year toWilliams' income; that would double once Williams gets Tenneco Energy'sshare, and Williams also expects savings from increased operatingefficiencies. Williams always has operated Kern River, but Tenneco Energyhas handled the administrative side. After the acquisition, administrativefunctions ``will be folded into our Salt Lake City offices,'' where anadministrative staff already is in place for Northwest. While it will add afew people to the current Salt Lake City staff, Williams expects Kern Riverto achieve ``annual savings of $2 million to $3 million'' as a result of``not having two corporate entities involved'' in running it, Gipson said.   Following the purchase announcement, Moody's Investors Service Inc.placed the securities ratings of Williams and its subsidiaries on reviewfor possible downgrade. Moody's said its review ``will examine thelikelihood of a deterioration in Williams' financial position as a resultof the acquisition. Although Williams' 100% ownership of Kern River mayprovide operational benefits, the acquisition is expected to add asubstantial amount of debt to Williams' balance sheet.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WITH CONDITIONS, FERC SIGNS OFF ON PARKING SERVICES FOR THREE PIPES   The added flexibility afforded customers is reason enough to approve theplans of three pipelines to provide hub services in the form of parking andloaning, Ferc reasoned in a series of orders issued late last month.Proposals by Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co., Mojave Pipeline Co. andIroquois Gas Transmission System all were approved with an effective dateof Jan. 1, subject to conditions. Ferc said technical conferences should beheld to address concerns about the Mojave and Panhandle plans.   The pipelines generally proposed to establish programs that would allowcustomers to park gas at specified receipt points for withdrawal at a laterdate.   Iroquois shippers were concerned that existing operations would behindered as the pipeline used excess line pack to provide the services (IF,18 Dec, 6). But Ferc dismissed that notion in its Dec. 29 order (RP96-63).Because Iroquois has assigned its parking and loaning service a lowerpriority than firm and interruptible transportation, ``there is no basisupon which to find, at this time, that the PAL service will adverselyimpact Iroquois' provision of firm service,'' Ferc said. The commissionalso found Iroquois' rates to be just and reasonable. It concluded thatIroquois shippers will ``reap significant benefits in the form of addedflexibility'' as a result of the PAL service.   For Mojave, which also sought to establish an imbalance trading service,shippers had several questions about how the pipeline would implement itshub proposal (RP96-67). With no storage facilities of its own, how wouldMojave's use of line pack relate to the creation of imbalances? shipperswondered (IF, 25 Dec, 15).   Ferc ordered a technical conference for parties to address ``theiroperational concerns regarding how Mojave will offer hub services and howthe hub services may impact other existing services and tariffprovisions.'' Ferc said customers should be able to explore Mojave'streatment of hub service revenues and its implementation of the newimbalance trading provisions at the conference.   ``Likewise, the technical conference can provide a more informed basisto determine if Mojave's maximum `first-day' and `subsequent-day' rates aretoo high, as suggested by several parties,'' Ferc said. The commissionnoted that it's difficult to compare rate design among the pipelinesoffering hub services because of the variety of those services and pipelinesystems. It's unclear what resources Mojave will use in rendering theservices, Ferc added. It accepted Mojave's hub plan subject to refund andthe outcome of the technical conference.   The commission called for a technical conference in the Panhandleproceeding as well, primarily to explore Panhandle's failure to allocateany costs to its parking service and the possibility of a revenue-creditingmechanism. Late last month, Panhandle sought to allay shippers' fearsregarding its parking service, insisting that it would meet its firm andinterruptible requirements before any parking transactions take place (IF,25 Dec, 14).   The commission's Dec. 29 ruling (RP96-51) found that the operationalflexibility, supply management and financial management options associatedwith the parking service should be in place as soon as possible during thecurrent winter season. Despite those benefits, however, Ferc said Panhandleneeds to provide more support for the parking service rates. The commissionsaid ``the convening of a technical conference is the best method toresolve the issues raised by the parties.''   The order noted that Panhandle did not show a derivation for itsproposed minimum daily rate of 0.5 cents/Dt. ``Panhandle will be requiredto file work papers and supporting materials which support and demonstratesuch derivations,'' Ferc said. It approved the parking service subject torefund and the outcome of the technical conference.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SERVICE REVISIONS GIVING TENNESSEE SHIPPERS MORE FLEXIBILITY took effectSERVICE REVISIONS GIVING TENNESSEE SHIPPERS MORE FLEXIBILITY took effectJan. 1 as scheduled, the pipeline reported to Ferc last week. The changeswere part of a settlement (RP95-396) on Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.'smuch-maligned services. In approving the deal Nov. 1, Ferc ordered thestatus report on Tennessee's follow-through (IF, 30 Oct, 3).   Certain firm transporters now can bump interruptible shippers. Inaddition, flexible nomination and scheduling provisions have beenimplemented, and provisions on unauthorized overruns and maximum allowedvolumes give customers additional swing rights, Tennessee said. Thepipeline's production-area pooling, or supply aggregation (SA) service,also is now in place. Some 102 customers that scheduled nearly 3.9-millionDt/day used the modified services and SA service for Jan. 1 business,according to the pipeline.   Tennessee said a pilot group of shippers successfully tested TENN-SPEED3, an upgrade of its computer software, from Nov. 16 through Dec. 8. Allcustomers should be using the new software by April, it said. Alsobeginning in April, new ``swing on storage'' and cash-out services will beavailable.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FERC'S NOI SHOULD NOT HOLD UP OFFSHORE EXPLORATION PLANS, Shell GasFERC'S NOI SHOULD NOT HOLD UP OFFSHORE EXPLORATION PLANS, Shell GasPipeline Co. told the commission in two different petitions last month. Inits notice of inquiry (RM96-5) on systems operating in the OuterContinental Shelf, Ferc vowed to consider changes to its regulations in aprompt manner because there are several projects pending at the commission(IF, 4 Dec, 1).   Shell Gas late last month said Ferc should not wait for the outcome ofthe NOI before issuing an order on its proposed Mississippi CanyonGathering System (IF, 16 Oct, 11). Delaying a decision on its request for anonjurisdictional declaration ``would have exactly the effect that thecommission says it wants to avoid: impeding and distorting developmentalactivities on the OCS,'' Shell Gas said. If the commission cannot issue anorder by Feb. 1, it could issue an interim ruling, declaring theMississippi Canyon facilities to be nonjurisdictional, subject to theoutcome of its inquiry, the pipeline suggested in the Dec. 22 filing(CP96-9).   Meanwhile, in a new request for a declaratory order (CP96-113), ShellGas submitted plans to develop the Garden Banks Gathering System in theOCS. While Shell Gas commended Ferc for its effort to clarify itsregulations regarding the OCS, delaying the planned construction of theGarden Banks system risks disruption of oil and gas production fromcritical areas, it asserted.   The Garden Banks system would consist of a 50-mile, 30-inch-diameterpipeline extending from the planned Enchilada platform in the Garden Banksarea to a new platform to be set in the South Marsh area. It wouldinterconnect with the existing facilities of Transcontinental Gas Pipe LineCorp., ANR Pipeline Co. and the Blue Water header system. Shell Gas andAmerada Hess Corp., which has committed to a 20% ownership in the system,expect multiple lateral lines to deliver gas into the 30-inch line becausethere is insufficient pipeline capacity to handle expected productionvolumes in the area. Shell Offshore Inc.'s production from the Auger Fieldwas shut in during portions of 1995 because of a lack of pipeline outlets,Shell Gas claimed.   Asserting that the Garden Banks system meets Ferc's primary-functiontest, Shell Gas noted that Ferc found a similar ``spine and lateralsnetwork'' of the Viosca Knoll Gathering System to be nonjurisdictional.Although the planned 30-inch pipe would be the widest line classified byFerc as a gathering facility, the large diameter is necessary to handle allof the expected production from the area, Shell Gas said. It added that``collecting gas from multiple sources into a single 30-inch pipeline`spine' is a more economically efficient way to handle the large volumes ofanticipated production from the Garden Banks area than numerous piecemealgathering lines from individual blocks to individual pipelineconnections.''   The system would have a capacity of 1.2 Bcf/day, according to theapplication. Shell Gas asked Ferc to declare the facilitiesnonjurisdictional by March 1 so production can begin to flow by April 1,1997. If the system is not ready for service by then, ``Shell and otherGarden Banks producers will be subject to significant financial losses,''it told Ferc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   LATE TO THE GAME, EASTERN SHORE FILES INITIAL RESTRUCTURING PLAN   Two years after most pipelines were forced to jump through the hoops oforder 636, Eastern Shore Natural Gas Co. submitted its initialrestructuring plan. ``We've been in a unique situation,'' said MichaelMcMasters, director of planning for Eastern Shore, explaining that thepipeline at the time of industrywide restructuring was not required to jointhe ranks of open-access pipelines. All that is about to change, however:the pipeline agreed in a settlement to go open access and filed its plan(CP96-128) Dec. 29.   ``There really wasn't any great demand'' for open-access status on thepipeline ``by any of the customers or any public agency'' when order 636was issued, an attorney for Eastern Shore added. ``We felt customers werepleased with the service and the rates'' from the pipeline, the attorneynoted. Since Eastern Shore was not an open-access pipeline, order 636 didnot apply, according to the attorney.   More recently, however, at least one customer ``has expressed someinterest'' in unbundled service, ``and we thought the time was right'' tooffer it, the attorney said. McMasters added that in the pipeline's lastrate case, ``we agreed to open our system'' as part of a settlement.   Eastern Shore's system runs from interconnects with Columbia GasTransmission Corp. and Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp. in southernPennsylvania through Maryland and Delaware, it noted. It serves four localdistribution companies and 12 direct sales customers, with a majority ofits throughput going to its parent, Chesapeake Utilities Corp., McMastersexplained.   Operation of its bundled city-gate sales service requires a significantamount of effort in coordinating receipts, McMasters said. It is severelyconstrained in operational flexibility because peak-day throughput is aboutfour times the system's linepack, the pipeline noted in the application.``The advent of open-access service on the Eastern Shore system, with newrights and obligations being bestowed on both Eastern Shore and itscustomers, may engender a great deal of uncertainty about the futureoperations of its system,'' Eastern Shore told Ferc.   Rather than retain upstream capacity, as some pipelines did, it proposedto have customers exercise nominating and scheduling rights on Transco andColumbia through Eastern Shore. ``We will act as an agent in schedulingtheir gas'' on the upstream pipelines in order to preserve operationalcontrol of its system, McMasters said.   Another critical element to its operations is a certificate request(CP96-97) filed last month (IF, 11 Dec, 14) to increase capacity on itssystem and deal with the declining pressure on its Hockessin line, where ittakes gas from Transco, McMasters added. Noting that Eastern Shore proposedan effective date for restructured services of no later than Nov. 1,McMasters said ``we can't open our system until we get the othercertificate.''   The pipeline intends to file a rate case implementing straightfixed-variable rate design on May 1, the application noted. The timing ofthe rate case is also tied to the certificate request in order to includethe cost of the additional facilities, according to McMasters. The switchto SFV and other elements should produce an average rate hike of 13.56%, hesaid.   Eastern Shore proposed to implement a capacity-release program, withbidding on a ``very simple'' electronic bulletin board that is still beingdeveloped. ``Eastern Shore is proceeding very deliberately in thedevelopment and implementation of its EBB in order to avoid unnecessarycosts which would ultimately be borne by its customers,'' it said. Anytransition costs resulting from restructuring will be collected consistentwith order 636, Eastern Shore said.   In offering unbundled firm transportation, Eastern Shore said customerswill receive entitlements equivalent to their current bundled servicerights. It is offering firm and interruptible transportation, and ano-notice transportation service. Eastern Shore said the cost-based salesservice requirement for small customers under order 636-A is not applicablebecause it has traditionally not offered sales under a small customer rateschedule.   It sought a limited waiver from the commission's marketing-affiliatestandards. ``Due to its small size, Eastern Shore has historically sharedfacilities and employees with Chesapeake,'' resulting in lower costs andlower rates for its customers, the pipeline noted. And since thedistributor sells off-system gas, it is likely considered a marketingaffiliate of the pipeline. Eastern Shore said that it has separated theoperations of its pipeline from those of its marketing affiliate to themaximum extent possible, however, with only two shared employees.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   CONSOLIDATION OF GAS COMPANIES WILL CONTINUE IN '96, ANALYSTS PREDICTBy:Cathy Landry   The gas industry has not seen the last of consolidation, asever-increasing competition this year will force companies to seek greaterefficiencies and cost-cutting measures, according to industry analysts.   ``I would say . . . the merger-and-acquisition activity will rebuild in1996 as companies continue to transform into what I describe as energyconglomerates,'' explained John Olson, first vice president of securitiesresearch for Merrill Lynch. Even though there were some sizableacquisitions in 1995, Olson characterized the 1995 merger-and-acquisitionactivity as ``fairly quiet.''   The really big year for consolidation, he said, was 1994, when PanhandleEastern Corp. merged with Associated Natural Gas Corp. in a transactionvalued at about $800 million, and The Williams Cos. Inc. announced a $3billion acquisition of Transco Energy Co. (IF, 26 Dec. '94, 1). Olsonbelieves 1996 will rival 1994's activity level.   Two consolidation trends should emerge, Olson predicted. First, the bigintegrated energy companies -- ``the Williamses, Panhandles, Coastals,Enrons, Sonats of the world -- will be looking very hard at both U.S. andforeign acquisitions.'' Second, ``you will also see electric utilitieslooking very hard at both pure [distribution companies] and integratednatural-gas companies.''   Ralph Pellecchia, a gas analyst and senior director at Fitch InvestorsService Inc., predicted that companies will continue to position themselvesto deal with greater competition. Because of increasing head-to-headcompetition in a number of markets, Pellecchia suspects there will be evenmore ``partnering up'' in 1996. He said producers and marketers willcontinue to team up, as will producers and marketers with distributors. Inaddition, he said more gas and electric companies will become partners inthe coming year. And he thinks there is the potential for gas distributorsand telecommunications companies to match up.   Capacity turnback will remain one of the major issues in the gasindustry this year, Pellecchia predicted, with pipelines serving Californiaparticularly hard hit. And the turnback issue will ``heat up'' in theMidwest and in other areas of the country as contracts begin to expire andpipeline customers move toward shorter-term commitments, he said.   Gregg Anderson, an analyst with Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co., agreedthat merger-and-acquisition activity will continue next year. ``I think1996 will be characterized by continuing consolidation and cost-cutting,''he said.   Anderson, who specializes in exploration-and-production companies,expects there to be more, smaller transactions in 1996 than the eye-poppingmegadeals in late 1994. ``I think there are fewer and fewer large companiesout there that have placed all their bets on long-term gas prices.'' Henoted, however, that ``there are a fair number of midsize companies thatare still being hurt by the volatility of gas prices.''   Duff & Phelps recently lowered its outlook for gas prices over the nextfive years. The rating group expects annual-average gas prices between$1.80 and $2/Mcf, down somewhat from its previous projection of $2/Mcfflat. If prices in fact do deteriorate, e&p companies will be forced tocontinue to cut costs, Anderson said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   AGA ANNOUNCED ITS SUPPORT OF THE D'AMATO BILL TO REPEAL PUHCA, saying thatAGA ANNOUNCED ITS SUPPORT OF THE D'AMATO BILL TO REPEAL PUHCA, saying thatintroduction of the measure ``is an important first step toward eliminatingan outdated statute that unnecessarily inhibits competition and has becomeredundant in light of other, more effective reform implemented in the last60 years.'' The American Gas Assn. board last month adopted a resolutioncalling for repeal of the Public Utility Holding Company Act (IF, 11 Dec,12), just weeks into the term of the group's new chairman, George DavidsonJr., who also is chairman and chief executive officer of ConsolidatedNatural Gas Co., one of five AGA members regulated under the act.   In a Jan. 3 letter to Sen. Alphonse D'Amato, the New York Republican whochairs the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, AGAPresident Michael Baly offered the group's explicit support for ``repeal ofPUHCA as called for in your bill.'' Under the measure (S. 1317), Ferc andthe states would be provided access to utility books and records, and theywould have jurisdiction over rate treatment of costs associated withaffiliate transactions (IF, 16 Oct, 1).   Baly further indicated that AGA ``recognizes that PUHCA relates tocorporate organization and financing, and repeal appropriately can beconsidered apart from other legislation on a stand-alone basis.'' Keyenergy lawmakers in the House plan to address PUHCA reform as part ofrestructuring of the electric industry, but Senate Energy and NaturalResources Committee Chairman Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, has stated firmopposition to linking reform of the act with comprehensive reform of theindustry.   ``Your bill . . . recognizes the anachronistic and burdensome regulatorysystem in place to enforce the provisions of PUHCA,'' Baly's lettercontinued. ``That the Securities and Exchange Commission has endorsedrepeal of the statute makes this an opportune time for Congress to act onthis issue. We urge you to hold hearings on your bill in a timely fashionso that the momentum building on this will not be lost,'' he urged.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   UNION ELECTRIC, CIPS WANT STOCKHOLDERS TO GET CUT OF MERGER SAVINGS   In seeking approval of their proposed merger, Union Electric Co. andCentral Illinois Public Service Co. have asked Ferc to authorize a ``sharedsavings plan'' that would enable stockholders to recover direct mergercosts and then split the remaining savings with ratepayers.   The two utilities, which would be operating utility subsidiaries of theregistered holding company Ameren Corp., also need Ferc approval ofagreements that would implement their plan to transfer Union Electric'sretail electric and gas service in Illinois to CIPS. The Dec. 22 mergerapplication (EC96-7) asked for expeditious approval without a hearing,asserting that ``there can be no dispute that the transaction will producesubstantial cost savings, will expand wholesale market opportunities forthe majority of regional market participants and, therefore, will beconsistent with the public interest.''   When Union Electric and CIPS announced their merger in August (IF, 21Aug, 1), they projected cost savings of $570 million over 10 years. Theapplication raised that to $590 million -- $196 million in corporate andoperations labor, $204 million in corporate and administrative programs,$69 million in nonfuel purchasing economies, $84 million in electricproduction and $37 million in gas supply.   The cost-savings projection was developed in the initial stages ofmerger negotiations and thus is ``not an ex post facto attempt to justify adecision to merge'' but rather has been ``an important element of theapplicant's internal merger planning,'' the application said. Theprojection also doesn't include programs to reduce costs and increaseefficiencies that the two utilities have undertaken on their own, apartfrom the merger, it added.   Subtracted from the savings are costs of $19 million to accomplish themerger, $22 million in transaction costs and a $232 million merger premium,yielding net savings in the first 10 years of $317 million.   The utilities said that in addition to the $590 million saved in thefirst 10 years, the merger would produce another $970 million in savings inthe second 10-year period and almost $1.4 billion in the third 10-yearperiod. To allow stockholders to share in the savings, the companies wouldamortize the $273 million in merger costs over 10 years in a way thatensures there are net savings in each year. They then would split netsavings equally between shareholders and customers. The utilities askedFerc to find that the sharing plan ``is consistent with appropriateregulatory accounting treatment.''   CIPS serves 317,000 retail electric customers and 166,000 gas customersin central and southern Illinois. Union Electric serves 1.06-millionelectric customers and 100,000 gas customers in Missouri and 64,000electric customers and 18,000 gas customers in Illinois. CIPS would acquireUnion Electric's electric and gas distribution systems in Illinois, but notits generation or transmission facilities in that state.   After the merger, under a ``system support agreement'' CIPS would buycapacity and energy from Union Electric to serve the transferred electriccustomers in Illinois. The agreement is intended to avoid cost-shiftingbetween state jurisdictions and, in short, ``to maintain the status quo,with the generation and transmission system planned and installed to servethese customers continuing to serve them,'' the application said. Withoutthe agreement, ``the transfer of the Illinois customers would not bepossible, and the resulting economies would be lost,'' it added, callingthe agreement ``central'' to the merger plan.   On a related point, the applicants asked Ferc to authorize the transferof the current balance in an Illinois account for Union Electric's nucleardecommissioning costs to a Ferc subaccount, since Union Electric no longerwould have retail service in Illinois.   Union Electric and CIPS also plan to operate their combined generationand transmission facilities as a single control area under a ``jointdispatch agreement.'' The single control area would interface with 28 otherutilities, which ``should enhance interchange purchase and salesactivities,'' they said. ``The result should be reduced costs'' for the twoutilities.   On wholesale electric issues, the two utilities said they have compliedwith Ferc's merger policy by filing open-access transmission tariffs thatconform to the pro forma tariffs in the commission's proposed transmissionrule (RM95-8).   Contracts for wholesale requirements customers would remain in place,and any inclusion of merger costs in rates after current contracts expirewould be negotiated with those customers, the application said. Moreover,Union Electric and CIPS committed to an open season in which any wholesalerequirements customer could terminate its contract by giving 90 days'notice if either utility files for a rate increase. That commitment wouldapply to the first five years after the merger is consummated. And anywholesale customer whose contract expires prior to the fifth anniversarywould be allowed to extend its contract to the fifth anniversary date.   Bulk-power market participants would benefit because the two utilitieswould transmit at a single-system, postage-stamp rate, which would expandrather than diminish bulk-power supply options, the utilities asserted. Theapplication included testimony by Rodney Frame of National EconomicResearch Associates Inc., who concluded that ``there is no likelihood of anadverse effect on competition in any of the relevant markets,'' theapplication said.   The merger was approved on Dec. 20 by shareholders of both UnionElectric and CIPSCO Inc., the parent of CIPS. The companies have filed forapproval from the Missouri Public Service Commission and the IllinoisCommerce Commission and said they will seek authorization from the NuclearRegulatory Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission as well asfederal antitrust clearance.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY ``IS NOT AT ALL BAD''THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY ``IS NOT AT ALL BAD,'' according toEdison Electric Institute President Thomas Kuhn. In a luncheon discussionin Washington last week sponsored by the Washington International EnergyGroup, Kuhn touted the 3.4% growth in electricity demand last year andasserted that steady merger activity is ``changing the face of ourindustry'' for the better.   At Ferc, ``the mega-NOPR is on target and the commissioners seem to bein sync'' for achieving the goal of issuing a final rule on open-accesstransmission and stranded-cost recovery this spring, he said. Commenting ona subject that is drawing increased attention both as part of and apartfrom the debate over the proposed rule, Kuhn said EEI is ``very much opento the concept of developing the specifics'' of what would constitute anindependent system operator for transmission service.   ``But before you say that the ISO should be applicable to every place . . . you have to look at a lot of those specifics'' to make sure that itaccommodates unique characteristics of the affected market, he continued.The industry remains concerned that one-size-fits-all solutions may beinappropriate in the context of the restructuring, Kuhn added.   Looking at what is going on in Congress, the EEI president maintainedthat there is no need for legislation ``to address retail competition thattells the state what they have to do.'' Asserting that ``states arevigorously looking at competition,'' Kuhn said they do not need a federalmandate to require retail wheeling. Asked if EEI is concerned that withouta legislative directive there will develop a hodgepodge of programs stateby state, Kuhn replied that markets are developing on a regional basis.``Issues are being addressed'' and solutions are being examined regionally,he asserted. ``You are just seeing the marketplace work.''   Kuhn declined to speculate on what action Congress might ultimatelytake, or when it might happen. House Commerce Committee Chairman ThomasBliley Jr., R-Va., and energy and power subcommittee Chairman Dan Schaefer,R-Colo., have talked about comprehensive legislation to restructure theindustry, possibly involving federal pre-emption on the issue of retailwheeling (IF, 27 Nov, 1), but ``they haven't really come up with anyparticular proposals at this time,'' he observed.   Commenting on specific state developments, Kuhn said the investor-ownedutility industry was very pleased that the California Public UtilitiesCommission's Dec. 20 restructuring order would permit 100% recovery ofstranded costs. And on that subject, he slammed the Electricity ConsumersResource Council's proposal to give utilities the chance to recover no morethan 50% of such costs, suggesting that it in fact would allow very littlecost recovery (see story on page 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NEPCO CAN'T CHARGE A FIRM RATE FOR CURTAILABLE TRANSMISSION even though theNEPCO CAN'T CHARGE A FIRM RATE FOR CURTAILABLE TRANSMISSION even though thecustomer has agreed to the rate, the commission says. In a Dec. 29 order(ER96-200, et al.), Ferc directed New England Power Co. to file within 30days lower rates for the service that is subject to curtailment.   NEPCO transmits power from the New York Power Authority to variousMassachusetts municipal customers, whose agent is Massachusetts MunicipalWholesale Electric Co. In a renegotiation last fall, MMWEC agreed to pay afirm rate for transmission of 35,456 Kw. Of that amount, 17,730 Kw will betransmitted on a firm basis and the remaining 17,726 Kw will have acurtailment priority higher than some nonfirm transmission but lower thanthe firm service that NEPCO provides to itself and other firm customers.   Ferc declared itself unpersuaded by NEPCO's arguments that MMWEC agreedto pay the firm rate for the whole amount and that the utility wasn'tobligated to offer any firm service at all. ``For the firm service that itwill provide, NEPCO should be compensated. However, for the other serviceit will provide, i.e., for the less-than-firm service it will provide,NEPCO is not thereby entitled to an excessive rate,'' the commission said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ELCON OFFERS STRANDED-COST RECOVERY PLAN; NO THANKS, SAYS EEI CHIEFBy:Craig S. Cano   Asserting that it's time to drop the posturing by utilities that seek100% stranded-cost recovery and customers that argue for no recovery, theElectricity Consumers Resource Council with some trepidation last weekproposed a formula that would permit utilities to recover up to 50% ofcosts associated with uneconomic assets. The decision to put astranded-cost proposal into play stemmed from a desire to ``kick this thingalong,'' said ELCON Executive Director John Anderson, despite lingeringconcern that the proposal might be interpreted as a signal that industrialcustomers are willing to negotiate an even higher recovery figure.   At a Wednesday press briefing to release ELCON's ``Road Map for theTransition'' to a fully competitive market, the group's Director ofTechnical Affairs John Hughes noted that uneconomic assets are ``veryclearly defined'' by the document. ``We are restricting what we want to puton the table'' in the first place, he said. The result is that what ELCONcalls 50% recovery may indeed be much less than half in the eyes ofutilities.   But the investor-owned utility industry trade group is not prepared tobudge from its insistence on the right to seek full cost recovery. ELCON'scomplex formula for calculating and allocating stranded costs is ``designedto ensure that there would be very little, if any, cost recovery,'' saidEdison Electric Institute President Thomas Kuhn. Speaking at a Thursdaylunch sponsored by the Washington International Energy Group (see story onpage 10), Kuhn asserted that the proposal ignores the fact that Ferc andmany states, like California, believe a utility's right to seek full costrecovery is in the public interest. ``We really think it is a road map fullof ruts and potholes,'' he added.   Asked if he sees the ELCON proposal as a bargaining issue to which anEEI counteroffer will be made, Kuhn said that ``we already have come upwith our own proposal. We are sticking with it.'' EEI supports Ferc'sproposal to allow utilities to seek full recovery, he said, adding, ``Idon't see a bargaining chip here at all.'' Furthermore, ``I don't think[the ELCON proposal] is going to be adopted by anybody,'' Kuhn said.   The road map identified certain costs that would not be eligible forrecovery. For example, utilities could not recoup the above-market costs ofpurchased-power agreements and/or fuel-supply contracts that the utilityhas with affiliated companies. Also, ``no utility shall be allowed to seekrecovery of any costs associated with uneconomic assets that were committedto subsequent to the enactment of the Energy Policy Act,'' said the roadmap, which is a companion document to ELCON's ``Blueprint for CustomerChoice'' (IF, 9 Oct, 3).   Utilities also would be required to engage in mitigation measures,including writing off or writing down assets. Finally, during thetransition period to competitive markets, utilities would not be permittedto earn a return on any uneconomic asset.   Costs that could be recovered as uneconomic assets would include thosefrom purchased-power agreements and/or fuel-supply contracts withnonaffiliates that exceed a market-clearing price; properly allocatedoverhead expenditures associated with the uneconomic assets; some costsassociated with the deferred recovery of certain investments orexpenditures as a result of regulatory decisions; and the rate base valueof uneconomic generating assets in excess of their fair market value.   However, stranded costs for generating assets would be reduced by twofactors. First, utilities would deduct from the calculation thedifferential between fair market value and any generation assets below thatvalue. Second, the uneconomic asset costs would be offset by deferredaccounts that ``constitute outstanding utility obligations to theirratepayers and are owed to their ratepayers,'' ELCON said.   Having defined the eligible costs, the proposal then identified afive-step process for recovering them. Step one would be to determine theexact amount of the uneconomic assets through either a regulatoryproceeding or the utility's voluntary divestiture of the assets as a meansof determining their market value, which Anderson described as ``the lastgreat rate case or divest.''   In step two, the state commission would determine a shareholder/customersharing mechanism. First, the utility would be required to commit tomitigate costs to the ``maximum extent possible'' or the state could set a``minimum mitigation threshold'' designating a level of expectedmitigation. The nonmitigable costs would be split between the utility andcustomers based on a formula that would allow the company to recover nomore than 50% and could give even less based on the imposition of whatELCON called a ``responsibility factor.'' That factor, to be developed byeach state commission, would reflect: the portion of the utility'sportfolio of uneconomic assets that were due to management discretion andthose that were due to government mandates; the utility's mitigation of themitigable costs; and the ``quality of the utility's management at the timethe uneconomic assets were incurred.''   Essentially, an extremely well-managed and efficient utility that``aggressively opposed'' any government mandate -- e.g., New York's 6 centsavoided-cost law -- that created the uneconomic asset would get to recoverthe full 50%. Conversely, a poorly run utility that did not fight suchgovernment mandates could be denied recovery of any costs, ELCON said.   In the rest of the process, step three would involve allocation ofrecoverable costs to each customer class ``on a pro-rata basis usingcost-causation principles''; step four would be to determine a set recoveryperiod of three to five years; and step five would involve a true-upmechanism to annually re-evaluate the level of the recoverable costs.   That is an ``absolutely ludicrous way to go about things,'' Kuhncommented. And in a prepared response, EEI said the proposal ``sets up aregulatory nightmare, where utilities will be involved in proceedings foryears, arguing every point of legitimate stranded-cost recovery andrelitigating prudence, already determined by state commissions, withELCON's members.''   EEI further asserted that the road map ``suffers from the same fatalflaws'' that the trade group saw in the blueprint. ``It is an attempt toadvance ELCON's goal of imposing a one-size-fits-all `federal structure' onthe U.S. electric system which will deliver any benefits of restructuringprimarily to its members at the expense of everyone else.''   Anderson revealed ELCON's intent to issue the road map at the NationalAssn. of Regulatory Utility Commissioners' annual meeting, where he cameunder sharp criticism from state regulators for the blueprint's lack ofdetail about transition issues (IF, 20 Nov, 15). As he did at that time,Anderson last week stressed that the blueprint was a ``vision'' documentmeant to describe where the electric business should end up and was neverintended to address the transition period. The road map should ``dispel theuncertainty of not knowing'' how to get to full competition, Hughes added.   Stranded cost is just one part of the road map. Overall, it envisionsthe transition as a three-year process to end on a designated day. Halfwaythrough the transition, customers would be allowed to choose their newpower supplier.   Looking at market power, ELCON asserted that while customer choice ``isa powerful weapon, . . . there must also be full enforcement of laws andregulations to protect consumers against anticompetitive practices andantitrust violations.'' Market entry is another check on market power, so``no undue prohibitions should exist to entry in any market segment such asgeneration, grid operation, ancillary services, transmission, localdistribution, merchant or customer service,'' it said.   ELCON embraced the concept of operationally unbundling generation,transmission, distribution and merchant functions into separate corporateentities. That's the approach put forth by the Dept. of Justice in itscomments on Ferc's notice of proposed rulemaking on open-accesstransmission (RM95-8). The road map also detailed the pricing andregulation of interaffiliate transactions that would be necessary to ensuresuccess of operational unbundling. So while ELCON did not call formandatory divestiture, market pressures may bring about that result asutilities find ``it isn't worth the hassle to stay under the regulatoryreach,'' Anderson said.   But EEI countered that there is ``no need to `require' unbundling or toencourage divestiture.'' The group said its NOPR comments demonstrated that``the competitive market and the threat of competition will mitigate marketpower. The establishment of [regional transmission groups], which EEI hasbeen advocating for years, can further help mitigate market power if somefeel it still exists.''   On the issue of decontrol of generation, ELCON said that by the end ofthe transition period all generation should be removed from rate base.During the transition, and for some additional period if a fullycompetitive market still has not emerged, the generating company wouldcontinue to sell power to the affiliated or previously affiliateddistribution company under ``transition contracts at rates based onembedded costs or other state-approved rates, terms and conditions,'' itsaid.   The transition contracts also would provide for ancillary and backupservices ``to all producers and consumers who had or achieved [PublicUtility Regulatory Policies Act] qualifying status by the beginning of thetransition period.'' ELCON said repeal or reform of PURPA should not beginuntil those contracts are in place and enforceable.   That provision was panned by the PURPA Reform Group, which comprisesutilities seeking to repeal the mandatory-purchase requirement of section210. ``Although ELCON purports to support `real competition' in electricpower, it seems bent on using PURPA for every subsidy it can possiblyget,'' the group said in a statement. ``Utilities would be denied recoveryof prudently incurred costs associated with uneconomic assets committed toafter passage of the Energy Policy Act -- and yet they would be required tocontinue buying PURPA power for the indefinite future.''   Anticipating that criticism, Anderson asserted at the briefing that thedebate over repeal of section 210 is misdirected in its focus on themandatory-purchase requirement. He maintained that no new PURPA contractsare being signed at above-market costs and that the utilities' problem iswith older high-cost contracts. What is lost in the debate, Andersoncontinued, is that section 210 also requires that backup and ancillaryservices be provided to QFs. And until QFs are assured of being able toobtain those services on a competitive basis, Congress should not pull thesection 210 rug out from under them, he said.   In other sections of the road map, ELCON supported private ownership oftransmission and distribution lines, independent system operations andcoordination, and a federal/state joint board on universal services.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ISOS, CAPACITY RELEASE, ALTERNATIVE RATES HIGHLIGHT FERC'S 1996 AGENDABy:Chris Newkumet   The coming year at Ferc should be eventful indeed with the commissionplanning to make major progress on a series of initiatives spanning itsgas, electric and hydropower responsibilities. But the big enchiladaclearly is the open-access transmission rule, Chair Elizabeth Molerindicated last week, vowing that a final rule will be out sometime thisspring. And a critical element of the rule may well involve independentsystem operators, a concept that has caught the commission's attention tothe extent that it is planning a Jan. 24 public conference to furtherexplore the idea.   In an interview with Inside F.E.R.C. last Thursday, Moler also vowedthat this year will bring: guidelines for reforming power pools to ensurenondiscriminatory operation; a new merger policy that accommodates thechanging nature of the electric industry; substantial progress indeveloping alternative pipeline rate structures and guidelines forincentive rates; formalized information and business practice standards forthe pipeline sector; and possible revisions to the commission'shydropower-relicensing regulations.   What's more, Moler revealed that the commission is quickly narrowing thefield of potential changes to the capacity-release program designed to makesuch transactions ``easier and more equitable,'' with final revisionsexpected well before the end of the year. Still near the intractable end ofthe spectrum of Ferc issues, however, is capacity turnback; Moler allowedthat no one has hit upon a ready solution to the growing dilemma, with thecommission and the industry continuing to feel their way.   The highest-profile generic proceeding at the commission, theopen-access transmission notice of proposed rulemaking (RM95-8), likelywill cross the finish line ahead of all others. ``We're beginning veryserious staff work and commissioner work'' on the final rule, Moler said,characterizing the recent holiday break as the ``seventh-inning stretch''in the mega-NOPR game.   Part of that work will examine how ISOs may fit into the final rule,Moler noted, asserting that the concept has ``great potential'' in thescheme of things to come. With three major power pools telling Ferc thatthey plan to install ISOs, and the California Public Utilities Commissionincluding the concept in its restructuring plan, it was not hard for Fercto notice that ``the industry seems willing to embrace them,'' the chairsaid.   ``The issue before us now is how do we evaluate ISOs,'' Moler continued.``What are the essential elements and operating characteristics of an ISO?How do we make sure that ISOs, if they are created, are nondiscriminatory?Are ISOs necessary? Is functional unbundling enough, or do we have tomandate ISOs?'' At the public conference, ``we will benefit from someadditional dialogue on the issues as we work toward a final rule,'' shesaid.   ISOs have potential not only in tight pools, Moler continued.``Individual companies or two or three companies doing a strategic alliancecould set up an ISO,'' she suggested. What an ISO should not become is ``areincarnated pool where only the utilities can play . . . and have thepotential to discriminate in favor of their own generation.''   The commission has learned much by watching the individual staterestructuring proceedings, the chair said, emphasizing the interfacebetween the new state programs and what Ferc has in mind for the wholesalemarket. ``Individual states are beginning to make their decisions about thenature of their local distribution and the way they want their utilities tobe structured,'' Moler observed. Open access at the interstate level``clearly facilitates that . . . it is an essential prerequisite to furtherprogress at the state level.''   For instance, the CPUC ``has decided to go to direct access,'' she noted(IF, 25 Dec, 1). ``So be it, great. And in order to do that, they decidedthey need a power pool . . . [and] a power exchange. And they recognizedthe power pool and power exchange are jurisdictional to this commission. Sothere is absolutely a link between'' wholesale and retail open access.   Anything to report on the Ferc/state jurisdictional split? ``The ballnow is in our court to come out with a decision and define what we mean byinterstate transmission,'' Moler acknowledged. ``Obviously, we've been verycognizant of the states' concerns about it, but it's our turn to issue afinal rule'' and go on from there.   The rules of the game for power pools also are on Moler's mind. ``Ianticipate major work this year on reforming power pools,'' she revealed.During the recent conference on the topic (IF, 11 Dec, 1), poolrepresentatives ``all said they are reforming themselves,'' the chairrelated. Even so, Ferc will give the matter ``a lot of attention thisyear'' under the mantle of its notice of inquiry on alternativepower-pooling institutions (RM94-20). ``What do power pools have to do interms of new membership and new structures and split-savings rates in orderto be nondiscriminatory?'' she wondered. ``That's a big deal,'' and Fercwill issue new guidelines this year.   A new policy for utility mergers will be next up, Moler said, notingthat ``lots of companies seeking to merge are very anxious about what wewill do. It's very topical.'' She observed that ``some of the measures ofbenefits that we have used historically'' to judge mergers ``will not beappropriate'' in an open-access environment. For instance, in recent casesutilities have been required to provide open access as a merged entity.``Well, everybody will be open'' after the final rule is issued, ``so wehave to re-examine our merger policy.''   In the area of hydro relicensing, ``we're making slow but steadyprogress'' in working through the mountain of applications filed at the endof 1993, Moler said, noting that the commission is ``encouragingsettlements, and we have lots of settlement activity going on in severalbasins.''   Looking ahead to the next major flood of relicensing applications due atthe turn of the century, the chair seemed to agree with the NationalHydropower Assn. that Ferc's regulations could use some upgrading. Thecommission recently invited comment on NHA's petition for rulemaking (IF, 6Nov, 4), and Moler said she would ``love to be able to move the processfaster at less cost to the project sponsors. And if changing our regs isthe way to do that, I'm happy to figure out what to do.''   On the gas agenda for 1996 is reforming the capacity-release program.Asked whether it makes sense to develop strict rules that the marketroutinely evades, Moler insisted that the best approach simply is to ``makecapacity release easier to do,'' a task that she vowed to complete thisyear.   And the existing price cap clearly will be on the table. ``I'm certainlyaware that the capacity-release issue has evolved in the past year,'' andone new element involves state regulators, Moler explained. ``As more andmore states are looking at competitive markets behind the city-gate, thenature of the capacity-release program is going to change.'' One of her``personal hesitations in terms of releasing the price cap'' has revolvedaround the existence of workable competition. And ``if there are majorchanges at the state level where there is full competition behind thecity-gate, I won't be as worried about the price cap.''   Commissioner James Hoecker's idea of setting an annual revenue cap (IF,25 Dec, 1) ``is one of a variety of things we're looking at,'' said Moler,acknowledging that she is moving closer to the realization that the pricecap can be lifted under certain circumstances. ``The industry's changing,the market's changing,'' Moler reasoned.   Moler also will be targeting the relationship between capacity-releasedeals and interruptible transportation, which she characterized as out ofwhack. ``I think we should have some parallel requirements'' for capacityrelease and IT transportation, the chair suggested, asserting thatpipelines tend to ``make it really easy to do interruptible, because theymake the cash, but much more difficult to do capacity release, because theydon't.''   This dichotomy ``appears to be trivial, but it's not,'' Moler said. ``Itabsolutely tilts the playing field'' in favor of pipeline IT service. ``Idon't think we can pretend that pipelines will be indifferent'' to whethercapacity release or IT transactions are conducted on their systems, ``but Ihope to make it easier'' for shippers to release capacity.   Moler also has great hope for the commission's ongoing study ofalternative rates, maintaining that progress in this area could answerrecurring complaints about pipelines' earnings. Wall Street analysts andpipeline executives have argued time and again that rates of return onequity simply are not high enough in large part due to the discounted cashflow methodology used by the commission, but Moler sought to shift thefocus of the debate. ``My belief now is that what we really need toconcentrate on is finding mechanisms that will allow the pipelines rateflexibility, particularly as they seek to serve new markets or as theircustomers want to package things differently.'' Developing new criteria forincentive rates is another high-priority item.   ``If we can do a better job than we have to date in those two areas,''pipelines ``will have an opportunity to earn a better return. And we'reworking on that.'' While some in the industry still complain about the DCFmethodology, ``the people who have made the most impassioned pleas to merecently on this issue'' have asked for ``a way that we can be moreflexible.''   Pointing to the recourse rate plan floated by the Interstate Natural GasAssn. of America (IF, 13 Nov, 7), Moler explained that the idea is for apipeline to protect traditional, captive customers while having the rateflexibility to offer attractive terms to new customers. Ferc is ``veryseriously looking at what we can do in that area,'' the chair related. Shecautioned, however, that there are ``lots of questions about what kinds offlexibility you should give pipelines. . . . I don't want to give them rateflexibility in a way that will result in deterioration of open-accessservice.'' That having been said, ``it's difficult to figure out how to dothat,'' she admitted.   Moler predicted that within the next year or so, the ``with-it''pipelines, ``those that want to offer new services, offer new deals,'' willbe in a position to earn higher returns due to improvements in rateflexibility and incentives. This approach ``is much more promising thanspending a great deal of time looking at the DCF methodology,'' Moler said,adding that ``there is clearly more enthusiasm in the industry foralternative ratemaking approaches than there is in fiddling around with RORanalyses and the DCF methodology.''   An issue that does not elicit such optimism from Moler is capacityturnback. ``The commission and the industry seem to be feeling their way''in this area, she acknowledged, noting that none of the major players inthe debate as yet has come up with ``a solution'' to the problem. ``Thebest solution is growing the marketplace,'' she offered, while admittingthat certain markets where turnback is an acute problem, like Chicago andCalifornia, show no signs of imminent growth. ``Where markets are notgrowing, it's a very difficult issue.''   Referring to the recent order involving Natural Gas Pipeline Co. ofAmerica (IF, 16 Oct, 1), Moler noted that ``all we've been able to come upwith to date'' in terms of a potential solution ``is basically rateflexibility. That's what the Natural order stands for -- rate flexibilitybut don't zap your captive customers'' by shifting excess costs their way.She conceded ``that is not a final solution in any way, shape or form. Idon't pretend it is.'' Natural responded that Ferc ``can't possibly thinkthis is enough,'' she related. But the pipeline and its customers arebusily pursuing a settlement, she said, suggesting that the longgive-and-take process may be the only way out for pipelines like Naturaland El Paso Natural Gas Co.   And it could get worse, Moler allowed. Would the commission stand by andwatch a pipeline suffer severe financial hardship, even bankruptcy, due toturnback costs? ``I certainly hope'' that doesn't happen. ``Anybody in thisposition would hope not. But it could happen.''   Ferc is feeling some financial pressure of its own these days, due tobudget authorization that orders a 20% reduction in oil-and-gas staff overthe next two years (IF, 20 Nov, 4), and Moler is none too pleased. ``I'mnot happy,'' she said of the budget cut. ``We went in with a voluntary andvery significant cut, and they cut us even further. No manager . . . wouldbe happy in those circumstances.'' But ``it's a fact of life'' now, and``the fact that they gave us two years'' to make the cuts ``certainly makesit easier to deal with.'' Through attrition and transfer of staff to theelectric program, Moler is hoping that ``we don't have to lay too manypeople off'' as a result of the budget directive.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   COMMENT DEADLINE EXTENDEDFerc is beginning to feel the impact of the partial shutdown of the federalgovernment. Noting that a number of agencies closed due to the budgetimpasse were unable to file comments on the draft environmental impactstatement (IF, 20 Nov, 13) for the open-access notice of proposedrulemaking (RM95-8), the commission last week lifted the comment deadline.``In order to accommodate this unusual circumstance, notice is hereby giventhat an extension of time for the filing of comments by all parties on theDEIS is granted for a reasonable period after the agencies have reopened.''The comments had been due today (Monday); a new deadline will be set in afuture notice, Ferc said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NAME CHANGEPanhandle Eastern Corp. has decided to change its name to PanEnergy Corp.to reflect its expanding role in the energy industry and commitment toprovide all forms of energy. The board of directors has approved the use ofthe name, and the company will seek stockholder approval at its 1996 annualmeeting. The company's pipeline subsidiaries will continue to operate asAlgonquin Gas Transmission Co., Texas Eastern Transmission Corp., PanhandleEastern Pipe Line Co., Trunkline Gas Co., Trunkline LNG Co. and TexasEastern Products Pipeline Co. The PanEnergy name and logo will replace theAssociated name currently used for some subsidiaries. The company's majornonpipeline subsidiaries will operate under the following new names:PanEnergy Services Inc.; PanEnergy Field Services Inc.; PanEnergy Tradingand Market Services Inc.; PanEnergy Gas Services Inc.; PanEnergy PowerServices Inc.; PanEnergy Risk Management Services Inc.; PanEnergy Transport& Trading Co.; PanEnergy LNG Sales Inc.; PanEnergy Services UK Ltd.; andPanEnergy International Development Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EQUITRANS AGREED TO BE PLACED AT RISK FOR ITS STORAGE EXPERIMENT involvingEQUITRANS AGREED TO BE PLACED AT RISK FOR ITS STORAGE EXPERIMENT involvingthe injection of nitrogen to replace a certain amount of base gas at itsShirley reservoir in West Virginia. Equitrans Inc. ``believes that thisproject is important both for itself and for the industry and is willing toassume the risks of the project to see it move forward,'' the pipeline saidin a Dec. 29 amendment to its application (CP95-565).   One of the contested elements of Equitrans' certificate request was acondition that if the project fails, the pipeline will be guaranteedrecovery of the net book value of the facility, along with a return on itsinvestment (IF, 31 July, 15). After another look at the risks and remediesin case the nitrogen mixes with other gas to damage the facility, Equitranssaid it would bear all costs associated with such an event.   However, the likelihood of that occurring is less than 1%, according toEquitrans. Under a worst-case scenario, Equitrans said costs to restore thestorage field to normal operations would amount to $1.7 million. It addedthat it would use the revenue generated from the sale of the withdrawn basegas to fund the restoration efforts.   Furthermore, Equitrans assured customers that the terms of all existingstorage contracts would be met regardless of any adverse effects resultingfrom the project. ``This commitment is being made in order to render mootthe security-of-supply concerns'' expressed by customers and to limit thenumber of issues to be addressed by Ferc, Equitrans said.   The pipeline also specified how much base gas it intends to replace withnitrogen. Although it plans to inject 300,000 Mcf of nitrogen, Equitransproposed to withdraw up to 400,000 Mcf of base gas to allow the pressurewithin the reservoir to push the nitrogen away from working-gas parts ofthe facility. The net reduction in base gas ``will ultimately reduceEquitrans' storage rate base to the benefit of customers, while havingvirtually no impact on storage operations,'' the pipeline said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   AVOCA'S CERTIFICATE AMENDMENTS WERE APPROVED WITH ONLY A FEW adjustments,AVOCA'S CERTIFICATE AMENDMENTS WERE APPROVED WITH ONLY A FEW adjustments,most of which involve environmental conditions. Sponsors of Avoca NaturalGas Storage sought four changes in its certificate to operate the facility,including installing a header that would allow connections with twopipelines in addition to its approved link with Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.(IF, 23 Oct, 15).   Ferc's Dec. 29 order (CP94-161) approved the header, designed toaccommodate connections with CNG Transmission Corp. and National Fuel GasSupply Corp., along with the other three amendments.   The commission dismissed the concerns of Rochester Gas & Electric Corp.,which has unused storage and transportation capacity on CNG Transmissionand argued that a connection is not needed because of its unsubscribedcapacity. The commission said it is not approving an interconnect yet, butis simply allowing the installation of the header. ``Rochester Gas shouldintervene and raise its concerns when an application is filed to constructthe interconnect between Avoca and CNG,'' Ferc suggested.   The order approved the use of electric compressor motors rather than thegas-fired engines originally planned, noting the reduced emission and noiselevels. Ferc also found no problems with Avoca's switch to six cavernsinstead of five, since there will be no change in the working-gas capacityof 5 Bcf. Lastly, the commission approved Avoca's request to take waterdirectly from the Cohocton River to supplement its withdrawals of waterfrom the storage caverns.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   PLEASE LET US FINISH CONSTRUCTING OUR FACILITIES, EGAN TOLD FERC in anPLEASE LET US FINISH CONSTRUCTING OUR FACILITIES, EGAN TOLD FERC in anemergency motion for clarification. Egan Hub Partners L.P. was in themiddle of construction under Ferc's prior-notice procedures when thecommission issued its order asserting jurisdiction over Egan's operations,it explained in a motion (CP96-21) late last month.   Although its storage facilities in Louisiana have been operating sincesummer, Egan filed a prior-notice request in October to build 6.7 miles of24-inch pipeline and related equipment to connect with Columbia GulfTransmission Co. The notice said that Egan would operate the facilitiesunder section 311 of the Natural Gas Policy Act, and construction began onDec. 4, Egan related.   Then Ferc issued its order (PR95-11) finding Egan's interstate storagefacilities subject to its jurisdiction under the Natural Gas Act anddirecting Egan to seek NGA section 7 authority (IF, 18 Dec, 1). Egan haltedconstruction in order to seek clarification of Ferc's ruling.   Even though Ferc said it should continue storage service using its ratesin effect, Egan asked Ferc to interpret the order to allow the section 311construction to continue. ``Egan believes that the order was not intendedto penalize Egan or its customers for those actions initiated prior toissuance of the order,'' it said. ``Justice requires either clarificationor a stay in order to allow Egan to complete construction of thefacilities,'' the company asserted. No environmental benefit would begained by delaying the construction, it added.   And Ferc recently stayed its decision asserting jurisdiction overpipeline systems run by Kansas Pipeline Operating Co. (IF, 18 Dec, 2) toavoid potential hardship and inequity, Egan said in claiming that itssituation is almost identical to that of the Midwest pipeline systems.   If Ferc does not grant the relief, ``customers will not receive theservice they expected during the winter heating season,'' Egan said,enclosing affidavits from three customers that signed up for servicethrough the Columbia Gulf interconnect. With prompt approval from Ferc,Egan said it could complete the facilities and initiate service for thecustomers by Feb. 1.   ``Without the requested authority, Egan, and ultimately its customers,will incur additional and unnecessary costs,'' it said. Egan noted that itis currently paying standby costs for contractors and equipment totalingalmost $17,000/day -- ``an amount which is significant for a company ofEgan's size.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SHIPPERS CAN CHOOSE TO PAY KOCH GATEWAY DIRECTLY FOR FUEL USED to transportSHIPPERS CAN CHOOSE TO PAY KOCH GATEWAY DIRECTLY FOR FUEL USED to transporttheir gas now that the commission has approved the pipeline'scash-reimbursement plan. Koch Gateway Pipeline Co. had offered to allowcustomers to select the cash-reimbursement option once it posts a price forsuch deals on its electronic bulletin board (IF, 11 Dec, 13), and thecommission late last month turned thumbs up on the proposal.   In a Dec. 28 decision (RP96-58), Ferc dismissed arguments that the saleof fuel gas should be made by a separate arm of the pipeline and complywith the commission's affiliate standards. Noting that it has approvedsimilar tariffs for other pipelines, Ferc reasoned that thecash-reimbursement option is analogous to imbalance cash-out programs. Thecommission said Koch Gateway's plan ``is not a marketing service, but is anextension of its transportation service, and it is not necessary for thesale to be made by Koch Gateway's marketing affiliate.''   Once a customer selects cash reimbursement, Koch Gateway will offer thesame deal to similarly situated shippers while retaining the right to denyrequests, according to the order. Rejecting protests that the tariffprovides Koch Gateway too much discretion in who would qualify for cashreimbursement, Ferc said the pipeline needs some operational flexibilityfor situations when it needs to have the fuel in-kind. ``We find that theterms of the tariff and the commission's regulations afford customersadequate protection against arbitrary action by Koch Gateway,'' Ferc said.   Shippers will still have the option of reimbursing Koch Gateway bysupplying gas in-kind, the commission noted. It accepted the change with aneffective date of Jan. 1.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   AFTER FIVE MONTHS OF ACTIVE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE EL PASO RATE CASE, ``thereAFTER FIVE MONTHS OF ACTIVE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE EL PASO RATE CASE, ``therejust does not appear to be present the necessary give and take, at least atthis point,'' to produce a settlement anytime soon, the commission's headadministrative law judge commented late last month in appointing an ALJ tocommence a formal hearing.   While rejecting El Paso Natural Gas Co.'s proposed exit fee to recovercosts of turned-back capacity last summer, the commission directed partiesto pursue a settlement of other elements of the rate case (RP95-363),setting a Dec. 31 deadline. Parties recently offered differing views on theprogress of those negotiations (IF, 18 Dec, 7), and Chief ALJ Curtis WagnerJr. apparently agreed with the darker view held by Southern CaliforniaEdison Co., which earlier last month called on the commission to appoint ahearing judge.   The parties ``have now had some five months of active negotiations,including unprecedented conferences before a settlement judge'' both in andoutside Washington, said the scheduling order. ``With the number ofconferences that have been held and the enormous effort that has been putforth, everything that could have been said by the parties has been saidmany times and everyone's desires have been fully considered,'' Wagnerobserved. Even so, ``it does not now appear that a unanimous settlement oreven a unanimous partial settlement is possible.''   Accordingly, the case should go to hearing ``on an expedited basis''under the hand of ALJ Joseph Nacy. The order directs Nacy to issue aninitial decision within 18 months.   And while ALJ David Harfeld was relieved of his duties as settlementjudge, ``there is no reason the parties cannot continue to meet amongthemselves to try to work out their differences and dispose of this ratherdifficult case through an agreed-upon settlement,'' Wagner observed. Infact, the parties are scheduled to meet again in Washington Jan. 10-11.   Separately, El Paso on Dec. 28 filed to place into effect as of Jan. 1 amodified version of the June 30 rates accepted and suspended by thecommission last summer.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ANR IS DOUBLE-CHARGING FOR SERVICE TO A PLANT IN OKLAHOMA, Amoco ProductionANR IS DOUBLE-CHARGING FOR SERVICE TO A PLANT IN OKLAHOMA, Amoco ProductionCo. asserted late last month. Based on the pipeline's misclassification ofits own facilities behind the Mooreland processing plant, ANR Pipeline Co.is collecting both transportation and gathering charges, Amoco told thecommission.   In its complaint (RP96-92), the producer asked Ferc to classify ANR'sfacilities behind the plant as gathering and make the pipeline refundtransportation charges previously collected on plant fuel and shrinkagevolumes. ANR operates several compressor stations in the area, with someattached to its transportation system and others connected to gatheringlines, Amoco related. ANR operates its Mooreland station, however, as botha transportation and gathering facility, according to Amoco.   The pipeline's intent is to create a way to charge both gathering andtransportation fees for gathering service, Amoco asserted. After applyingFerc's modified primary-function test to ANR's Mooreland-area system, Amocosaid ``none of ANR's behind-the-plant facilities performs a transportationservice with respect to field production delivered to the inlet of theMooreland plant and are therefore improperly classified as transmissionfacilities.''   As operator of the Mooreland processing plant, Amoco explained that itusually provides plant fuel and shrinkage volumes by sourcing gas upstreamof the plant. But ``ANR's classification of behind-the-plant facilities hasinhibited Amoco's ability to obtain upstream gas supplies because ANRbundles together transportation and gathering rates on such gas,'' Amocosaid. So when ANR charges the Mooreland plant owners for downstreamtransportation, it receives double charges on volumes of gas equivalent tofuel and shrinkage, Amoco asserted.   The producer noted that Ferc ordered Williams Natural Gas Co. to stopcharging both gathering and transportation rates on fuel and shrinkagevolumes in a similar case. The ANR proceeding deserves the same treatment,Amoco said, asserting that Ferc should order refunds, with interest, on allimproper transportation charges collected since ANR unbundled its gatheringand transportation rates.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FERC WILL DETERMINE RATE TREATMENT FOR NORTHERN BORDER'S proposedFERC WILL DETERMINE RATE TREATMENT FOR NORTHERN BORDER'S proposedexpansion/extension project in the pending certificate proceeding, it madeclear in a Dec. 29 rate order. Northern Border Pipeline Co. had filed proforma tariffs showing a change in its depreciation rate schedule that itemphasized would be made only if the project is built.   Competitor Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of America had urged the commissionto reject the pro forma sheets (IF, 4 Dec, 15). But Ferc said it considersthe tariff sheets ``to have been provided for demonstration purposes only''and neither accepted nor rejected them.   The commission suspended the rate filing (RP96-45) until June 1 and saida number of issues raised by shippers -- including Northern Border'sexisting depreciation rates -- can be thrashed out in a hearing. But itrejected up front two changes sought by Northern Border.   First, Ferc said Northern Border can't drop its minimum revenue creditfor interruptible transportation. Under the pipeline's cost-of-servicetariff, firm shippers pay all of its costs and receive credits forinterruptible transportation. The minimum credit was put in place whenNorthern Border began open-access transportation because the pipeline coulddiscount IT without bearing any economic consequences itself.   ``This reasoning is equally applicable today and will remain so for aslong as Northern Border maintains this form of tariff,'' the commissionsaid, adding that the cost-of-service tariff ``gives Northern Borderadvantages which other pipelines do not enjoy, their [straightfixed-variable] rate design notwithstanding.'' Since other pipelines baserates on projected costs and billing determinants, they face underrecoveryof their cost of service when they discount, the order noted.   Second, Northern Border asked to eliminate a tariff requirement for atriennial review of its equity rate of return. Again, though, Ferc citedNorthern Border's unusual cost-of-service rate structure. The three-yearreview requirement has applied since the pipeline was built and ``wasconsidered an essential part of the regulatory bargain that was originallyaccepted by Northern Border and still prevails,'' the order said. NorthernBorder ``has not presented a basis for a departure'' from the policy, itadded.   On another point, Ferc set for hearing Northern Border's request toraise its allowance for charitable donations from $20,000 to $100,000.Commissioner James Hoecker dissented on that issue, as he has in other ratecases, saying he would ``summarily find that charitable contributionsshould not be included in rates'' but nevertheless hopes Northern Border``would continue charitable giving regardless of the rate treatmentpermitted such costs.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-17IA059-000325-B005-133http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey66.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232654 text/html 9852HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:24:59 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:11 GMTContent-length: 9666Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey66.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SPECIAL REP SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SPECIAL REPORT (196 words) PRICES OF SPOT GAS DELIVERED TO PIPELINES, JANUARY 1 (415 words) CITY-GATE PRICES IN EFFECT JANUARY 1 IN SELECTED GAS MARKETS (266 words) DELIVERED SPOT-GAS PRICES (55 words) HENRY HUB (13 words) WAHA/WEST TEXAS (12 words) CORRECTION RANGE OF REPORTED SPOT PRICES (DEC. 1, 1995, ISSUE) (40 words) CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPSPECIAL REPORTIf you had gas to sell in Louisiana for Jan. 1, 1996 likely is shaping upto be a pretty good year. Jan. 1 index prices in Louisiana -- with a fewexceptions -- posted gains of $1.01 to $1.24/MMBtu over Dec. 1 indexlevels. The exceptions were for Louisiana deliveries into Koch GatewayPipeline Co. (up 40 cents/MMBtu), Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of America (down2 cents/MMBtu) and Texas Eastern Transmission Corp. in West Louisiana (up63 cents/MMBtu).Sellers in Appalachia also found significantly higher index prices for Jan.1 over Dec. 1: CNG Transmission Corp. was up $1.27/MMBtu and Columbia GasTransmission Corp., $1.20/MMBtu. Index prices on Mid-Continent pipelinesrose too (9 cents to 15 cents/MMBtu) but not by anywhere near as much.   Indexes for pipelines in Texas, where longhaul capacity was limited,ranged from minus 6 cents/MMBtu on Texas Eastern in East Texas to plus 8cents/MMBtu in Florida Gas Transmission Co.'s zone 1. Indexes in theRockies were down 4 cents to 6 cents/MMBtu from Dec. 1. Permian Basinindexes were up 15 cents and 18 cents/MMBtu, and the San Juan Basin indexrose a nickel.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPPRICES OF SPOT GAS DELIVERED TO PIPELINES, JANUARY 1     PRICES OF SPOT GAS DELIVERED TO PIPELINES, JANUARY 1                        (per MMBtu dry)                                Range           IndexANR Pipeline Co.Louisiana$2.80 to $3.45  $3.25Oklahoma$1.90 to $2.10  $2.02CNG Transmission Corp.Appalachia$2.80 to $4.25  $3.80Colorado Interstate Gas Co.Rocky Mountains                 $1.12 to $1.31  $1.26Columbia Gas Transmission Corp.Appalachia (W.Va., Ohio, Ky.)   $2.86 to $4.20  $3.70Columbia Gulf Transmission Co.Louisiana$2.76 to $3.65  $3.35El Paso Natural Gas Co.Permian Basin                   $1.78 to $2.17  $1.92San Juan Basin                  $1.30 to $1.43  $1.39Florida Gas Transmission Co.Zone 1                          $2.02 to $2.35  $2.18Zone 2                          $3.23 to $3.58  $3.40Zone 3                          $2.94 to $3.55  $3.37Kern River Gas Transmission Co.Wyoming$1.21 to $1.32  $1.27Koch Gateway Pipeline Co. (formerly United)Louisiana$2.20 to $3.38  $2.52Texas$1.85 to $2.22  $2.06Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of AmericaOklahoma$1.90 to $2.15  $2.00Louisiana$1.95 to $2.40  $2.13Texas (Gulf Coast Line)         $1.92 to $2.20  $2.05NorAm Gas Transmission Co. (formerly Arkla)East$2.00 to $2.20  $2.09West$1.92 to $2.08  $2.01Northern Natural Gas Co.Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas         $1.87 to $2.10  $1.93Demarcation$1.95 to $2.15  $2.05Ventura, Iowa                   $1.93 to $2.10  $2.00                                Range           IndexNorthwest Pipeline Corp.Rocky Mountains                 $1.19 to $1.44  $1.25Canadian border                 $1.16 to $1.30  $1.24ONG Transmission Co.Oklahoma$1.91 to $2.12  $2.02Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co.Texas, Oklahoma (mainline)      $1.91 to $2.10  $2.00Questar Pipeline Co.Rocky Mountains                 $1.20 to $1.30  $1.26Southern Natural Gas Co.Louisiana$2.80 to $3.48  $3.38Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.La. & Offshore (zone 1)         $2.80 to $3.52  $3.25Texas (zone 0)                  $1.98 to $2.25  $2.11Texas Eastern Transmission Corp.East Louisiana zone             $2.94 to $3.84  $3.50West Louisiana zone             $2.05 to $3.51  $2.85East Texas zone                 $2.00 to $2.13  $2.05South Texas zone                $1.90 to $2.60  $2.10Texas Gas Transmission Corp.Zone 1                          $3.02 to $3.55  $3.32Zone SL                         $3.01 to $3.59  $3.35Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp.Zone 1 (pooling point)          $1.89 to $2.33  $2.15Zone 2 (pooling point)          $3.15 to $3.50  $3.29Zone 3 (pooling points)         $2.86 to $3.70  $3.38Mississippi, Alabama            $3.18 to $3.60  $3.44Transwestern Pipeline Co.Permian Basin                   $1.84 to $2.14  $1.89Trunkline Gas Co.Field zone (Texas, Louisiana)   $1.90 to $3.47  $3.15Louisiana$2.90 to $3.47  $3.20Texas$1.90 to $2.25  $2.05Valero Transmission L.P.Texas$1.87 to $2.18  $2.04Williams Natural Gas Co.Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas         $1.88 to $2.12  $2.03Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPCITY-GATE PRICES IN EFFECT JANUARY 1 IN SELECTED GAS MARKETS        CITY-GATE PRICES IN EFFECT JANUARY 1 IN SELECTED GAS MARKETS                                (per MMBtu dry)NEW YORK/NEW JERSEYRange of reported spot prices                   $2.78 to $3.77NEW ENGLANDRange of reported spot prices                   $3.27 to $3.59WESTERN PENNSYLVANIALocal production                                $4.25 to $4.34Range of reported spot prices                   $2.30 to $4.96NORTHEAST OHIOLocal production                                $2.89 to $4.96Range of reported spot prices                   N.A. to N.A.SOUTHERN MICHIGANRange of reported spot prices to utilities      $3.25 to $3.95Range of reported spot prices to other buyers   $2.98 to $3.75NORTHERN ILLINOIS/NORTHERN INDIANARange of reported spot prices to utilities      $2.95 to $3.35Range of reported spot prices to other buyers   $2.95 to $3.55WISCONSINRange of reported spot prices                   $3.45 to $3.59MINNESOTARange of reported spot prices                   $2.04 to $2.16WESTERN TENNESSEERange of reported spot prices                   N.A. to N.A.PACIFIC NORTHWESTRange of reported spot prices                   $1.23 to $1.35CALIFORNIARange of reported spot prices*                  $1.36 to $1.59Malin, Ore., (PG&E Line 400)                    $1.36 to $1.43Other PG&E points (non-Malin)                   $1.45 to $1.59Southern California Gas Co.                     $1.43 to $1.54METHODOLOGY: This table represents prices paid for spot gas delivered atdistributors' city-gates on the first day of the month. Except where noted,the prices are those paid for spot gas by utilities. In California, therange is for prices paid by both utilities and other buyers. In NorthernIllinois/Northern Indiana and Southern Michigan, the ``other buyers''designation represents prices paid by large and midsized end-users andmarketers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPDELIVERED SPOT-GAS PRICES                        DELIVERED SPOT-GAS PRICES                                January 1996                                 (per MMBtu)Houston Ship Channel/Beaumont, Texaslarge packages (at least 3,500 Mcf/day)         $2.04 to $2.28index (large packages only)                              $2.17small packages (less than 3,500 Mcf/day)        $2.02 to $2.17Louisiana/Mississippi River Corridorpackages of at least 2,000 Mcf/day              $3.40 to $3.55index$3.47Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPHENRY HUB    Henry Hub    Cash Price/Jan. 1, 1996$3.42/MMBtuCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPWAHA/WEST TEXAS    Waha/West Texas    Cash Price/Jan. 1$1.95/MMBtuCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPRANGE OF REPORTED SPOT PRICES (DEC. 1, 1995, ISSUE)The ``Range of reported spot prices'' for California published in the Dec.1, 1995, issue did not reflect the full range of the individual Californialine items. The correct range is $1.39 to $1.73.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-18IA059-000325-B005-214http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey71.html 205.156.212.5 19970114232823 text/html 71144HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:25:37 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:15 GMTContent-length: 70957Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey71.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNet January 8, 1996 Vol. 18, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SALP HISTORY REPORT (497 words) INDUSTRY CBLA SAVINGS NEAR $600-MILLION MARK THROUGH MID-DECEMBER (508 words) NRC APPROVES INDUSTRY GUIDELINE FOR MANAGING COMMITMENTS (262 words) NRC ORDER BARRING MAINE YANKEE RESTART COULD BE CLEARED THIS MONTH (810 words) WHISTLE-BLOWERS SAY AGENCY SHOULD SUSPEND PLANT OPERATING LICENSES (664 words) FOUR UTILITIES EXPECT SAVINGS FROM JOINT STANDARD TECH SPEC SUBMITTAL (606 words) DUKE POWER (250 words) NRC, FEMA, INDUSTRY WORKING TO DEVELOP MORE REALISTIC EP DRILLS (581 words) WORLD REGULATORS AGREE MORE WORK NEEDED TO LEAVE CIRC CRACKS IN PLACE (1233 words) GOOD MARKS FOR BEZNAU-1 AND -2 IN INTERNATIONAL ASSESSMENT (294 words) NEI WILL CONTINUE TO PUSH IN '96 FOR THERMO-LAG WAIVERS UNTIL NEW RULE (645 words) CRITICS FEAR ANOTHER `BROWNS FERRY' AS NRC OKAYS COMBUSTIBLE FIRE STOPS (1280 words) DICUS TO ASSUME DUTIES AS COMMISSIONER IN FEBRUARY, RESTORING QUORUM (960 words) NRC LAST MONTH TURNED DOWN A SUBMITTAL (157 words) SALP REPORTS . . . NRC NOTES IMPROVEMENTS, PERSISTENT PERSONNEL ERRORS AT FITZPATRICK (145 words) NRC FINDS `SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT' IN OPERATIONS AT COMANCHE PEAK (214 words) NRC FOUND CONTINUED STRONG PERFORMANCE (159 words) BRIEFLY . . . COOPER COMPLETES OUTAGE 22 DAYS LATE (264 words) THREE UTILITIES SLAPPED WITH $50,000 FINES (230 words) CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoSALP HISTORY REPORTNote: NRC's SALP program was revised July 14, 1993 (NRC Management directive 8.6). NRC says that ``the final rating for each functional areawill be a composite rating of the performance based on a knowledgeablebalancing of the issues in a functional area and their safety significance.Statistical or numerical balancing of data is inappropriate.'' With thisrevision NRC has reduced the number of functional areas to four: plantoperations, maintenance, engineering, and plant support. This last areaincludes activities such as radiological controls, emergency preparedness,security, chemistry, and fire protection.FOOTNOTES:RPT - date report issuedASSMT. PERIOD - assessment periodOPS - plant operationsRCON - radiological controlsMNT/SURV - maintenance, surveillanceEP - emergency preparednessSEC - securityENG/TS - engineering/technical supportSA - safety assessment/quality verificationPLSP - plant supportN - not ratedCategory 1--Licensee attention and involvement have been properly focusedon safety and resulted in a superior level of safety performance. Licenseeprograms and procedures have provided effective controls. The licensee'sself-assessment efforts have been effective in the identification ofemergent issues. Corrective actions are technically sound, comprehensive,and thorough. Recurring problems are eliminated and resolution of issues istimely. Root cause analyses are thorough.Category 2--Licensee attention and involvement are normally well focusedand resulted in a good level of safety performance. Licensee programs andprocedures normally provide the necessary control of activities, butdeficiencies may exist. The licensee's self-assessments are normally good,although issues may escape identification. Corrective actions are usuallyeffective, although some may not be complete. Root cause analyses arenormally thorough.Category 3--Licensee attention and involvement have resulted in anacceptable level of safety performance. However, licensee performance mayexhibit one or more of the following characteristics. Licensee programs andprocedures have not provided sufficient control of activities in importantareas. The licensee's self-assessment efforts may not occur until after apotential problem becomes apparent. A clear understanding of the safetyimplications of significant issues may not have been demonstrated. Numerousminor issues combine to indicate that the licensee's corrective action isnot thorough. Root cause analyses do not probe enough, resulting in theincomplete resolution of issues. Because the margin to unacceptableperformance in important aspects is small, increased NRC and licenseeattention is required.Category N--Insufficient information exists to support an assessment oflicensee performance. These cases include instances in which a ratingcannot be developed because of insufficient licensee activity orinsufficient NRC inspection. The category is normally used for constructionphase reactors only.SALP HISTORY REPORTREGION: IPLANT NAME: FitzPatrick        RPT     ASSMT. PERIOD   OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        5/94    4/93-4/94       2       2       2       2                                OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        12/95   4/94-11/95      2       2       2       2REGION: IVPLANT NAME: Comanche Peak        RPT     ASSMT. PERIOD   OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        6/94    5/93-5/94       2       2       1       1                                OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        12/95   5/94-11/95      1       1       2       1Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoINDUSTRY CBLA SAVINGS NEAR $600-MILLION MARK THROUGH MID-DECEMBERBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   The nuclear utility industry estimates total savings of $590-million inaverted costs from NRC's cost-beneficial licensing action (CBLA) programthrough mid-December, 1995.   Industry interest in the agency's CBLA program was about the same in1995 as during the previous year, with utilities submitting 116 CBLArequests through December 14, 1995 compared with 123 requests in 1994,according to NRC's semi-annual report on the program. But industryestimates of the savings gained through licensing actions approved by theNRC dropped significantly from the previous year.   In 1995, NRC approved 115 CBLA requests for a total estimated savings of$235-million. During 1994, the agency approved 52 CBLA requests, totalling$335-million in expected savings over the remaining operating lifetimes ofthe affected nuclear power plants. In 1993, the first year of the program,utilities projected $20-million in savings from 33 approved CBLA requests.   The declining value of the estimated savings ``likely reflects [thefact] that the licensees initially submitted CBLA requests with thegreatest value,'' Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation (NRR) DirectorWilliam Russell said in a December 28, 1995 memorandum to ExecutiveDirector for Operations James Taylor. Russell suggested that futureamendment requests will continue to show declining savings.   However, Russell said that the economic impact of the CBLA program isdifficult to assess because utilities are ``not very specific'' with theircost savings information. He cautioned that the industry's projected$590-million total lifetime savings are based on conservative estimates byutilities and could actually reflect higher savings.   ``We believe that the combined lifetime industry savings is a veryconservative estimate because some licensees have not provided totalestimated savings but rather have simply indicated that savings realizedfrom the CBLA would exceed the $100,000 criteria,'' he said. ``Foruniformity, cost data submitted by licensees are presented as savings overthe remainder of the 40-year plant design life.''   The CBLA program, which has been institutionalized in NRR, grew out of atask force established in April 1993 as part of an NRC effort to helpnuclear utilities control operations and maintenance costs. The CBLA taskforce was one of several groups established within the agency to work onstreamlining the regulatory process and reducing regulatory burdens onindustry.   Two years ago, the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI) forecast thatutilities would submit 400 CBLA requests a year during 1994 and 1995--farmore than have actually been submitted. Of the 272 CBLA requests submittedby utilities so far, the NRC has approved 173 and denied 11. Utilitieswithdrew three requests, and 85 submittals are still under review.   During the six-month period ending December 14, the NRC denied one CBLArequest, a submittal by Northeast Nuclear Energy Co. for Millstone-1. Theutility had requested a revised exemption from Appendix R to eliminatereliance on maronite boards as radiant heat shields in the cable vaultarea. The NRC decided that the proposal would not provide an ``equivalentlevel of fire safety to that required by Section III.G of Appendix R,'' thememorandum said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC APPROVES INDUSTRY GUIDELINE FOR MANAGING COMMITMENTSBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   Executive Director for Operations James Taylor signed a Secy informationpaper December 20, approving a commitment management program developed bythe Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI).   Secy 95-300, a Secy paper that does not require commission action,finalizes the agency's approval of NEI's guidance for managing NRCcommitments, said Gene Imbro, head of the Office of Nuclear ReactorRegulation (NRR) regulatory review group and cost-beneficial licensingaction (CBLA) program. The Secy paper caps more than 20 months of jointindustry-NRC work to develop a way to help utilities manage the thousandsof commitments on the books and eliminate those no longer deemedsignificant to safe plant operation.   About half of the industry is already using the guidance, and they aresaving money, according to Stephen Floyd, NEI manager of special projects,who developed the guidance document. Floyd said that some utilities haveestimated ``a couple million dollars already in direct savings,'' whileothers have projected several million dollars in soft savings (INRC, 13Nov. '95, 1).   Imbro said the commission paper contains a letter that the agency plansto send to NEI endorsing the use of the industry commitment managementguideline. NEI intends to send a copy of the letter to all nuclearutilities, along with the guidance document.   The average nuclear power plant has between 8,000 and 10,000 commitmentsper unit. Currently, there is no uniform method used by utilities fordetermining how to change or drop commitments, NRC staffers noted. Adoptionof the NEI guidance document would be entirely voluntary.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC ORDER BARRING MAINE YANKEE RESTART COULD BE CLEARED THIS MONTHBy:David Stellfox, Washington   A restart of Maine Yankee Atomic Power Co.'s Maine Yankee could stillcome this month, plant officials say, despite an NRC order January 3barring restart of the unit.   Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation Director William Russell issued theorder blocking Maine Yankee from restarting until it has satisfied certainconcerns about the safety analyses for the plant's emergency core coolingsystem (ECCS) and containment.   Once documentation is submitted to NRC addressing those initialconcerns, Maine Yankee will be allowed to start up. However, operation willbe restricted to 2,440-MW thermal, about a 10% derating, while NRC isreviewing the material provided and until a new safety analysis for theECCS and containment is provided for operating at higher thermal powerlevels.   The plant's originally licensed thermal power is 2,440-MW thermal, butNRC had granted it two power uprates in the 1980s. The unit was lastoperating at 2,700-MW thermal.   Maine Yankee spokesman Marshall Murphy said January 4 he expected theplant would restart in ``the January time frame.''   A planned restart in late December--after a one year outage to repairsteam generators--was derailed when an anonymous allegation was made thatthe plant's safety analyses for ECCS and containment design were faulty(INRC, 25 Dec. '95, 1).   In its January 3 order, NRC said that it approved the use of the YankeeAtomic Electric Co. (YAEC) version of a computer code, Relap5-YA, foranalyzing Maine Yankee's ECCS in 1989, but with ``twelve conditions,including specifications for future plant specific licensing submittals,justifying options taken and sensitivity studies performed.''   NRC never followed up on the demands for information until after theallegation was made December 4, 1995 and it found ``(t)his licensee has notprovided the justifications or submittals specified....''   At a December 18 meeting at NRC, YAEC President Andrew Kadak said thatthe material was held on site because, although the staff's safetyevaluation report called for submittals, a related NRC letter at the timespoke of NRC audits. However, Maine Yankee spokesman Murphy could notconfirm that last week. Murphy said plant officials were still reviewingthe entire order, including ``taking a look at that language.''   NRC noted that its order addresses only future operation and does notaddress allegations related to violations of NRC requirements in the past,including allegations of wrongdoing, which will be dealt with separately.   According to the order, Maine Yankee must supply the following materialprior to restart:   -- A description of evaluations that have been completed that providejustification for the use of the current cycle's operating limits, asestablished in the Cycle 15 Core Operating Limits Report, using methodsapproved for Maine Yankee and without reliance on the Relap5-YA computercode for small break loss-of-coolant accidents (SBLOCA) analysis andassuming a reactor thermal rating of 2,440 MWt. Details related to analysesperformed, significant assumptions, and conclusions drawn shall beprovided.   -- A description of all other applications where Relap5-YA is relied onfor Cycle 15 operation identifying the details of the application, andconclusions drawn with respect to any facility modifications or procedurechanges. For each application, document the determination that operability,as defined in Maine Yankee Technical Specifications, of affectedstructures, systems and components is maintained. For plant proceduresrequired by Maine Yankee Technical Specifications that rely on Relap5-YAanalysis for operator action, document the determination as to why theaffected operator action continues to be appropriate or, if necessary,evaluate the affected procedures in accordance with 10 CFR Section 50.59and provide a summary of that evaluation. If any procedures are changed,confirm that appropriate training has been provided.   -- A description of measures taken to limit reactor operation to amaximum thermal power of 2,440 MWt (90.37% of 2,700 MWt).   -- A description of measures taken to limit containment internaloperating pressure to a maximum of 2 psig.   Also, according to the order, Maine Yankee has 30 days to supply thefollowing information:   -- A SBLOCA analysis that is specific to Maine Yankee for operation atpower levels up to 2,700 MWt. The analysis must meet the requirements of 10CFR Section 50.46, ``Acceptance criteria for emergency core cooling systemsfor light water nuclear power reactors,'' and NUREG-0737, ``Clarificationof TMI Action Plan Requirements,'' Items II.K.3.30 and 31, ``SBLOCAMethods'' and ``Plant-specific Analysis,'' respectively, and NUREG-0737,Item II.K.3.5, ``Automatic Trip of Reactor Coolant Pumps During LOCA.''   -- An integrated containment analysis, accounting for relevant changesto the facility (e.g., spray system changes, power uprates, and containmentmaximum temperature and pressure changes), during a design basis accident(DBA) that demonstrates the maximum calculated DBA containment pressuremeets the design basis pressure for Maine Yankee (55 psig). Assumptionsused for these analyses that are different from those specified inNureg-0800, the NRC Standard Review Plan, Section 6.2.1.1.A, shall bedescribed.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoWHISTLE-BLOWERS SAY AGENCY SHOULD SUSPEND PLANT OPERATING LICENSESBy:Dave Airozo Washington   Two whistle-blowers locked in years-long battles with Georgia Power Co.and the Southern Nuclear Operating Co. over alleged harassment want NRC toimmediately suspend the companies' nuclear plant operating licenses andfine them more than $20-million because, the whistle-blowers say, thediscrimination by senior management continues.   Late last week the whistle-blowers, Allen Mosbaugh and Marvin Hobby,were expected to file a so-called 2.206 petition with NRC in which theyargue that the agency's own regulations require that the drastic action betaken and the hefty fines meted out. They contend that senior managers ofthe companies have repeatedly violated NRC whistle-blower protectionprovisions and that the agency must escalate enforcement action.   Last year, both Mosbaugh and Hobby won Department of Labor (DOL) casesagainst the companies over alleged retaliation for whistle-blowing. In bothcases, Secretary of Labor Robert Reich directed the companies to reinstatethe men and ordered payment of other damages.   In mid-December, Georgia Power filed a motion with DOL's Office ofAdministrative Appeals asking that the record in the Mosbaugh case bereopened and further hearings be held. In the motion, Georgia Power notedthat during the DOL proceeding, NRC's Office of Investigations had held onto 76 tape recordings Mosbaugh had surreptitiously made of fellow employeeswhile he was assistant general manager of the Vogtle nuclear plant. OI usedthe tapes recordings as part of its own investigation into Mosbaugh'sallegations of wrongdoing by Georgia Power management. The tapes were notgiven to Georgia Power until after the record in the Labor proceeding wasclosed, and Georgia Power now claims that the tapes contain significantinformation that would have affected Reich's decision.   Georgia Power also plans to appeal Reich's decision in the Hobby casebut the proceeding is in limbo at DOL because of the federal government'sbudget crisis and resulting government employee furloughs, Georgia Powerspokesman Tal Wright said January 4.   NRC is already considering ``escalated enforcement action'' because ofthe Mosbaugh harassment case.   In a draft of the 2.206 petition, the whistle-blowers note that Reichspecifically identified A.W. Dahlberg, former Georgia Power president andnow president, chief executive officer and chairman of the board ofSouthern Co. as having had an ``active role'' in the ``illegal'' firings ofHobby and Mosbaugh. They charge that the discrimination against Hobby andMosbaugh, and Georgia Power's refusal to reinstate them, continues to havea ``chilling effect'' on Georgia Power and Southern Nuclear workers andthat the NRC should fine the companies $200,000 a day for each day thatHobby and Mosbaugh are not reinstated.   With the meter running from the date of Reich's decisions, the finewould total $20-million as of January 4.   In their petition, the whistle-blowers also note that George Hairstonand Kenneth McCoy, both Georgia Power senior managers, were involved inproviding NRC with inaccurate or incomplete information regarding theequipment performance and test results following a 1990loss-of-offsite-power incident at Vogtle (INRC, 20 Feb. '95, 8).   The whistle-blowers suggest that the repeated involvement of seniorofficials in these cases reveals a pattern of noncompliance with NRCregulations and that the agency must impose strong sanctions, including thesuspension of the operating licenses until the alleged management problemis corrected.   NRC regulations (10 CFR Part 2) do call for progressively stifferenforcement actions for repeated violations of the same requirements withina two-year period. The agency has already hit Georgia Power with a SeverityLevel II violation and a $200,000 fine for supplying inaccurate andincomplete information related to the Vogtle incident and, as noted above,is considering more in response to the Mosbaugh case.   Under the NRC guidelines, if a licensee is slapped with two SeverityLevel II violations within the two-year period, suspension of affectedoperations should be considered.   ``The actual progression to be used in a particular case will depend onthe circumstances,' the regulations say. ``Enforcement sanctions willnormally escalate for recurring similar violations.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoFOUR UTILITIES EXPECT SAVINGS FROM JOINT STANDARD TECH SPEC SUBMITTALBy:Wilson Dizard III, Washington   Four Region IV utilities expect savings that could range into themillions of dollars from their banding together to submit their standardtechnical specifications applications to NRC.   Pacific Gas & Electric Co. (PG&E), Texas Utilities Electric Co. (TUEC),Union Electric Co., and Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corp. (WNOC) joinedforces late last year to coordinate their joint standard tech specconversion. The utilities presented their plans to NRC staff at a November14 meeting.   Roger Walker, manager of nuclear licensing for TUEC, told Inside N.R.C.that the savings from the standard tech spec conversion process could runbetween $1- and $4-million a year.   Alan Passwater, licensing manager for Union Electric's Callaway, saidhis utility earlier planned to conduct a joint standard tech spec submittalwith WNOC, because Wolf Creek and Callaway were built to the standard SNPPS(Standardized Nuclear Power Plant System) design devised by Westinghouse inthe mid-1970s. Passwater said extending the joint standard tech specapplication to four utilities would likely save his utility $200,000.   The four utilities all operate one nuclear station each. All of theunits are in NRC Region IV, and all are two-train, four-loop Westinghouseunits.   Managers for the four utilities see the joint tech spec application asthe first of what could become several joint efforts in dealing with NRC.   NRC has been pressing nuclear plant operators to adopt standardtechnical specifications (INRC, 15 May '95, 8). NRC staff estimate that upto 40% of the surveillances required under existing tech specs could beeliminated under standard tech specs. By mid-1995, close to 50 plants hadcommitted formally to standard tech spec conversion.   Walker said that the four utilities plan to submit their jointapplication in December 1996. ``It's a long, elaborate process,'' Walkersaid, noting that the application would run well into the hundreds ofpages.   ``We did an economic estimate before we started,'' Walker said. ``Weestimated hard savings and soft savings.'' The hard savings flowed fromrequirements that would be dropped, and the soft savings were estimated tocome from avoided plant shutdowns.   ``The soft savings were much stronger than the hard savings,'' Walkersaid.   Walker noted that some procedure changes that would require tech specchanges under current conditions could be handled through NRC's 50.59process under the standard tech specs.   Walker also expects faster service from NRC in any future tech specchanges after the standard tech specs are adopted.   Steve Wideman, supervisor of licensing for Wolf Creek, said the impetusfor the joint standard tech spec submittal flowed from senior managementmeetings among the four utilities last summer. He noted the joint submittalwould also save the utilities some of the NRC review fees associated withthe process.   Pat Nugent, tech spec supervisor for PG&E's Diablo Canyon, said, ``Webelieve there is some economic benefit. Also, NRC has been pushing theindustry hard to go to standard tech specs.''   The four utilities expect that NRC will take four to six months toreview their standard tech spec application, which takes the schedule outto mid-1997. The new tech specs will be implemented in the middle of anoperating cycle at each unit, but the utilities have not reached that pointin their planning yet.   Some of the utilities are in the process of seeking line item changes totheir existing tech specs, a process that NRC staff said would continuewhile the joint standard tech specs are developed.   NRC staff told the utilities at the November 14 meeting that theapplication process could be accelerated if the applications were sentelectronically.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoDUKE POWERBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   DUKE POWER EXPECTS TO SAVE $2.7-MILLION AT THE OCONEE NUCLEAR PLANT bychanging the qualified life of pressure transmitters installed in thereactor containment buildings of the three units.   The 105 pressure transmitters inside the containment buildings all had a10-year qualified life, based on the assumption that they would be subjectto ambient temperatures of 120 degrees F. Robert Smith, an engineer atDuke, who for years had been pushing to install temperature devices in thecontainments to determine the real temperature, last year installedtemperature monitoring data loggers at Oconee.   The actual ambient temperature level in the basement was only 80 degreesF, which allowed Duke to change the qualified life of the transmitters, andobviated the need to replace them for the remaining operating life of theunit, Smith said. The idea to install the temperature devices grew out of aprogram instituted at Duke Power three years ago to review theenvironmental qualification (EQ) of electrical equipment coming up for achangeout before each outage, he added.   Duke is continuing to analyze electrical equipment based on the actualtemperatures in which they run and expects to save several hundred thousanddollars--maybe close to $1-million--on replacement costs for changing otherelectrical equipment, such as level switches and solenoid valves, saidSmith.   The utility also ``is looking at installing temperature monitoringequipment at Catawba and McGuire, where greater savings are projected,''according to Duke spokesperson Rick Zuercher.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC, FEMA, INDUSTRY WORKING TO DEVELOP MORE REALISTIC EP DRILLSBy:Tom Harrison, Washington   The NRC is working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)and industry organizations to develop more realistic emergency planning(EP) drill scenarios that participants say will improve training and reducecosts for plant owners.   Members of the Realism in Scenarios Working Group includerepresentatives from the NRC, FEMA, the Institute of Nuclear PowerOperations (INPO), the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI), and the Conferenceof Radiation Control Program Directors (CRCPD).   The idea originated with NRC senior management, who saw room forimprovement after participating in EP drills, said Aby Mohseni, NRCemergency response coordinator.   ``There are some good scenarios out there, but there are some that arenot as logical and coherent as others,'' he said.   For example, a scenario might involve a plant having significant coredamage without major problems with core cooling, which is not possible.   Or to test various parts of the plant in the drill, events could includea plane crash, an earthquake, an on-site fire and several employeessuffering heart attacks--all within the space of a few hours.   The NRC is searching its database to develop criteria for what makes agood scenario, Mohseni said, and wants to have those attributes identifiedwithin a couple of months.   After that, the group, which held its first meeting in December, plansto have a plant volunteer to test the criteria in an upcoming drill.   The criteria aren't intended to become a regulation or increase costs,and may eventually save money for utilities, he said.   After the group develops a repository of scenarios, utilities will beable to reuse them instead of having to come up with their own, he said.   Every other year, each plant is required to hold a graded drill, whichis overseen and assessed by NRC officials. These biennial drills alsoinvolve state and local governments, whose performance is evaluated byFEMA.   ``We've had 15 years of experience since TMI in doing the majorexercises,'' Mohseni said. ``Those 15 years have shed some light on wherewe could get more benefit in training.''   Plants also hold at least one emergency plan drill a year involving theNRC and other outside agencies and conduct several drills annually on theirown.   Costs for drills range from thousands of dollars to tens of thousandsdepending on the number of people involved and the scope of the exercise.   The biennial drills traditionally involve the release of enoughradioactivity to require several miles around the plant to be evacuated,which allows FEMA to meet its requirements.   Emergency planners say the scenarios are unrealistic because they haveto meet objectives set by the NRC and FEMA.   ``You've got to break things in the plant that are almost beyondbelief,'' said Jim Weeks, manager of emergency planning at Wolf Creek.   The scenarios also don't allow operators to be successful in solvingproblems, he said.   ``Operators know no matter what they do, they're going to go to ageneral emergency,'' he said. ``From the operations people's point of view,they're not getting much value out of it because they know they're notgoing to be successful.''   That results in negative training, said scenario group member RonFraass, a public health physicist with the state of Kansas.   ``It keeps control room operators from taking some ideas and runningwith it,'' he said.   Many utilities develop their own scenarios in-house. Paying a consultantto devise a scenario can cost $60,000, according to industry estimates.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoWORLD REGULATORS AGREE MORE WORK NEEDED TO LEAVE CIRC CRACKS IN PLACEBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Significant improvements are needed in plugging criteria and cracksizing before circumferentially cracked steam generator tubes can be leftin service, a group of experts from the nuclear industry, research andregulatory bodies agreed late last year.   Those improvements depend, in part, on a much broader base of experienceof past degradation, better understanding of why and how flaws develop, andmore robust nondestructive examination (NDE) tools and analysis methods.   As for criteria used to determine response to axial cracking, theexperts found present voltage-based criteria acceptable for now, but saidthe criteria have weaknesses that may be offset in the future by improvedtechnology for sizing cracks.   In any case, the experts said, international collaboration is needed todevelop more realistic plugging criteria based on examination of pulledtubes and laboratory-produced cracks.   At an international workshop devoted to steam generator tube integrity,sponsored by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) and hosted by the NRC'sOffice of Nuclear Regulatory Research at the Argonne National Laboratorynear Chicago, 100 experts from 15 countries explored the extent ofknowledge on different types of steam generator degradation.   Much has been learned since the NEA's last steam generator meeting inBrussels in 1991. But participants decided that because of the evolvingnature of tube degradation any definitive conclusions would be premature,according to Jean-Pierre Clausner, the NEA staffer responsible for theworkshop.   Reports on the meeting were presented late last year to the NEA'sCommittee on Nuclear Regulatory Activities (CNRA) and to its Committee onthe Safety of Nuclear Installations (CSNI), sponsors of the workshop. Theexperts' findings and recommendations were numerous and detailed, giventhat they met in parallel sessions covering tube degradation, inspection,integrity, preventive and corrective measures, and operational aspects ofrisk analysis.Group Recommends Pulling More Tubes   According to a summary prepared for the CNRA/CSNI, several of theworkshop sessions highlighted the need to pull and examine for analysismore tubes and tube/tube support plate assemblies from both operating andretired steam generators. The examinations are considered key to definingthe precise conditions of crevice chemistry, developing better NDEstandards, providing prototype flaw specimens for integrity testing, andevaluating such repair techniques as sleeving.   The CNRA did not follow a recommendation from the Argonne meeting todevelop an international data base on tube pressure and leakage testing anddestructive examinations, Clausner said--not because it isn't needed, butbecause the committee members felt such data would be very difficult forregulators to gather because it belongs logically to the nuclear industry.   On the other hand, he said, the committee recommended that the CSNI'sworking group on component integrity intensify its monitoring of thephenomena involved in steam generator tube degradation, permitting a morecomplete review of the international situation within the next two years.   The Argonne workshop agreed that circumferential and axial cracks insteam generator tubes should continue to be treated separately with respectto their impact on safety, according to the NEA summary. In general, betterinspection tools for early detection of stress corrosion cracking (SCC),more experimental data on outer-diameter SCC crack initiation and growth,improved monitoring instrumentation, and better understanding of localstress/strain conditions are needed, as is a better correlation ofchemistry and microstructure with SCC susceptibility, the experts found.   They agreed that periodic NDE is not very useful in detectingfatigue-induced cracks, for which plants must depend on leak-before-breakmethods to manage degradation. Greater attention is needed to processesinitiating at regions of mild deformation, such as denting and scratches,they said, and the impact of tube support plate ligament cracking--nowobserved at several plants, notably in France--is ``not thoroughlyunderstood,'' they said.   Officials agreed that reliable crack detection and sizing are importanteven if circumferentially cracked tubes are plugged on detection. Thedetection threshold for circumferential cracks with eddy current testing isonly about 50% throughwall, pointing to the need for other NDE methods.Ultrasonic techniques (UT) have potential, but ``there are problems withfalse positive calls, and improvements are clearly needed,'' officialssaid.   Accurate sizing information is needed to develop data on crack growthrate. However, sizing cracks is more difficult than detecting them, theysaid.   Robert Comby of Electricite de France's Central Laboratories (GDL), saidthat only two of the countries participating in the Argonne workshop usetube plugging criteria for circumferential cracking based on analysis, notmere detection. They are Belgium and Canada. The Canadians plug the tubesall the same, he said. Comby said very intricate work is used to analyzeouter-diameter circumferential cracking, which is ``very diverse'' innature and evolves in a way that is still poorly understood.   One of the French participants, Guy Turluer of the Institute of NuclearSafety & Protection (IPSN), said that the dilemma highlighted by theArgonne meeting was that ``few countries have feedback from operatingexperience'' concerning circumferential cracking. ``We don't know thenature of the corrosive environment. It's hard to reproduce in thelaboratory,'' he said.No Consensus On Continued Use   The Argonne workshop could reach ``no consensus on the question ofleaving tubes with circumferential cracks in service,'' the NEA summarysaid. But the experts discussing tube integrity agreed that ``regulatoryrequirements should be flexible to allow adapting to changing technologyand operating experience,'' for example to allow implementation ofdegradation-specific management.   Another group considered the status and efficacy of preventive andcorrective measures used to mitigate or overcome tube degradation. On theissue of mechanical mitigation, they found that successful tube sleeving``requires development of qualification guidelines and a procedurechecklist,'' observing that ``many early failures were associated withapplication outside of the process window.''   While sleeves can generally be adequately inspected, the group said thatintegrity validation requires that sleeved tubes be removed and examined. Nickel-plating of the tubes, as used for example in Belgium, can be appliedat almost all tube locations. However, inspection of those tubes requiresUT rather than eddy current techniques.   Direct tube repair by remelting and welding can be applied primarily attube support plate intersections, the group said, but it complicatessubsequent inspections because eddy current tests are not effective and therough surface makes UT more difficult. Shot- or roto-peening before serviceguards well against primary water SCC, but post-service peening can at bestdelay the onset of cracking, they said. The group recommended cold-legpeening where PWSCC is the primary mode of tube degradation.   To prevent degradation, workshop participants said, ``good sludgecontrol is essential.'' Steam generator crevice chemistry is stillinadequately characterized, ``making it difficult to evaluate waterchemistry remedies,'' they said. They recommended a significant steamgenerator tube sampling program to increase knowledge about crevices.   The ultimate remedy for tube degradation, steam generator replacement,should be effective, they said, since new steam generator designs minimizestresses and sludge buildup, and new alloys--690 and 800--should providesufficient protection against corrosion.   Finally, the Argonne workshop agreed on the need to improve humanreliability information and methods used in probabilistic analysis of steamgenerator tube rupture events. They approved the implementation of on-lineleakage monitoring, but called for improved correlation between leakage anddegradation for various tube degradation modes as well as for a morerefined technical basis for operational leakage limits. They also said therole of steam generator tube degradation in overall plant risk should bebetter appreciated.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoGOOD MARKS FOR BEZNAU-1 AND -2 IN INTERNATIONAL ASSESSMENTBy:Laura Pilarski, Zurich   Switzerland's 364-MW Beznau-1 and -2 have achieved an ``excellent''record, said an IAEA Operational Safety Review Team (Osart) which completeda three-week review December 1.   Osarts compare performance to best international practices. The auditwas made at the request of the Swiss government in a general effort toenhance operational nuclear safety and not because of any specific safetyconcerns. An official Beznau report will be submitted to Bern in a fewmonths.   Nordostschweizerische Kraftwerke AG (NOK), owner of the two PWRs, wascommended for several areas of performance, including having an experiencedand capable staff with a strong apprenticeship program; a commitment tohighest work quality standards, with good condition and cleanliness ofplant equipment; imbuing station management and staff with high goals; andutilizing state-of-the-art safety analysis techniques to ensure high safetystandards are maintained.   Among the Osart's proposals for improvement were: conducting reviews ofabnormal operating events in more depth and giving more attention to humanperformance factors contributing to these events; providing improvedguidelines to examine plant conditions before returning to power operationfollowing reactor trips; strengthening management safety policies andguidance to the staff; fostering a more self-questioning attitude amongstaffers in performing plant activities; and increasing managementexchanges with nuclear power plants internationally.   An Osart team will return to Beznau for a follow-up visit sometime in1997. The Swiss review was the 86th plant reviewed in the Osart program.The cost, which the owner and plant assume, is estimated at more than1-million Swiss francs and includes all internal costs of special reports,documentation, and files.   Nuclear opponents in Switzerland tend to disparage Osart reviews, sayingthey are not concerned with possible technical problems and plant design.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNEI WILL CONTINUE TO PUSH IN '96 FOR THERMO-LAG WAIVERS UNTIL NEW RULEBy:David Stellfox, Washington   A Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI) executive says the industry lobbyorganization will continue to push NRC to waive certain fire protectionrequirements on Thermo-Lag fire barriers until a new rule can bedeveloped.   NRC Chairman Shirley Jackson told Inside N.R.C. November 15, 1995 thatshe opposed the idea. It is an idea that has been floating around for along time, but was resurrected formally with NRC staff on November 8, 1995by Bill Rasin, NEI vice president for technical issues.   Despite Jackson's apparent opposition, NEI Executive Vice President JoeColvin said his organization would continue to push for that option in1996.   ``We have not given up on that approach,'' Colvin said. ``I think thestaff at the leadership level is receptive to this approach because they'respending a lot of resources and we are too.''   NEI would have to ``have communication with Chairman Jackson andCommissioner Rogers and the senior staff'' about the issue, Colvin said inremarks prior to Commissioner Greta Dicus' Senate confirmation.   NEI is due to have a meeting with NRC senior staff on the issue thismonth and a staff paper to the commission on Thermo-Lag resolution isoverdue.   The problem of unqualified Thermo-Lag fire barriers dates back to1991-92 and still remains, according to some estimates, years away fromresolution.   The problem with the fire protection issues, Colvin said, particularlyThermo-Lag is that ``it's not just a technical issue. It's not just alicensing issue. It's got political overtones.''   He said ``everyone agrees'' that the fire protection regulations requireadjustment so if the agency is going to change the regulations anyway, whyforce compliance with the old ones in the interim when compensatorymeasures taken are adequate to insure safety.   Looking ahead to 1996, Colvin said he sees the industry-NRC relationshipas positive. He said a dialog has been opened up. The two parties arecomparing notes as to what their respective priorities are to make best useof both industry and NRC resources. One of the most positive signs, Colvinsaid, is that the dialog with NRC is now ``engaged at the EDO level'' andincludes the office heads.   One of the most often cited past successes of industry/NRC cooperationhas been the maintenance rule. When it came to developing the regulatoryguidance for the maintenance rule, which takes effect in July, seniorindustry officials and senior NRC officials sat down to iron out theguidance. The result was considered a success by both sides and yet ``themaintenance rule approach'' has been unsuccessful when applied elsewhere.   It was first tried on the license renewal rule and ``it didn't work,''there, Colvin said. Then, it was tried on the maintenance rule and ``itworked tremendously (well).''   Then it was tried on graded quality assurance (QA) and it didn't work,Colvin said. ``It's people and perception driven.'' All these issues,particularly the QA, is ``talking about changing the way people do things.That makes people nervous--at both utilities and NRC,'' he said.   One advantage with the use of the approach on the maintenance rule, wasthat NRC didn't use outside contractors and high-level staffersparticipated in themeetings and made decisions, Colvin said. It was thestrong leadership from both the industry and agency side that made thedifference, he said.   He said NEI would be continuing to try to use the maintenance rule modelof looking at systems, structures and components and their risk and try toapply that in other contexts in 1996.   The failure, so far, of the graded QA effort Colvin said it is ``verydifficult to get the mindset changed. The QA infrastructure runs long anddeep in the industry and in NRC. It's almost sacred. There's a lot ofemotion you got to get through before you can get down to details.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoCRITICS FEAR ANOTHER `BROWNS FERRY' AS NRC OKAYS COMBUSTIBLE FIRE STOPSBy:David Stellfox, Washington   A silicone foam or elastomer sealant material--used to block the spreadof fires at the soon-to-be licensed Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) WattsBar plant--is combustible and prone to ``deep-seated fires,'' NRC says.   Nonetheless, the agency said the material is an ``acceptable deviation''from requirements limiting fire stops to noncombustible materials.   The antinuclear group Nuclear Information & Resource Service (NIRS) anda private fire protection engineer contend that the NRC violated federallaw when it authorized the use of the admittedly combustible fire seals atWatts Bar.   Four years before the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island-2, TVA's BrownsFerry plant had a near meltdown after a fire started in a penetration sealmade of combustible urethane. Penetration seals are used to stop a firefrom spreading from one room or fire area to another.   But at Browns Ferry, the fire quickly spread through electrical controlequipment, disabling systems needed to safely shut off the nuclear chainreaction. That near disaster led to the creation of NRC's current fireprotection requirements that call for the use of noncombustible materials.   The NRC staff decision that Watts Barr could use combustible siliconematerials to seal penetrations through fire walls and floors has alarmednuclear watchdogs. NIRS wrote to NRC Chairman Shirley Jackson saying thatWatts Bar should be denied a full-power operating license because it doesnot meet fire protection requirements. The commission is expected to issuethe full-power license to Watts Bar within a few weeks.   Jackson would not comment on the issue, and staffers in her officereferred inquiries to the NRC Public Affairs Office. Agency spokesman JoeGilliland said that, as of January 4, no official response had been made toNIRS.   In a letter to Jackson in late December, NIRS said it was ``ironic''that NRC would consider licensing a TVA plant with combustible penetrationseals 20 years after a fire at another TVA plant prompted the agency toadopt fire protection rules specifically to bar the use of such material.   Equally ironic, nuclear watchdogs said, is that the argument NRC staffused to justify use of the seals is remarkably similar to an argument itrecently rejected for an unrelated fire protection material.   That fire barrier material, known as Thermo-Lag, is used to protectelectrical cables and components used to shut down reactors.   The Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI), the nuclear industry tradeassociation, tried unsuccessfully to claim that Thermo-Lag wasnoncombustible using arguments similar to what NRC used to accept thecombustible penetration seals.   Gerald Brown, a Minneapolis-based fire protection engineer, claimed thatby waiving requirements on penetration seals, NRC is trying to avoid anexpensive drain on both industry and NRC resources.   Other industry sources say privately that NRC treated Thermo-Lag morestrictly because Thermo-Lag had become a political problem for them,particularly after a congressional hearing in 1993. Problems with firebarrier penetration seals have not gotten the same level of publicattention.   It was Brown's 1991 allegations on Thermo-Lag that prompted a wholesaleupheaval in nuclear industry fire protection programs. His 1991 allegationswere confirmed by NRC and led the agency to disqualify all prior testing ofThermo-Lag and to declare all those barriers inoperable--a matter stillunresolved five years later.   As a fire protection consultant, Brown potentially stands to gainbusiness from utilities upgrading fire protection programs and equipment.   Brown said the nuclear power industry, in attempting to requalifyThermo-Lag in the last five years, wanted to claim that the material was``noncombustible.'' They did so with the argument that given the difficultyof igniting the material, the location in the plant, and the absence of anyother combustibles to start or feed a fire, Thermo-Lag was ``effectively''noncombustible.   NRC rejected that argument (INRC, 3 April '95, 3), but then turnedaround and used a remarkably similar approach to justify the use ofcombustible fire penetration seals at Watts Bar, Brown said. ``That'sludicrous. It's a double standard, and it's against the law.''   NRC's Conrad McCracken, the plant systems branch chief in the Office ofNuclear Reactor Regulation, doesn't deny that the silicone seals arecombustible. McCracken couldn't be reached for comment, but in a December21 response letter to Paul Gunter of NIRS, McCracken wrote: ``The NRC staffacknowledges that silicone foam and silicone elastomer penetration sealmaterials are combustible as defined by NRC fire protection guidance.''   However, McCracken wrote Gunter that the seal material does provide someprotection; it acts as a sacrificial material and is accepted in manynon-nuclear applications. Incidentally, the same is true of Thermo-Lag.   The seal material ``make up a relatively small contribution to theoverall combustible load...are usually distributed throughout the firearea, as opposed to representing concentrations of combustibles, and aredifficult to ignite,'' McCracken wrote. Finally, McCracken concluded theuse of the silicone seals ``is an acceptable deviation from the penetrationseal guidance in Nureg-0800.''   In a separate response to an e-mail allegation from Brown, McCrackenacknowledged that a fire ``may become deep-seated within the penetration.''Brown says this makes it appear the fire has been extinguished when deepinside the seal it is still burning.   The NRC's fire protection requirements are prescriptive, Brown said. Isthe material combustible or isn't it? he asked. To say it is combustiblebut that's an acceptable deviation is not prescriptive regulation, Brownsaid. ``That's a performance-based answer,'' he said. NRC has so farrefused industry attempts to resolve problems with Thermo-Lag by usingperformance-based approaches, Brown noted, and now the NRC is turningaround and using a performance-based approach for penetration seals.   Besides the apparent double standard, Brown maintained NRC cannotlegally make an acceptable deviation on the penetration seals. He said thatunlike the situation with Thermo-Lag, penetration seals are specificallyaddressed in the federal Code of Federal Regulations. Brown added that NRCdoes not have the right to waive federal law but can only promulgate new,superseding law. For Thermo-Lag, the requirements are in subsidiaryguidance documents giving NRC greater flexibility in interpretation andenforcement.   But penetration seals are specifically addressed in 10 CFR Part 50,Appendix R, Section M, which says, in part: ``Penetration seal designsshall utilize only noncombustible materials and shall be qualified by teststhat are comparable to tests used to rate fire barriers.''   Brown, who also filed allegations over the penetration seals, claimedNRC has been ignoring problems with the seals. Many of the problems relatedto seals with voids and gaps and other issues are contained in NRC's ownfiles, and others were documented in a series of Inside N.R.C. articles in1994 (INRC, 19 Sept. '94, 1 and INRC, 17 Oct. '94, 1).   Thousands of similar silicone foam or elastomer seals are installed innuclear units across the country.   In addition to their combustibility, questions have been raised aboutthe effectiveness of the seals. Penetration seal problems related toinstallation, testing, documentation and poor maintenance, go back at least15 years and rival problems associated with the controversial Thermo-Lagmaterial.   In 1987 NRC drafted guidance on penetration seals intended to clarifywhat was needed to qualify a seal. The guidance was leaked to industryofficials, then mysteriously dropped from the regulatory agenda and wasnever issued (INRC, 6 March '95, 1). NRC officials have claimed thepenetration seal requirements in the leaked document were incorporated intoother NRC regulations, but industry sources have strongly disputed that.The question has never been resolved.   Brown said the NRC simply doesn't want to face up to the problems withpenetration seals so ``they are carefully selecting regulations (toenforce) to suit the industry. This is the most flagrant and fraudulentexample.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoDICUS TO ASSUME DUTIES AS COMMISSIONER IN FEBRUARY, RESTORING QUORUMBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   The Senate confirmed Greta Joy Dicus as an NRC commissioner December 22,paving the way for restoring a three-person quorum to the commission.   Dicus, who is director of the Division of Radiation Control & EmergencyManagement at the Arkansas Department of Health, said that she hopes to beready to assume her duties as commissioner in early February. ``I have alot of goals I hope to accomplish in my time on the commission, but I wantto get up there and get a staff together before I get into those goals,''she told Inside N.R.C. January 4.   Dicus' term runs through June 30, 1998. No date has been set yet for anofficial swearing-in ceremony.   The commission has been acting without a quorum since July 1, 1995 whenGail de Planque left after her five-year term as a commissioner ended andIvan Selin quit as chairman a year early. Currently, Chairman ShirleyJackson is making commission decisions--in consultation with CommissionerKenneth Rogers--under an arrangement of ``delegated authority'' approved bythe commission when it still had four members.   Clinton nominated Dicus July 14, 1995 to fill a third seat on thecommission. Dicus faced no opposition in the Senate Environment & PublicWorks Committee, which approved her nomination September 19 (INRC, 2 Oct.'95, 15). The fast-track nomination process stalled, however, when SenateMajority Leader Robert Dole (R-Kan.) made it clear to the White House thathe would not schedule a confirmation vote until President Clinton sent tothe Senate an intent to nominate a Republican to the five-membercommission.   Ultimately, Dole relented and allowed the confirmation to go forward. AWhite House staffer said January 2 that the administration is ``looking atother candidates'' to fill the remaining two seats on the commission, buthas sent no names to the Senate since the Dicus nomination.   Dicus was among more than 65 executive nominations cleared for a Senatevote on December 22. Charles William Burton of Texas was confirmed as amember of the board of the U.S. Enrichment Corporation (USEC) for a termthat lasts only until February 24. Kathleen McGinty of Pennsylvania wasconfirmed as chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.   There had been speculation on the Hill that Dole let the nominations gothrough to avoid the need to have the names all renominated in the secondsession of the Congress. Because of the ongoing budget problems, however,the first session of the 104th Congress was declared over, sine die, at11:55 a.m. January 3. The second session began at noon.   Dicus served as a member of the USEC board for a one-year term thatended in March 1995. She is a member of the Conference of Radiation ControlProgram Directors (CRCPD) and was elected chairman of the CRCPD in 1993.Dicus, who has served as Arkansas liaison to the NRC, received her B.A.from Texas Woman's University in Denton, Texas in 1961 and an M.A. inradiation biology from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Schoolat Dallas in 1967.Number Of Secy Papers, Commission Meetings Down   The commission continued a downward trend in the number of Secy papershandled in 1995. The staff produced 310 Secy papers last year, downslightly from the 315 papers in 1994, and down significantly from the 360papers produced in 1993.   Also, there were fewer commission meetings last year than in theprevious year, according to Andrew Bates, senior level adviser to thesecretary of the commission. There were 86 commission meetings held in1995, compared with 92 meetings in 1994. Fifty-two of the 86 meetings tookplace in the first half of 1995, and 34 meetings in the second half.   Part of the reason for the decline in the number of meetings can beattributed to the fact that there have only been two commissioners sinceJuly 1, 1995, and the staff has tried not to schedule commission meetingswhen one of them is away or on leave.   The schedule for commission briefings for the month of January is verylight. Except for one briefing on industry restructuring scheduled forJanuary 5, the calendar is empty until the end of the month. On January 30,a briefing by DOE on the high-level waste program has been tentativelyscheduled. The periodic briefing on operating reactors and fuel facilitiesmeeting on is tentatively set for January 31.Watts Bar-1 Full Power License Briefing Still On Hold   A commission briefing on the Tennessee Valley Authority's Watts Bar-1full power license--one of the most important decisions facing thecommission in some time--could be put off until after Dicus is sworn in asa commissioner and a legal quorum is restored.   The NRC announced December 20 that a planned January 5 commissionbriefing on the license would be rescheduled.   NRC staffers said January 2 that a commission briefing on the WattsBar-1 license had been set tentatively for January 31, three days afterRogers returns from a personal trip, but before Dicus's presumedswearing-in at the beginning of February (Nucleonics Week, 4 Jan., 3).However, NRC spokesperson Joe Gilliland said January 4 that a commissionbriefing had not yet been set--even tentatively--on the matter. ``That datemay have just been set as a working assumption for the staff,'' Gillilandsaid.   Delaying a vote on the license would avoid a possible legal challenge toa commission decision approving Watts Bar's full-power operation. A lawsuitalready is pending challenging the delegated authority procedure underwhich Jackson has exercised the full power of the commission for sixmonths. In that case, intervenors challenging the Trump-S nuclear researchproject at the University of Missouri sued over the procedure (INRC, 13Nov. '95, 5).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC LAST MONTH TURNED DOWN A SUBMITTAL   THE NRC LAST MONTH TURNED DOWN A SUBMITTAL BY PENNSYLVANIA POWER & LIGHTCo. (PP&L) seeking a change in the quality assurance program. The changerequest was submitted as a cost-beneficial licensing action (CBLA), but NRCstaffers said that changes to the quality assurance plan under 10 CFR50.54(a) are not considered eligible for CBLAs.   ``The submitted change proposes an elimination of the biennial procedurereview requirements for plant emergency operating procedures, off normalprocedures, emergency operating procedures, and other procedures of whichusage may be dictated by event,'' Michael Modes, chief of civil, mechanicaland materials engineering branch in the Division of Reactor Safety, wrotein a December 15, 1995 letter to Robert Byram, senior vice president,nuclear, of PP&L.   Modes said the proposed change is a ``reduction in the commitmentpreviously accepted by the NRC,'' and added that if the change has alreadybeen implemented, ``you must cease implementation.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC NOTES IMPROVEMENTS, PERSISTENT PERSONNEL ERRORS AT FITZPATRICK   The New York Power Authority received Category 2 ratings in all fourfunctional areas in NRC's latest systematic assessment of licenseeperformance (SALP) at FitzPatrick. NRC Region I Administrator Thomas Martinsaid NRC found good coordination and communication between plant andcorporate groups. He said, however, that despite some improvements as aresult of a number of initiatives, ``persistent personnel errors acrossmultiple parts of the organization demonstrated the need for continuedmanagement attention.''   According to Nucleonics Week, FitzPatrick, an 849-MW BWR, had a grosscapacity factor in 1994 of 69.25%. Through October 1995, the capacityfactor was 61.27%.   In his letter to the utility, Martin noted the effectiveness of NYPA'sresponse to individual plant events and problems. He added, however, thatthere were continued instances of ``a lack of a broad approach to eventinvestigations and root-cause determinations.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC FINDS `SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT' IN OPERATIONS AT COMANCHE PEAK   TU Electric received top Category 1 ratings in three functionalareas--operations, maintenance, and plant support--and a Category 2 ratingin the area of engineering in NRC's latest SALP review at Comanche Peak.   NRC Region IV Administrator L.J. Callan said the utility's ``superiorperformance in the operations area represented a significant improvementand was marked by a strong safety focus, clear management support foroperations, effective communication of management expectations, and strongmanagement involvement in operator training.'' Callan, however, also noteda decline in performance in the engineering area. The SALP board, Callansaid, ``considered the examples of less than thorough and timely evaluationof problems which affect operations and the instances where equipmentperformance information was not effectively tracked and used to improvereliability by predicting and preventing challenges to the plant, includingthose introduced from the balance-of-plant.''   According to Nucleonics Week, Comanche Peak-1 and -2, both 1,161-MWWestinghouse PWRs, had gross capacity factors in 1994 of 95.98% and 54.76%,respectively. Through October 1995, the capacity factors were 78.48% and94.40%, respectively.   In the area of maintenance, Callan said NRC found ``an improvement inplant material condition, the absence of significant maintenance workerinduced plant challenges, the reduction in the maintenance backlog, and ahealthy customer service philosophy.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC FOUND CONTINUED STRONG PERFORMANCE   NRC FOUND CONTINUED STRONG PERFORMANCE IN THE OPERATIONS AREA ATLIMERICK in a plant performance review (PPR) done December 5, 1995. NRC,however, said that it was concerned about four scrams between August 8 andSeptember 11, 1995, as well as other transients experienced during the lastsix months. In a letter to PECO Energy, NRC's Wayne Lanning, deputydirector of the division of reactor projects, noted that the utility's``reviews have not found common contributing root causes, but we have notedthat you have developed a Focus on Excellence Through People Program toaddress broad issues.''   The PPR process consists of a review of inspection findings, significantevents and other information related to the integrated performance at anuclear plant. The purpose of the PPR process, NRC says, it to assessperformance trends and to plan future inspection activities. Another PPRwill occur later in the SALP cycle at Limerick, NRC said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoCOOPER COMPLETES OUTAGE 22 DAYS LATE   Major modifications to emergency diesel generators at Cooper last monthadded another 22 days to the plant's refueling outage, costing the NebraskaPublic Power District (NPPD) roughly $2.2-million. The plant ended the77-day refueling outage, which also included an in-service inspection ofthe reactor vessel, on December 27.   Terrence Reis, acting chief of reactor projects in NRC Region IV, saidlast week that NPPD modified the diesel generators from a design thatneeded a continuous supply of air to run to one that only needed an airsupply to start, similar to those used at all other nuclear generatingunits in the U.S. Officials at both NRC and NPPD touted the modification asone that would enhance plant safety. Cooper, once considered atrouble-prone plant, is making a turn-around, according to NRC officials.Reis said that NPPD officials admit that they underestimated the complexityof the diesel generator modifications. He added that after some significantproblems with the work that NPPD quality assurance officials got very``aggressive,'' making the modifications on the second generator go a lotsmoother.   The diesel generator modifications, said Reis, are not related to theAppendix R fire protection work done earlier. In November, NPPD crews foundthat diesel generator modifications done in 1994 to meet NRC fireprotection rules actually would have made that equipment inoperable duringa control room fire (Nucleonics Week, 30 Nov. '95, 8). Crews hadincorrectly wired the control panel when they installed fuses in 1994 toisolate five of the diesel generator indications on the control roompanel.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoTHREE UTILITIES SLAPPED WITH $50,000 FINES   NRC started the new year by announcing $50,000 fines against each ofthree utilities: Commonwealth Edison Co. (CECO), Baltimore Gas & ElectricCo. (BG&E), and the New York Power Authority (NYPA).   NRC said that CECO had failed to correct a potential problem withcircuit breaker settings at Quad Cities. Managers at Quad Cities had beentold of a potential problem with the circuit breakers based on an incidentat CECO's Dresden plant, but failed to act, NRC said. The utility now isplanning plant modifications and procedure changes at Quad Cities.   NRC staff identified a violation at BG&E's Calvert Cliffs involving laxcontrols on unescorted access to the plant. A contractor employee wasgranted unescorted access to the plant even though security staff atCalvert Cliffs knew that the worker had been arrested under a differentname, NRC said. The worker's unescorted access permission later was revokedwhen federal officials told BG&E that he was an illegal alien who hadfraudulently applied for a U.S. passport under another false name.   NYPA was cited for four violations at Indian Point-3. The lapsesinvolved an October 15, 1995 incident in which the unit was taken from coldshutdown to hot shutdown while switches controlling recirculation andcontainment spray pumps were in the wrong position.   The utilities have until February 1 to pay or contest the fines.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-19IA059-000325-B005-250http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey96.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233031 text/html 61399HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:27:55 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:33 GMTContent-length: 61212Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey96.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ENEL DIPS BELOW $34.00 (305 words) TAIPOWER SEEKS AUSTRALIAN LOW (193 words) NATPOWER BUYS FOUR CAPES (106 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW TRY SPOT, JAPANESE URGED (279 words) NEWS EPDC REPLIES TO THE S. AFRICANS (69 words) TNEB AWARDS CONTRACTS (182 words) KARNATAKA SEEKS 250,000T (149 words) ANDHRA PRADESH COOLS TO IMPORTS (83 words) CHILGENER SETTLES 500,000T (107 words) CODELCO MAKES AWARDS (233 words) KIDECO SUPPLIES NEW INDONESIAN POWER PLANT (327 words) TMT WINS SAVANNAH ORDER (99 words) RBCT 1995 EXPORTS HIT 58.1MT (462 words) COLD WEATHER WARMS UK TRADE (398 words) PHIBRO SELLS TO EDF (88 words) KEPCO FIXES OVER 1MT (62 words) GERMAN IMPORTS ROSE 3% IN 1995 (318 words) BAYERNWERK PLANS 0.3MT IMPORTS. (159 words) ONE DELAYS TENDER (52 words) AL NASR BIDS SHOW RISES (327 words) COALARBED, ISCOR EXPAND TONNAGE (256 words) GERMAN COKERS TO IMPORT 1.3MT. (301 words) AUSTRALIA SHIPS 137MT (222 words) BSM NAME SAD COORDINATOR (69 words) CST STUNS SUPPLIERS (441 words) SHELL RINGS THE CHANGES (94 words) ATIC SERVICES GETS NEW BOSS (46 words) COALCORP WANTS UPGRADE (99 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW C&L SURVEY DETAILS COLLAPSE IN NSW PROFITABILITY (769 words) CONSOL, RHEINBRAUN TALK BUYOUT (296 words) CONSOL ANNOUNCES REORGANISATION (227 words) AEP, COGENTRIX FORM VENTURE (192 words) PEN OWNERSHIP CHANGES (196 words) RUHRKOHLE HOPES TO INCREASE STAKE IN GERMAN CREEK (78 words) NEWS BF IRON OUTPUT SLOWS (74 words) CHINESE COKE SALES REACH 7MT (176 words) FREIGHTS STAY QUIET (305 words) CSX APPOINTS EXECUTIVES (117 words) UMW INAUGURATES ROBERTS (84 words) CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ENEL DIPS BELOW $34.00Italy's ENEL has made awards to South African producers following itsrecent tender and has done so at much lower levels than most predicted.At what is believed to be $33.65 FOBT Richards Bay, basis 6,200kc GAR,the price not only covers the tonnages award to the two successfultenderers - Amcoal and Ingwe - but also the second year of two-yearcontracts awarded a year ago to Shell and, again, Ingwe.In all 2.5mt has been awarded plus 400,000t in options: under the newtender, Amcoal gets 1mt including options and Ingwe 300,000t includingoptions while under the terms of last year's two-year contracts, Ingwewill ship 700,000t and Shell 400,000t. Last year's prices were $32.50for Ingwe and Shell and $32.60 for other South African suppliers.Under the terms of the new awards, Amcoal will receive a two-yearcontract with 1mt earmarked for 1997 and Ingwe's tonnage under the twoawards will be rolled together for a similar 1mt volume for next year.Over the next two weeks ENEL will negotiate with the Colombianproducers it approached in its search for 500,000t. These include:Carbocol, Intercor, Carbones del Caribe and Drummond. The settlementprice is expected to be in a $36-36.50 range basis 11,700/11,800Btu/lb.When all the tonnage is booked from these tenders, purchases willproceed for Chinese, Polish and Venezuelan deliveries.US exporters told ICR New Year's Week they expect Enel's tender for 1mtof US coal "any day." It was originally scheduled for mid-December.Delays are related to a change in spec: Enel plans to cut the sulfurlimit from 1.0% to 0.8% and the Btu minimum from 12,500 to 12,000. Ashstays at 10%, which for southern Appalachian coals tends to correspondto the previous higher Btu level, raising the question of Btu premiums.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TAIPOWER SEEKS AUSTRALIAN LOWTaiwan Power Corporation has started 1996 with a bang with two tendersout and a decision imminent for Australian coal which looks likesetting a new low benchmark for its long-term contract buy-ins. The twotenders include a second attempt to purchase a trial panamax of lowc.v. (4,500kc-5,500kc GAR), high moisture material for its Taichungstation, the tender closing on January 16. The second tender is forfive panamaxes for March and April delivery. Contact: Director of Fuel,Taiwan Power, 9th Floor, 242 Roosevelt Road, Section 3, Taipei 100,Taiwan. Phone: 886 2 366 6752; fax, 886 2 367 0597.But it is reports of very low prices in four bids into a tender for along-term supplies from Australia which created something of a buzzthis week. The bids are from Camberwell, Saxonvale, Ulan and Coal andAllied, spanning less than $2 from a low of just under $22.50 FOB. Noneof the companies contacted said they had heard from Taipower about thetender and suggested that prices quoted were lower than their actualbids. The prices will be for the first year of deliveries in a seven-year contract.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NATPOWER BUYS FOUR CAPESNational Power of the UK has booked four capes from the US for firstquarter delivery, bringing to well in excess of 1mt the company hasbooked for 1996 delivery just from the US. The purchases, of mid-sulphur material, have all been done a few cents higher than similarpurchases by the company in the Fall of 1995. They have helped toproduce a drying up of supplies of this quality coal from some USsuppliers. One cape is from the East Coast from AMCI - which hadalready won 500,000t worth of business from NatPower; the balance iscoming through traders from the Gulf.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TRY SPOT, JAPANESE URGEDJapanese utilities should ditch their dependence on contract purchasesand increase the amount of spot tonnage bought, according to a study*by the country's Institute of Energy Economics.The study, comparing Japanese utility buying practices with those inEurope, South Korea, and Taiwan, urges the utilities to become moreflexible for at least 1.8mt of their annual needs. This tonnage, 6% ofcurrent demand, represents the fluctuations in annual consumptioncaused by different weather conditions in recent years.Tonnage fluctuations are likely to increase as coal stations shifttowards mid-loading and consequently, says the study, spot purchasesshould move towards 10% of annual consumption.In comparison with virtually no spot purchases by Japanese powercompanies, European, Taiwanese and Korean powercos take 28-44%, 10-30%and 10% respectively of their coal needs from the spot market.The next few years will see Japanese coal stations drop theirutilisation from 65% today to about 59% in 1999 and even lower insubsequent years, bringing Japanese coal station utilisation close tothose of Europe.The IEE report sees no merit in current buying practices of includingoption tonnages since they bring no benefit in lower prices. SinceJapanese power companies burn high-quality coals of well-known origin,they are likely to enter the spot market initially through closedtenders for specific brands. "But, if they hope to procure the cheapestcoal, they have to make open tender-based spot procurement as Taiwandoes," buying coal on physical properties alone, and buying coal which,in some cases, has an unknown origin, says the IEE study.*Japan's Generating-Use Steaming Coal Procurement Forms Now and Future,by Shuji Yamada and Toshiro Doi.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EPDC REPLIES TO THE S. AFRICANSThe price ideas requested by Japan's Electric Power DevelopmentCorporation - a request which led to demands for rises of $3 - have nowreceived a dusty response from the EPDC buyers for a c25 cut to $36.36FOBT Richard Bay. This price relates to Total's Ermelo supplies basis6,021kc NAR. The other offers range upwards from $33.80 for TCOA'sWitbank and include Total's Arthur Taylor and Shell's Rietspruit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TNEB AWARDS CONTRACTSIndia's Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) has concluded 1996contracts for a total of 2.4mt, having succeeded in getting the biddersdown to a level of $59.45/t CIF. This is higher than the low bid of$49.00 submitted by PT Sarita Prima but significantly under all otherbids, which ranged from $64.85 to $73.25/t CIF Madras.Several of the contract winners appear to be affiliated, based on theiroffering the same coals. Glencore and Esteco each offered Cook,Tselentis, and Prima Comex Indonesia; and Emirates Trading and WesternShipping each offered Danau Mashitam, Shanxi, and Ensham. PT SaritaPrima offered Berau and Bukit Asam, while Alagendran Exports offered arange of Indonesian, South African, and Australian.The two "unknowns" who won contracts last year along with Alagendranand Emirates - Ocean Centre and Kerry Coal - have not reappeared on theline up this time around (ICR 366/1).Tamil Nadu Contract AwardsSupplier    Initial Offer*/TonnageAlagendran Exports  $64.70/800,000Glencore             69.00/400,000V.K. Esteco          65.10/200,000Emirates Trading     65.35/300,000Western Shipping     64.85/200,000P.T. Sarita Prima    49.00/500,000* CIF MadrasBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996KARNATAKA SEEKS 250,000TKarnataka Power Corporation (KPC) is once again entering theinternational market, this time looking for 250,000t. In its previousattempt to import in 1993, the utility found the offers in response toits 1mt tender technically and commercially unacceptable (ICR 353/13).Karnataka is passing through a severe power crisis because of a strikeat Singarani Collieries in neighbouring Andhra Pradesh state since mid-October. This has created shortages at Karnataka's only coal-firedpower station at Raichur. Hydro activity has also been poor.Bids can be submitted by January 18 for delivery before May 31.The bidders are being asked to quote in Indian rupees (the rupee hasdeclined 12% against the $ since October).Further information can be obtained from Superintending Engineer (MM),Karnataka Power Corporation Limited, 82 Shakti Bhavan, 3rd Floor, RaceCourse Road, Bungalore - 560001, Karnataka, India. Telephone: +91-(0)80-2203894 Fax +91-(0)80-2252144.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ANDHRA PRADESH COOLS TO IMPORTSAndhra Pradesh State Electricity Board (APSEB) may not place orders forthe 500,000t quantity it put to tender in September. The utility foundthe offers it received at around Rs2,900/t cost three times the priceof domestic coal available from the coal mines in Andhra Pradesh.The sharp decline in the Rupee value against the dollar in October-November has further increased the delivery price of imports. Coupledwith the high price factor is the precarious financial position of theAPSEB board.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CHILGENER SETTLES 500,000TChilgener has settled a third of its 1.5mt requirement for 1996,concluding with Colombian producers at competitive prices. Sources saythe buyer claims to have concluded at $34.00-35.00/t FOB basis 6,600kcGAR.The company plans to conduct talks with other suppliers over the nextmonth. It has inventories sufficient to last it until March and canwait to conclude until late February.Meanwhile, the Chilean utility has asked for bids on one or two trialcargoes of western US and western Canadian coals. Offers are dueJanuary 10. Observers say the company is looking to diversify supplysources, given the rapid growth in its consumption.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CODELCO MAKES AWARDSChile's Codelco has awarded contracts for 1996 supplies for theTocopilla plant to companies in Canada, Australia, Colombia, andIndonesia. Prices are believed to be up $4-5 over the previous levels,but those prices were negotiated in September 1994, before last year'smarket upswing. Sources said prices for all suppliers are in the rangeof $40-42/t CFR basis 6300kc GAR. The price on the Indonesian coal isbelieved to be $36.20/t CFR basis 5,400kc GAR.Codelco officials told ICR they could not release any details untilcontracts are formally concluded. Codelco is acting as purchasing agentfor the new owner of the privatised Tocopilla Division, now calledCentral Termica Tocopilla.Although Codelco had originally asked for bids on 280,000t for 1996 and900,000t in 1997, it decided not to award any tonnage for the secondyear. The volume was set at a higher level for 1997 because severaldomestic contracts expire, leaving open the possibility of theirreplacement with imports. One observer comments that prices may besomewhat below market because bidders believed they were competing formulti-year agreements.Elsewhere in the Chilean market, P.T. Adaro has won an order for a testcargo for Chilgener's Guacolda plant.Codelco awardsSource/supplier     TonnageCanadaNova Solid Fuels/Fording                    60,000IndonesiaP.T. Kideco         30,000*P.T. Berau          60,000ColombiaIntercor/Cerrejon   60,000AustraliaBHP                 45,000Total              255,000** = plus 30,000t optionBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996KIDECO SUPPLIES NEW INDONESIAN POWER PLANTThe South Korean owned coal mine PT Kideco Jaya Agung, in EastKalimantan, has signed a long-term contract for supply to theIndonesian private power plant PT Jawa Power. It will be Kideco's firstdomestic supply contract. Currently all output is exported, mostly foruse by the South Korean power utility.PT Jawa Power is in the very early stages of developing 2x600 MW plantsat Paiton in East Java, alongside the existing 2x400MW the existing2x400 MW units now in operation and run by the state utility PTPerusahaan Listrik Negara (PLN), and the 2x615 MW units to be built bythe now celebrated private power company, PT Pation Energy Company.Kideco, wholly Korean owned, (80% of which is by Korean stateagencies), and operating under a production sharing contract with theIndonesian government, will supply 1.8mt/yr over 30 years to PT Jawa.This matches the term of PT Jawa's operation, for which a powerpurchase agreement with the PLN was signed in April 1995.It is not yet known where the additional coal needed will come from,but there are rumours that further supply may be secured from anotherKalimantan producer, PT Berau, which started production in 1994 fromits mines in north-eastern Kalimantan. Berau is a joint venture betweenNissho Iwai of Japan and PT United Tractors Indonesia.In 1995, Kideco produced about 2.5mt all exported to South Korea.Kideco said it would increase production to around 6mt by 1999. Kidecobegan production from its mine south of Balikapapan in the second halfof 1993. Coal is shipped by road 40k to the Kideco run seaport of TanahMerah, which can accommodate bulk carriers of up to 40,000DWT.PT Jawa is being built by a partnership made up of Siemens of Germany(50%) PowerGen of Britain (35%) and the Indonesian PT Bumi PertiwiTatapradipta (15%), a subsidiary of the Bimantara group, controlled bypresident Suharto's second son, Bambang Trihadmojo.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TMT WINS SAVANNAH ORDERTMT Coal has won an order to supply 36,000t to Savannah Electric &Power for the purpose of testing the new unloading dock that is beingconstructed to serve the Kraft plant. Delivery will be between March 1and March 25.TMT will supply Venezuelan coal produced by Carbosurco in the state ofFalcon. As earlier reported, TMT recently signed a contract to take230,000t of Carbosurco's output for shipment out of Palmarejo on LakeMaracaibo (ICR 388/12). Approximately 60% of the volume is earmarkedfor one customer and the remainder is being sold on the spot market.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RBCT 1995 EXPORTS HIT 58.1MTThe Richards Bay Coal Terminal (RBCT) pulled out all the stops duringDecember to shift 5.58mt of coal and bring the total throughout forcalendar 1995 to 58.12mt. That compares with the calendar 1994 totalthroughput of 53.5mt.The official throughput target for 1995 issued by the RBCT was 56mt,although members were told they6 could export coal up to theirrespective quotas of a total RBCT throughput of 59mt. Reason for thelower official target is that major exporters Ingwe and Amcoal - whichbetween them account for nearly two thirds of RBCT capacity - indicatedearly in the year they did not have the coal available to meetthroughput rates equivalent to 59mt. Both groups said that they wereaiming for their shares of a throughput level of 56mt.A number of the smaller RBCT shareholders made it clear they were notconstrained by such availability problems. It seems some have exportedat more than their proportionate share of 59mt by "buying-in" RBCTquotas from other members unable to utilise their full entitlements.Industry sources indicate the going rate for such deals varies betweenUS$1.5/t and $3/t, depending on market conditions.It's early days for predictions on 1996 but the feeling in the industryseems to be that a repeat performance of the 4.6mt growth shown in 1995is unlikely. Reasons for this are worries over constraints onproduction capacity at the various mines, most of which are at fullstretch already, combined with a degree of caution over the market.The official RBCT line on export growth is that ideally, the memberswould like to increase total throughput by about 2-2.5mt annually whichis also about the long-term average annual increase achieved in theirexports. Last year's 4.6mt jump in exports shows many SA exporters areprepared to go all out to take advantage of favourable marketconditions when they present themselves. A similar performance thisyear must, however, bring the RBCT to the limit of the capacity it canprovide through rationalisation and reorganisation of its operations atminimal capital cost.The RBCT's nominal capacity is currently stated at 60mt/yr. Theterminal's track record over the past few years has shown the RBCT's"nominal capacity to be as long as the proverbial piece of string.While the 60mt/yr number is therefore not a cap it is, however, veryclose to what can be achieved without having to make a major capitalinvestment in expanding the terminal.a decision on that unspecified investment by the members is pending topush the terminal's capacity to 70mt. Industry executives commentconventional wisdom is the RBCT should be exporting between 65mt and70mt by 2000. Judging by 1995's performance it could be sooner thanthat.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COLD WEATHER WARMS UK TRADEFreezing conditions in North West Europe during December meant relieffor the beleagured UK house coal trade. After a run of mild winters,capped by an appalling 1994/95 in which trade fell by 20-30% to anannual rate of well below 2mt/yr, sales were very low throughout 1995.This reflected high carryover stocks from the winter and structuralchanges within the industry.The structural changes followed the privatisation of British Coal inDecember 1994. RJB Mining, the lead producer in the newly privatisedworld, made its priority in this sector a deliberate targeting ofimport markets, offering heavily discounted supplies in northernScotland to challenge longstanding Polish contracts. It also pursueddirect sales to merchants, which had traditionally been supplied byfactors. Merchants, confronted with increasing competition betweendifferent suppliers and between suppliers and factors, had anotherreason to hold back from purchasing.By October, which was the warmest in the UK on record, there were signsof panic within the industry because coal was still not moving andbalance sheets were already in the red. By this time, two of theleading factors were changing hands with Coal Products, itself newlyprivatised, buying Anglo Coal from Anglo United and the management ofBritish Fuels just about to secure their company from British Coal. Themanagement of the third biggest factor, PD Fuels which is owned byPowell Duffryn, gained exclusivity to bid for their company just beforeChristmas.After the bitterly cold weather of December, traders are now talking ofshortages developing for some grades. They point out that many effectsof the cold snap are yet to be felt because it hit in the middle of aholiday period when fires were on all of the time.Another cold snap will surely bring another surge in sales. There isalready a shortage of 50mm plus sized material and of singles. As onetrader put it, "if you had some Colombian product at the moment you'dsell thousands of tonnes of it, the trouble is none of us has". Given alead time of c. 35 days to bring in a typical 35-40,000t consignmentfor processing and the fact that the coldest months in the UK arenormally January and February, only those with coal already on the wayor at European stockpiles will be able to respond on time to meetdemand.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PHIBRO SELLS TO EDFPhibro has sold two capes of Colombian to Electricite de France atclose to $37.00/t FOB basis 12,000 Btu/lb. One will be delivered ineach half of 1996. The purchase completes EdF's requirement for thefirst half.The price is $1.00 less than deals done two or three months ago for UScoal of equivalent quality to EdF. The French company bought fromExporting Commodities Inc. at $38.00 and, in a deal in which coal couldgo either to EdF or to CarboPego, from AMCI at $38.00-38.50.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996KEPCO FIXES OVER 1MTSouth Korean utility Korea Electric Power Co has booked eight, option aninth, capes with compatriot owner Samsun to trade from Newcastle. Itagreed a rate of $6.50 for shipments of 120-132,000t and expects themto be made over a year from February. Samsun is now in the market fortime charter tonnage to work the business on a consecutive voyagebasis.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN IMPORTS ROSE 3% IN 1995Coal and coke imports into Germany increased by only around 3% in 1995to 18mt, according to the German Coal Importers Federation. The borderprice for imported steam coal into Germany averaged DM76t ($53.10)/thard coal equivalent during the first 10 months of 1995, just over onequarter of the price of German coal - DM291/thce - before subsidiestook effect.In 1996, the importers anticipate that, assuming there are nosignificant currency swings, imported coal prices will remain stableand cheap. It seems contradictory therefore that the volume of importsis expected to fall by around 10% in 1996. The reason is that manylarge consumer utilities have generous coal stocks, the hangover involumes from their obligation to buy German coal under the now-lapsedJahrhundert contract which were larger than their actual needs.These companies will draw down their stocks in 1996, reducing purchasesof fresh coal by as much as 10%. German and imported coal are expectedto be affected to the same degree.Ruhrkohle announced at the end of last year that sales would reach anaverage 27mt a year over the next three years, resulting in an excessproduction capacity of 2-3mt. Saarberg expects to sell only around 7mtin 1996 instead of the originally anticipated 8.2mt.The coal importers association warns against what it considers over-estimates of coal sales for this year and beyond by politiciansresponsible for German coal policy. The consultancy Prognos in Basel,in particular, is criticised as having given too optimistic a pictureof coal's future market position in its recent energy forecast for theFederal economy ministry. The development of steam coal use forelectricity generation is especially overrated, say the importers.German power station coal consumption 1992-2020 (mthce)Year           Tonnage1992           43.871993           45.172000           47.612005           48.952010           49.192015           49.432020           49.91Source: Prognos, BaselBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BAYERNWERK PLANS 0.3MT IMPORTS.Saarberg, Germany's second largest coal producer, signed a five-yearcoal supply contract with major utility Bayernwerk on December 21 1995,just days before the 15-year Jahrhundert contract expired at the closeof the year. The deal covers 2.3mt, 0.46mt/a year.Bayernwerk signed up for coal from Ruhrkohle for 1996-2000 back in Julylast year. The contract was for nearly 4mt, a little under 0.8mt peryear. The utility has thus made a firm commitment to use around 1.26mtof German coal a year. Stocks standing at 0.5mt at the end of 1995 willalso be drawn down.Furthermore, after two years of using only Germany coal, in 1996Bayernwerk will import 0.3mt.Delivery of the imports by water is restricted due to the limitedunloading facilities at the power stations, so the utility buys onlypart cargos of 15,000t. Rail deliveries from Poland and the CzechRepublic are more or less continuous week-by-week throughout the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ONE DELAYS TENDERMorocco's Office Nationale de l'Electricite has postponed the deadlinefor bids on its recent tender from December 27 to January 10. No reasonwas given. ONE is looking for combined firm and option tonnage of1,080,000t for the Jorf Lasfar and Mohammedia plants (ICR 388/15).Delivery periods run from May to October.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AL NASR BIDS SHOW RISESOpening bids into Egypt's Al Nasr Company of Coke and Chemicals tenderfor Australian coals show 5-6% increase on last year's prices. BHP(Blackwater) and South Blackwater - who supplied under the previouscontract - have bid $47.75 and $47.20 FOB respectively, compared withlast year's price of around $46.Two newcomers bidding for the Al Nasr "standard high vol" areGlencore's Cook and KCC's Tahmoor - Glencore close to the traditionalsuppliers' prices, KCC for substantially more. All bidders are goingfor the full 400,000t on offer which in the case of Cook shows aremarkable turnaround; only a year ago it was producing just 275,000t.A second blend is being called for by Al Nasr for 100,000t of lowervol, lower ash material. One explanation for this development is thatthe buyer is seeking an alternative to one of its US coals. MIM (OakyCreek) and BHP (Saraji blend) are both going for the full 100,000toffered.Traditionally, Al Nasr has come back seeking better prices, althoughthe fact that it is tendering in the middle of the JSM negotiationswould suggest that few are going to oblige with lower offers with somuch at risk. Decision expected in February. The new contracts will runfor four years commencing on April 1 this year.The CIF Alexandria prices reveal a wide range of freight estimates ($11-16.40) suggesting that some suppliers are very keen to get the businesswithout posting damaging FOB numbers. Alexandria takes panamaxes withthe alternative cape port, El Dikela, sometimes being used.Al Nasr's Australian offersCompany     Brand         Offer      FOB      C&F AlexandriaGrade One - Standard HVBHP         Blackwater    400,000t   $47.75      $64.90Glencore    Cook          400,000t   $47.50      $65.25KCC         Tahmoor       400,000t   $50.50      $69.90Grade Two - lover vols, lower ashBHP         Saraji blend  100,000t   $54.00      $71.15BHP non-conforming A      100,000t   $50.25      $67.40BHP non-conforming B      100,000t   $49.75      $66.90MIM         Oaky Creek    100,000t   $55.00      $73.00Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COALARBED, ISCOR EXPAND TONNAGECoalArbed has won new multi-year contracts to supply 250,000t/yr out ofBaltimore to South Africa's Iscor. The tonnage is in addition to themore than 700,000t that CoalArbed supplied in 1995 under long-termdeals.CoalArbed will supply mid-vol coking coal from two Pennsylvaniaproducers, Bradford Coal and K & J Coal. Neither company has beenactive in direct sales to export customers in recent years, althoughBradford formerly supplied Pakistan Steel through Hansen Coal.Both companies have operations in Clearfield County, Pennsylvania,served by Conrail for shipment through the Consol Coal Pier. They arestrip operations in the Kittanning and Freeport seams with typicalvolatile content of 26-27%, according to sources.Representatives of Iscor were in the US in December to visit mines. Thesteel company has been increasing its import tonnage because ofdeclining reserves at the captive Hlobane colliery and because it wantsto improve coke quality when it adds pulverised coal injection thisyear (ICR 365/7). At the moment, the company would take higher importvolumes but is reportedly held back by capacity limitations of itsdischarge equipment.CoalArbed has been supplying Iscor with southern Appalachian coals fromproducers such as Consol and Pittston for shipment out of HamptonRoads. The new contracts represent the first deals out of Baltimore.But although Iscor's import requirement could rise to nearly 2mt/yrafter 2000, it is expected to cut its US take when it goes ahead withdeveloping an operation in Queensland at Moranbah, where it iscurrently undertaking exploration work.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN COKERS TO IMPORT 1.3MT.Backdated to the beginning of 1995, a deal was finally signed shortlybefore Christmas by German steel companies and Ruhrkohle allowing theimport of an additional 1.3mt of coking coal a year (ICR 385/2).The steel companies which operate coking plant - Thyssen Stahl, HKM andPreussag Stahl will together import between 0.7mt and 0.8mt of cokingcoal annually. Thyssen will probably have an import entitlement ofaround 0.5mt with the other two mills sharing the rest. Ruhrkohle willimport about 0.5mt, rather more than the figure of 0.32mt circulatingin November last year.The volumes have been fixed only verbally as they depend on the amountof coke breeze produced in each company's coking plant. This in turncan be varied under various technical conditions. Also, for a limitedperiod, Thyssen will give up a part of its share to the other twomills.(The link with coke breeze hinges on the fact that the coking coalequivalent to the breeze is not eligible for subsidy under the rules ofthe Huette Contract.)The steel companies now allowed to import coking coal will, it seems,derive no significant financial benefit from the deal as Ruhrkohlealready supplies all coking coal at more or less world market prices.However the mills will have the opportunity to "practise" with worldmarket coking coal in preparation for the moment when the door isfinally opened to unrestricted coking coal imports.This could be in 2002 when the Huette contract expires or earlier ifthe German government decides to screw back coking coal subsidiessooner.Backdating the agreement to beginning 1995 means that imports byThyssen, HKM and Ruhrkohle last year will be covered by the deal.Preussag however will start importing this year for the first time.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AUSTRALIA SHIPS 137MTA survey of port throughput in Australia shows that the country liftedexports from 131.2mt to 136.7mt. Port Kembla was the only port to see asignificant fall, dropping 1.5mt to 10.8mt. Four ports moved over 20mt - Gladstone, Hay Point, Dalrymple Bay and Newcastle which rose 3.4mt to48.9mt.The stock situation tightened during November, largely throughindustrial action, cutting exports stocks from 11.5mt to 11.5mt. Afurther fall was predicted for December because of production problemsin Queensland caused by high rainfall. All the fall was in coking coalwhich dropped 1.2mt.Australian 1995 exportsPort              Dec 95        1995Abbott Point      498,000    4.801mtHay Point       1,752,000   23.838mtDalrymple Bay   1,673,000   22.951mtGladstone       1,981,000   22.517mtBrisbane          187,000    2.967mtQueensland      6,091,000   77.074mtNewcastle       4,084,000   48.884mtPort Kembla     1,020,000   10.909mtNSW             5,104,000   59.793mtAustralia      11,195,000  136.862mtAustralian export stocksGrade        Oct (mt)    Nov (mt)Metallurgical  5.0             3.8Of which: -High vol      1.8             1.6Mid volNSW           1.1             0.8Q'land        1.0             0.7Total mid     2.1             1.5Low vol       1.1             0.7NSW total     2.9             2.5Q'ld total    2.1             1.3Thermal       6.5             6.6NSW           4.2             4.2Q'ld          2.3             2.4All coalsNSW           7.1             6.8Q'ld          4.4             3.8Total        11.5            10.5Source: Department of Primary Industries and EnergyBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BSM NAME SAD COORDINATOROnce again, the Brazilian steel mills have nominated Helio Sad ofUsiminas as the chief negotiator for this year's coking coal contracts.Talks are expected to start in late February after Carnival.It should be noted that although the mills do much of their negotiatingas a bloc, the recent moves of CST to modify or cancel existingcontracts were the actions of that company on its own.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CST STUNS SUPPLIERSBrazil's CST has astonished the industry by sending out a letter to allof its coal suppliers asking for a price reduction on existingcontracts. In the case of certain suppliers, CST has followed up with asecond communication saying it is cancelling its contracts with thosecompanies.The initial letter went out mid-December from CST's new chief rawmaterials buyer, Coletano Abreu. It asked for price cuts of $4.00/t oncoals priced more than $40.00 and cuts of $3.00 on coals between $30.00and $40.00, both to be effective January 15. At the same time, CST sentletters to iron ore producer CVRD asking for a 10% cut and to shippingcompany Doce Nave also asking for 10%.The company said it was forced to take the measure because of a 25-30%drop in sales of steel slabs, its only product. CST is believed to beunder pressure from its leading bank which, like many banks in Brazil,is going through a bad period due to the lack of inflationary gainsunder the new currency system.Suppliers have universally responded to this message by saying it isnot possible. One major supplier told ICR, "We sent back a very politeletter saying that we appreciate where they're coming from, but when werun into bad times we bite the bullet and we expect the customer to dothe same."The informal reaction, however, has been far from polite. Theimplications of such a move are obvious, as the modification of formalcontracts in progress would call into question the whole framework ofagreements in the market. CST's action has reportedly been as unpopularelsewhere in Brazil as it has with the suppliers, as buyers at theother mills worry their credibility will be undermined. According tosources outside CST, it is also highly unpopular with members of thecompany's raw materials purchasing staff whose experience in the coalmarket is far more extensive than that of the newcomer Abreu.As mentioned above, the initial price cut request was followed by amessage to selected high-vol suppliers indicating their contracts wereactually being cancelled. This message, sent out December 28, stated:"Due to substantial changes in our coal blending, as a consequence ofdrastic administrative measures because of declining slab prices in theinternational market, we are cancelling the balance of our contracts."   It wasn't clear at press time which companies were the luckyrecipients of this second message. Some sources said, however, theybelieved CST was attempting to cut back on US high-vol because it hadrecently taken increased volumes of high-vol from Canada's Devco.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SHELL RINGS THE CHANGESShell Coal International has replaced Peter de Wit in his position asvice president, supply and trading, with Mike Sweeney, previouslygeneral manager for Asia, America and for metallurgical coal. De Witmoves to a new post involving coal and gas supplies.Meanwhile, in Australia, Shell is advertising for two traders. One isto join its Shell Australia team in Sydney under Lindsay Flint, theother to work with David Heap, the Shell Coal International executivebased there. The latter is effectively a relocation of a London-basedjob, probably to Sydney or Jakarta.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ATIC SERVICES GETS NEW BOSSATIC Services has appointed Thierry Arnold as chairman, replacingPierre Verbrugghe. Michel Margnes has been reappointed as president,Michel Bellissant as CEO and Gilbert Join as secretary.  ATIC Serviceswas set up early last year when the ATIC's monopoly for coal importsinto France was abolished.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COALCORP WANTS UPGRADECoal Corporation of New Zealand is negotiating with Tranz Rail and theLyttelton Port about the provision of transport services to meetCoalCorp's planned export growth targets. The company has alsocommissioned engineering consultants Connell Wagner to undertaketechnical analysis regarding the construction of a deep-water jetty inBuller Bay, chairman David Stock said last month."Our directors are concerned about delays in the Coal Export Project todate and are progressing developments that will allow export growthtargets to be met in the event that the negotiations with Tranz Railand the LPC are not concluded satisfactorily."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996C&L SURVEY DETAILS COLLAPSE IN NSW PROFITABILITYFiscal 1994/95 was a monetary disaster for the New South Wales coalindustry with the aggregate after tax profit falling by A$100m ($74.4m)from the previous year to just A$98m, according to the annual surveyconducted by Cooper & Lybrand. However, it is expected that theperformance of the industry will show a marked improvement this year,and in 1996/97 with the expectation of further price rises this year.There is now a degree of optimism in the industry, given the higherprices and continuing increases in productivity, the director of theNSW Minerals Council and CEO of Peabody Resources, Bob Humphris, said.Although the latest Coopers & Lybrand survey is now just over sixmonths out of date, (it covers the 1994/95 FY), it does show theimmense damage caused by the savage price cuts forced by the Japanesebuyers for JFY 1994.Twenty one companies took part in the survey representing about 80% ofNSW production. This grew by 8% to about 67.5mt in the year, of which alittle more than 50% was won from underground operations. Domesticdemand remained static and all of the additional 5.1mt found its wayinto export markets which increased to close to 50mt. Operating profitafter tax but before abnormal and extraordinary items averaged onlyA$1.45/t less than half the A$3.19/t profit for the previous financialyear.If extraordinary and abnormal items are included, the meagre profit isall but wiped out. The aggregate bottom line result for last financialyear for all the companies surveyed was only A$3m which suggests that,in all probability, a relatively large percentage of the respondentstraded in the red.The Minerals Council, as always, has been quick to point out that thegovernments' take of coal industry revenue was much higher than thatreceived by the producers. Total government revenue grew from A$12.14/tin 1993/94 to A$12.43/t. The figure includes services provided, notablyrail freights, as well as income tax. A breakdown of the total paymentsto the state and federal governments suggest that NSW is getting itsact together on becoming a more efficient provider of services.Provision of government services fell from A$396m in 1992/93 to A$336min 1993/94 and to A$312m last financial year - a 24% drop in threeyears. This was achieved despite the fact that tonnages moved rose byalmost 9% last year. Capital investment in 1994/95, mirroring industryoptimism, rose to A$625m from $485m the year before and it is estimatedthat it will rise further to around A$700m this financial year. It isalso likely that capital expenditure will remain strong for theremainder of this decade as producers gear up for the anticipatedincrease in demand. Most of this will be met through brownfieldsexpansion, Humphris said. The survey also includes a comparison of datafrom a constant group of respondents whose production rose from 60.9mtto 61.8mt in the last couple of years although employment levels fellby almost 800 from 12,064 to 11,272. The constant group also performedbetter financially than all the respondents with the after taxoperating profit before abnormals and extraordinaries being A$106mcompared with A$210 the previous year.The Minerals Council has also released data compiled by the Joint CoalBoard and the Reserve Bank which shows that employment levels for theentire industry continue to fall. These dropped 8.6% in 1992/93 to14,458, a further 5.2% to 13,701 in 1993/94 and a further 0.6% to13,612 last financial year. At the same time, output per employee isrising steadily - up 7.7% three years ago to 5,580t a man year followedby a 6.5% rise in 1993/94 to 5,940t and a further 6% increase last yearto 6,440t.Consequently, the labour cost per tonne produced dropped 4.5% in1992/93, 4.2% in 1993/94 and 2.5% last year to A$10.39.NSW Coal Industry 1992 - 1995                           1992/93       1993/94       1994/95Operating profit1$/t                          2.87          3.18          1.45% return onshareholders' funds           9.2           9.7           4.7Government revenueTotal $/t                   12.80         12.14         12.43Excl. PAYE tax $/t           8.66          8.31          8.31Royalties, company taxes     2.93          2.92          3.69Net profit after taxExcl. abnormals andextraordinaries ($m)         198            198            98Total ($m)                   149            201             3Debt to equity ratio        0.53           0.56          0.50Capital expenditure          331            485           625Survey coverage% production2                 82             74            77No. of respondents            21             19            211 After tax but excluding abnormal and extraordinary items.2 % of industry production covered by survey.Source: Coopers & Lybrand financial survey - summary of major results.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CONSOL, RHEINBRAUN TALK BUYOUTDuPont is negotiating with Rheinbraun parent RWE to sell its remaining50% share in leading US producer Consol, according to reliable sources.The two sides held a series of pre-Christmas meetings in London to workout the details of the buyout, but are still talking over valuation,ICR understands.The crux of the matter, apparently, is that Rheinbraun does not expectto pay as much for the second half of the company as it did for thefirst half. The German company paid an estimated $1.25bn for itsinitial share in 1991 (ICR 270/6).A Consol spokesman said he could not comment on acquisition rumours.From Germany, RWE chief Dietmar Kuhnt issued a statement confirmingthat DuPont wants to sell its stake in Consol and saying that RWE willlook for another partner or partners to replace DuPont.Expectations have been high this fall that DuPont would soon sell itsshare in Consol. The company has made no secret that it considers coalto be a non-core asset. One source points out that reports of adivestiture have been widespread since former DuPont chairman EdgarWoolard said the company intended to buy back shares owned by Seagramand to fund that with a sale of Consol.In connection with the RWE-DuPont negotiations, there have also beenrumours that a third party will take a minority share in Consol. Thename of Cyprus Amax has come up in this connection, but it should beremembered that Cyprus has been mentioned as a prospective buyer ofvirtually every property on the block for the past six months. Oneobserver notes that a part-ownership of Consol by Cyprus Amax would beillogical from an operational point of view as it would "paralyse" thetwo competitors.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CONSOL ANNOUNCES REORGANISATIONConsol will eliminate three regional mining offices in a majorreorganisation resulting in the loss of an estimated 200-300 jobs. Alsoat Consol, company president William Karis will take over Bobby Brown'sposition as CEO, while Brown will stay with Consol to focus on"strategic issues."In the reorganisation, Consol will shut down its mining offices inWashington, Pennsylvania; Morgantown, West Virginia; and St. Louis,Missouri. Functions handled at these mid-level offices will betransferred either to company headquarters in Pittsburgh or to themining operations themselves, a spokesman told ICR."We are trying to update our structure to reflect the character of ourcompany in 1995," the spokesman said. "The structure was put in placein 1975, but we mine fifty percent more coal than we did 20 years agowith fifty percent fewer mines."The change will be effective as of February. There have also beenrumours that some of Consol's regional sales offices will close, butthe spokesman said he was not aware of any such plan.Regarding Brown's new role, the company did not define the "strategicissues" he will deal with, but his responsibilities may be related toan upcoming change in ownership. The shift of the CEO position fromBrown to Karis follows a transfer of the president position from theformer to the latter in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AEP, COGENTRIX FORM VENTUREAmerican Electric Power, the largest coal-burning power company in theUS, has formed a joint venture with independent power company Cogentrixand with Zurn Industries of Erie, Pennsylvania. The venture, calledIndustrial Energy Partners, will focus on building IPPs sellingelectricity beyond AEP's own service area, possibly including overseas.The announcement was made in December at a power conference inCalifornia. It reflects a decision by Ohio-based AEP to take advantageof the deregulation of the US electricity industry. The ventureinvolves a non-utility subsidiary called AEP Resources, one of severalunregulated entities recently formed by AEP to pursue new power-relatedmarkets. The parent company controls utilities in seven states in themidwest burning about 45m short tons (st)/yr.Cogentrix is headquartered in Charlotte, North Carolina, and operatespower projects in the US and overseas. It operates 10 plants in the USand is currently working toward development of a $1.4bn power plant inMangalore, India.Zurn is a manufacturer of equipment for power generation. It hasdesigned and built more than 40 generating stations over the past 10years that are fuelled by natural gas or waste products.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PEN OWNERSHIP CHANGESThe evolution of an independent US producer continues with PenHoldings' announcement this week that controlling interest in thecompany's common stock was sold to William Beckner January 3. Becknerhas been the company's president and chief executive officer since 1993and has held various executive positions since 1982.Pen, a privately held company located in Brentwood, Tennessee, wasoriginally formed in 1971 by Eddie Pen, who died February 6, 1993. Hiswife, Grace Pen, has served as chairman of the company's board ofdirectors since his death. The sale was effected by Grace Pen and theother co-executors of Pen's estate.The company was originally known as P&C Bituminous Coal and was createdby Pen largely to do business with Taiwan Power. However, the company'slong-term contract supplies to Taipower have declined in volume at thesame time it has shifted toward domestic markets as well as exportmarkets outside Taiwan.Pen has total revenues of more than $200m per year and employs 500people. Its two largest subsidiaries are Pen Coal Corp. and Elk HornCoal, which control about 200m short tons of reserves in east Kentuckyand southern West Virginia.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RUHRKOHLE HOPES TO INCREASE STAKE IN GERMAN CREEKRuhrkohle International, a subsidiary of Ruhrkohle Handel, the tradingarm of German coal producer Ruhrkohle, wants to increase its share inAustralia's German Creek from around 12% to at least 20%.Ruhrkohle International continues to scout the world for otherinteresting investment possibilities. Any acquisitions are likely to besmall however after the investment of several hundred million DMs inVenezuela since "Ruhrkohle is not a company with enormous financialresources." Only those of the German state.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BF IRON OUTPUT SLOWSLatest International Iron and Steel Institute blast furnace ironproduction figures show a sharp drop off in November in Europeanactivity rates. Indeed the institute's monthly analysis for the first11 months of 1995 indicates a slowing across the board of the 43industries surveyed. Although in Asia South Korea and Taiwan continueto show growth, India, and significantly, Japan are both down - thelatter by 5.9% in November compared with November 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CHINESE COKE SALES REACH 7MTThe rapid growth in Chinese coke exports could approach 9mt for thewhole of 1995, easily more than double 1994 sales. In October exportshit a new monthly record with 890,000t shipped, bringing to 7.05mt thevolume moved in the first 10 months of the year (3.13mt in JanuaryOctober 1994. Prices, according to Chinese customs authorities, reached$80.52/t FOB compared with $67.39 a year previously.Coal exports also look to be heading for another record year with22.44mt moved in the first 10 months compared with 18.34mt in the same1994 period.Chinese Coal & Coke Exports (1,000t)1994Exports        Coal           CokeJan            270            220Feb            2,200          320Mar            1,980          360Apr            1,730          230May            2,170          190Jun            1,740          330Jul            2,110          360Aug            2,780          370Sep            1,590          330Oct            1,770          420Nov            2,290          420Dec            3,680          4801995Jan            1,810          750Feb            2,260          480Mar            2,020          700Apr            2,260          750May            2,310          600Jun            2,540          730Jul            2,230          620Aug            2,540          730Sep            2,860          800Oct            1,160          890Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FREIGHTS STAY QUIETDeep sea freight rates are drifting with very little activity reportedin any sector. The Baltic Freight Index has slipped to 1,589, from itspre-Christmas level of slightly over 1,600. Brokers report an"absolutely terrible" cape-sized market and a not much better panamaxsector. Of the few spot fixtures reported, since just before Christmas,capes from the US Atlantic to ARA ranged around $6.00. A cape in thePacific fetched $5.15 for a shipment from Queensland to South Korea.The only Colombian business reported was for a 60,000t shipment fromPuerto Bolivar to Wedel in Germany at $11.25, whilst there was noRichards Bay loading fixtures reported.Freight rates to January 5 ($/t)Voyage/Vessel size              RateHRoads/Rich.Bay-Japan*     12.40  (12.25)HRoads-ARA*                 6.10   (5.95)Q'land-ARA*                 8.00   (8.00)Rich. Bay-ARA*              5.75   (5.90)US Gulf-ARA**               9.00   (9.00)Rich. Bay-Spanish Med**     9.25   (9.75)Source: H. ClarksonFigures in brackets for 29/12/95* Cape** PanamaxRecently reported coal freight fixturesRoute                   Vessel      '000                                    dwctHR-Dunkirk              Mineral Dr.  110HR-IJmuiden             Carbonesti   110Baltimore-Rotterdam     Frontl. vsl  100Baltimore-Rotterdam     Jahre Rose   100Pto Bolivar-Wedel       Vessel        60Vancouver-Taranto       Vessel        60Roberts Bank-Taranto    Vessel        57Queensland-S. Korea     Ocean Conq.  130Banjarmasin-Rotterdam   Courageous   135N. China-Madras, coke   Vessel        25Charterer     Laycan         RateKlaveness     8-15/1/96      7.90Cobelfret     prompt         5.90Hoegh         20-30/1/96     6.25Preag         15-25/1/96     6.40Kleimar       5-20/1/96     11.25Deiulemar     12/95-1/96    13.50Sidermar      10-20/1/96    13.50Yukong        11-20/1/96     5.15Yukong        15-30/1/96     6.30Glencore      12/95         20.00Source: Lloyd's List, Brokers.Recently reported coal trip chartersRoute                      DWT     Charterer  Laycan         $/dayWC US/-/Cont.              65,767  Aimcor     12/95-1/96     9,500++Vancouver/-/Jorf Lasfar    65,357  Torm       mid-1/96       8,500+Sri Lanka/Richards Bay/Korea                 61,972  Hanjin     29/12-2/1/96  12,000Muroran/Queensland/ Pakistan                  52,370  Comar      15/12/95      10,500Kalimantan/-/Japan         68,676  Daiichi    6-10/1/96     12,600+ Plus $220,000 ballast bonus++ Plus $185,000 ballast bonusSource: Lloyd's List, Brokers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CSX APPOINTS EXECUTIVESCSX Transportation has appointed three executives to posts in its coalmarketing group, effective December 1. James C. Mitchell is the newdirector-export coal, replacing Dennis Damron, who has been nameddirector-river marketing and energy. Thomas Howard has been appointedassistant vice president-energy development.Mitchell will have sales and marketing responsibility for export coalmoving to East and Gulf Coast ports. Damron will have sales andmarketing responsibility for coal movement to river terminals as wellas dealing with issues such as the deregulation of the energy industry.Howard will handle cogeneration projects and marketing of industrialcoal.Mitchell and Damron will be based in Huntington, West Virginia, andHoward will be based in Jacksonville.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UMW INAUGURATES ROBERTSThe United Mine Workers of America swore in its new president, CecilRoberts, December 22. Roberts succeeds Richard Trumka in leading the USminers' union and is expected to take an aggressive stance inattempting to reverse the union's declining representation in theindustry.Roberts has been active in the UMW since the 1970s and became aleading figure in the 1989 Pittston strike while serving as vicepresident of the union's District 17. He has worked as a coal minersince 1971.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-20IA059-000325-B005-315http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey95.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233151 text/html 166409HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:29:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:32 GMTContent-length: 166221Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey95.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DONG/AMERADA PROBE NEW DANISH N SEA GASLINE (495 words) BP/SONATRACH IN ALGERIAN GAS PUSH ON EUROPE (675 words) NIGERIA LNG SEALS MAJOR CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT (339 words) MAJOR ITALY-NORWAY GAS DEAL FLAGGED (249 words) PTT PLANS THAI WEST/EAST GASLINE (309 words) SYRIAN GAS OUTPUT POISED TO DOUBLE (190 words) GADONNEIX TAKES HELM AT GAZ DE FRANCE (432 words) NEWS POWER DEAL HOPES DASHED (49 words) HYDRO SEEKS 2000 OSEBERG GAS (159 words) GAS DELIVERIES HIT NEW PEAK (89 words) FINDS ADD 75 BCM OF GAS (58 words) EIB BACKS 'YAMAL' LINE (106 words) NORFRA GROUP URGES SHORT LOOP (123 words) STATOIL/HYDRO TAKE NV STAKES (85 words) CLYDE GETS TRIPLE GREEN LIGHT (95 words) RUSSIAN OUTPUT SLIDES 2% (27 words) TURKMEN OUTPUT SET TO RISE (108 words) COLD SPELLS GOOD/BAD BG NEWS (274 words) BG APPOINTS CONTRACTS GURU (302 words) HOMES COMPETITION 'ON COURSE' (190 words) MINISTER RESIGNATION HITS GAS TAX (281 words) EVN/BAYERNWERKE LAND KOGAZ (261 words) INDUSTRY CALLS FOR LPG TANK LAW (97 words) GAS TRADER REPORTS SUCCESS (126 words) TIGAZ BOARD BACKS $280M PLAN (102 words) THREE PIPE PRODUCERS FINED (98 words) GERMAN NORTH SEA GAS EYED AGAIN (253 words) REPSOL CONFIRMS T&T DEAL (455 words) NEW SWITCH TO GAS FUEL (162 words) GN QUITS TELECOMS PLAY (164 words) GN BOLSTERS TARRAGONA STAKE (66 words) PGNIG IN FRESH NORWAY MOVE (464 words) SUBSEA ROUTE FOR CADIZ GAS (119 words) CONFERENCE REPORT INTERCONNECTOR TRANSIT INTEREST (775 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW STORAGE WINS GRONINGEN TIME (1077 words) NOW TOTAL GAS DEAL CLOSE? (275 words) RASGAS AWARDS $200M CONTRACTS (114 words) NEWS QATAR/ITALY IN PIPELINE TALKS (74 words) QATAR IN PHILIPPINES TALKS (219 words) FIRMS PLAN AMMONIA PRODUCTION (183 words) SOUTH AFRICA GROUP EYES MOSSGAS (138 words) MORE GAS SET FOR PETCHEMS (133 words) UMC WELL COMES GOOD (121 words) MAGHREB LINE WINS NEW CREDITS (259 words) PRICE HITCH FOR PIPELINE PLANS (216 words) TWO BIDS FOR PAK-IRAN LINE (358 words) QATAR/TURKEY LNG DEAL 'CLOSE' (92 words) EGYPT-ISRAEL ACCORD FLAGGED (601 words) COST CUTS MAY FORCE MERGERS (240 words) SHIP CHARTER SLASHES COST (122 words) PETRONAS DETAILS NEW LNG PLANT (312 words) DUTCH FIRMS IN LPG PROJECT (70 words) TEPCO PLANS LNG CAPACITY BOOST (75 words) FLUOR/MITSUBISHI FORGE LNG LINK (38 words) UEA IN CHINA GAS VENTURE (83 words) TENNECO WINS GASLINE LICENCE (117 words) SANTOS TESTS RECORD GAS FLOW (96 words) WOODSIDE DECAMPS TO PERTH (89 words) CALTEX IN LPG STORAGE PLAN (133 words) YACHENG GAS FEEDS HONG KONG (243 words) CHINA 'CUTS LPG TARIFF BY 3%' (38 words) ALLIANCE FOCUSES ON GAS MARKET (49 words) SABAH GAS WORK UNDER WAY (54 words) FERTILISER FIRM UP FOR SALE (113 words) DABHOL D-DAY LOOMS - AGAIN (289 words) MOBIL IN LPG JOINT VENTURE (152 words) ESSAR/PREMIER LAND R FIELDS (182 words) GAIL SEEKS GAS PLAN PARTNERS (135 words) UNION TEXAS/OXY IN LPG PLAN (151 words) PAKISTAN SET FOR NEW ROUND (94 words) FIELD NARROWS FOR $700M PROJECT (335 words) UNIQUE/MITSUI CHASE MARKETS (738 words) PTT MULLS HIGHER BURMA TAKE (369 words) CAMBODIA MULLS PTT MODEL (336 words) HONDO WARNS GASLINE IN DOUBT (253 words) NEB DETAILS EXPORTS IMPACT (115 words) HANSON SELLS SUBURBAN PROPANE (182 words) FLYING START FOR MARITIMES LINE (320 words) CORPOVEN PLANS NGLS LEAP (151 words) SHV CALOR EXPANDS IN BRAZIL (165 words) CPUC SEEKS POWER COMPETITION (825 words) COLD SPARKS PRICE SPIKE (430 words) NEW PIPE TALLY 8,000 MILES (168 words) ENGINE IN SCHOOL BUS EXAM (254 words) ELTRON IN NEW SYNGAS R&D (157 words) BUYERS TO HOOK INTO US SYSTEM (128 words) NEW INDIANA PLANT ON STREAM (186 words) CMS BUYS PETAL STORAGE (151 words) BECHTEL LANDS LNG EPC CONTRACT (370 words) GASLINE PLANS 'MAKE PROGRESS' (573 words) GAS VEHICLE PRODUCTION OK'D (97 words) US INVOLVEMENT NOW LIKELY (111 words) CRISTOBAL NEEDS HIGHER PRICE (119 words) ATCO NEGOTIATING SALE OF ATCOR RESOURCES (42 words) AGAC BUYS ACIA, THE LOCAL REFUSE COLLECTION COMPANY (43 words) EL PASO BUYS PREMIER GAS (50 words) MCN BUYING CONSOL COAL'S COALBED-METHANE BUSINESS (60 words) NGC BUYS OKEENE GAS-GATHERING SYSTEM (56 words) BULGARIAN GAS FIND (69 words) DEMAND FOR CANADIAN NATURAL GAS (96 words) COPHILL PLUGGING WELL IN PHILIPPINES (37 words) AMMONIA PLANT AT CABO NEGRO (41 words) FINANCING FOR SUI NORTHERN GAS PIPELINE (50 words) INDONESIAN LNG SHIPMENT TO SOUTH KOREA (51 words) THAI LPG PROJECT (126 words) START-UP OF NORSK HYDRO'S PORSGRUNN COMPLEX (96 words) NEW YORK TO CONVERT SOME TAXIS TO COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS (80 words) INDIAN PETROCHEMICALS TO RAISE POLYETHYLENE CAPACITY (48 words) TAIWAN FACES A NEW WORRY: SUBSIDENCE (85 words) SIAM CEMENT AND DOW CHEMICAL JOINT VENTURE TO PRODUCE LLDPE (172 words) CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DONG/AMERADA PROBE NEW DANISH N SEA GASLINEDenmark's state owned Dansk Olie og Naturgas (Dong) and Amerada HessA/S, local unit of US Amerada Hess Corp, are jointly investigating apossible DKr1.5-2.5bn ($270.7-451m) new gas transport system in theDanish North Sea, potentially tapping Norwegian and UK supplies as wellas Danish gas.  The move follows acceptance by Dong of an Ameradaproposal to participate in a joint study of the technical and economicfeasibility of building a new system.  Faced with rapidly growingnatural gas demand in Denmark Dong is currently investigating furthergas supplies.Dong already owns the existing pipeline system transporting natural gasfrom Central Graben fields in the southwestern Danish North Sea toshore on the west coast of Jutland.  Announcing the new investigationlate last month, Amerada noted the existing system has an annualtransport capacity of about 7.5 Bcm.  This corresponds to the totalamount of gas Dansk Undergrunds Consortium, hitherto Dong's solesupplier, is able to deliver to Dong from 1997.  "With these deliveriesthe existing gas transport system will be nearing its capacity," saidAmerada."From the turn of the century, Dong expects to be able to selladditional gas in the region of two billion cubic metres per annumwhich entails securing new gas supplies.  Taken together, this meansthat there is a need for a new system which will also give improvedsecurity of supply for the Danish market."  Amerada is an operator andparticipant in several exploration licences in the Danish sector whileDong is a part owner, with a typical 20% share in all licences awardedsince 1984.Amerada says it expects to start Danish sector production soon, withone discovery for which it has expectations being the South Arne fieldin licence 7/89.  This saw a promising production test earlier lastyear.  "A new gas transport system would be able to gather gas fromboth South Arne as well as other smaller fields and could also belinked to the Norwegian system," said Amerada.  Amerada and Dong would"in appropriate circumstances" seek cooperation with other fieldowners.Some of these smaller fields would not be economic if they had to bearthe costs of a transport infrastructure on their own, said Amerada."Apart from transporting gas from any smaller Danish fields there mayalso be a possibility to transport gas to Denmark from the UK, Germanand Norwegian sectors.  Depending on which technical solution is themost attractive, the transport system would require an investment ofapproximately 1.5-2.5bn Danish Kroner (C.#170-280 million)."The accompanying map (see hard copy) shows the existing transportsystems for oil and natural gas from Danish Undergrunds Consortium'sfields in the Central Graben in the southwestern Danish North Sea.  Thedotted line indicates a potential new transport sytem for natural gasemanating from the South Arne field in the western Danish North Sea.Amerada notes there are unutilised fields on Danish as well as onGerman, English and Norwegian territory.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BP/SONATRACH IN ALGERIAN GAS PUSH ON EUROPEBP just before Christmas announced signing of a major potential $3.5bngas deal with Algerian state oil and gas firm Sonatrach which marks akey new strategic phase in Algeria's push for future gas sales inEurope and a major advance for BP's ambitions to boost itsinternational gas business. The two companies signed an agreement toexplore for and produce gas in the remote Sahara Desert and,particularly significantly, to market it jointly in Europe, notablysouthern Europe.Algerian industry and energy minister Ammar Makhloufi said the BP dealcould be a model for other similar projects; Exxon is reportedly tostart negotiations on a possible natural gas deal close to the BPlocation. Algeria's bloody struggle between Islamic militants andgovernment security forces has not so far deterred energy firms; whilethe bulk of oil and gas fields are in the south of the country mostviolence has been in the north.Commenting on the new deal, BP chief executive John Browne said: "Thisis a landmark agreement which could increase BP's worldwide gasproduction by 30%. It is the first major gas joint venture a foreigncompany has signed with Sonatrach, the sole gas producer in Algeria forthe past 30 years. It has the potential to open up a new area of gasproduction in Algeria and, from the next decade onwards, to giveEuropean consumers greater choice in their sources of gas supply."Under the deal, which follows two years of negotiations, BP willinitially appraise known gas finds and search for additional reservesin the In Salah region of District 3 some 1,200 km south of Algiers.The licence area is about 25,000 sq km or 20% of the total District 3area and BP said the area was believed to be capable of producing about10 Bcm/yr of gas by the early part of the next century; the area hasyielded no liquids to date and they are not expected.Present BP global gas output is about 13 Bcm/yr, most in the North Sea.Current estimates are that the Algerian licence area holds about 10 Tcfsplit equally between existing finds and future discoveries. Subject toproving sufficient reserves, gas would be transported north via a newpipeline (see map in hard copy) to link with Algeria's existingpipeline system and then onwards by pipe to Europe to be marketedjointly by a new company to be owned 50:50 by BP and Sonatrach. Firstgas is looked for about 2002-2003.BP said it was planning to spend about $100m on an initial two to threeyear appraisal and exploration programme and later investment decisionswould be needed for subsequent stages of the project. The deal requiresapproval of the European Union as well as ratification by Algerianauthorities. BP Exploration chief executive Rodney Chase said BP wouldshortly start seismic work in the In Salah region and was planning todrill nine appraisal and exploration wells to establish location andsize of known reserves and to find new fields. The licence area holdsseven known gasfields and 750 sq km of 3D seismic will be shot overthese, plus drilling of five appraisal wells. A separate explorationarea in the licence has a work programme of 2,000 sq km of 2D seismicand four exploration wellsDepending on success of this initial phase, full development wouldrequire construction of a 520 km, 48-inch diameter pipeline to take gasto Hassi R'Mel, Algeria's gas hub, linking up to the new Maghrebgasline to Spain and the TransMed system to Italy, and then on tomarket. LNG export is not envisaged. Pipeline construction could costup to $1,000m, with full cost of the project estimated at some $3,500mover a five year period. BP would fund 65% of this investment andSonatrach the remainder. BP is expected to get about 30% of net profitsover the full 20-30 year life of the project. The pipeline is bigenough to carry gas from other concessions.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NIGERIA LNG SEALS MAJOR CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTNigeria LNG Ltd (NLNG) late last year turned a deaf ear to continuedinternational calls for reprisals against Nigeria's military regime forits execution of minority Ogoni activists (IGR 289/21) and kept thelong delayed Bonny LNG project on the rails with final award of themain project construction contract. The company said the move startedthe final phase of the project which main foreign partner Shell notedhas so far taken 30 years to bring to fruition. The lump sum turnkeycontract, reportedly worth about $3bn, has been confirmed to acontracting consortium of France's Technip, Italian Snamprogetti, MWKellogg of the US and Japan's JGC.It covers engineering, procurement and construction for theliquefaction plant at Finima, Bonny Island, together with associatedfacilities and the gas transmission system to collect natural gas fromproducers. NLNG said the contractors were "obliged to ensure maximumNigerian input during construction and to follow strict regulations toensure environmental impact protection". Shell, holder of 25.6% of theproject and technical leader, said until now there had been no way todispose of large volumes of associated gas produced with oil in theDelta region.If the construction contract had not been signed by end-1995 a complex,interdependent series of other contracts, including contracts forexport of Nigerian gas, would have collapsed, terminating the LNGproject with little hope of revival. It again stressed the benefits ofthe project for jobs and the environment - through cuts in gas flaring - and that no dividends would accrue to shareholders, which include theNigerian state, until after 2007.Shell Development Co of Nigeria managing director Brian Anderson said:"We recognise there have been calls for the project to be halted as agesture of political protest. We respect these views and understand theconcerns they reflect. But we cannot accept that this would-contributeto the good of Nigeria." Other partners in NLNG are Nigerian NationalPetroleum Corp with a 49% stake, France's Elf with 15% and Italy's Agipwith 10.4%.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MAJOR ITALY-NORWAY GAS DEAL FLAGGEDAgreement appears imminent in negotiations on a supply deal toestablish Norway as a major source of natural gas for Italy. AntonioBadini, Italian ambassador in Oslo, is quoted in the weekly MondoEconomico as saying: "It's now a question of several weeks, the timefor settling the last details." The agreement was said by the magazineto provide for the Eni group's Snam to import 10-12 Bcm/yr from theNorwegian North Sea for an annual value of L1,500bn ($940m). It wouldrun for 20 years, from 1999/2000. The magazine added that Norwegiancommerce minister Gete Knudsen discussed the matter on a recent visitto Italy.The Eni group gives no further details than those already disclosed bySnam. The negotiations, Snam said last month, are with the GFUconsortium of Norwegian producers and the gas would be landed atDunkerque, France under arrangements with Gaz de France. A pipelinewould have to be laid across French territory to bring the gas toMontcenis on the Italian border. Little has been made known about thepipeline scheme and various aspects are reported still under discussionsuch as whether it would be owned by Gaz de France alone or jointlywith Snam.The advantage for Snam is that in Norway it will gain a secure majorsource, at much lower political risk than the two existing leadingsuppliers, Algeria and Russia. It already imports lesser quantitiesfrom a low risk source, Holland, but here the availability is limited.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PTT PLANS THAI WEST/EAST GASLINEThe Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT) is embarking on a 7.27bn baht($290.8m) investment project for a new natural gas pipeline spanningfrom Thailand's western region to the east. The new gasline, 28 inchesin diameter and 200 km long, will be laid from Ratchaburi province tolink with PTT's existing gas grid at the Bangkok South Power plant inSamut Prakan and Wang Noi in Ayutthaya. According to PTT, the west-to-east line is geared to respond to greater natural gas demand byindustries and future power stations operated by independent powerproducers (IPPs) along the route.The gasline will form an integral part of the larger pipeline, 42inches in diameter and 300 km long, to be laid from the Thai-Burmeseborder at Kanchanaburi province to a 1,800 MW combined cycle plant tobe built by Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (Egat). TheKanchanaburi-Ratchaburi gasline, estimated to cost 16.5bn baht, willtransport natural gas from Burma's offshore Yadana and Yetagungasfields to Thailand. PTT has just received Cabinet endorsement forinvesting in the two gasline projects. The west-to-east pipeline isscheduled operational in 1999, a year after expected completion of theKanchanaburi-Ratchaburi stretch.At present, PTT, the Thai state oil and gas firm, is selectingcompanies to provide engineering consultancy services for theKanchanaburi-Ratchaburi gasline project, PTT officials said. Meanwhile,the Cabinet has signalled a green light for PTT to proceed with a1.47bn baht investment in another gas pipeline scheme - a 24-inch, 100km stretch - from Tantawan gasfield in the Gulf of Thailand to tie inwith PTT's Gulf grid. The approval came after PTT sealed an agreementwith the group led by US-based Pogo Producing for long-term natural gassupply from Tantawan. The Tantawan gasline is scheduled complete at end-1997, before starting delivery of 100 MMcfd to PTT (IGR 287/18).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SYRIAN GAS OUTPUT POISED TO DOUBLEPlans have been put together that will see a doubling of Syrian gasproduction by 2000. A recent study into reserves and prospects leadsthe oil ministry to give the green light to projects aimed at utilisinga flow of over 16 MMcmd. Four schemes will make this possible, thebiggest being the start of production from fields near Palmyra. Theseare due to start up at 3 MMcmd when first-stage development iscompleted in 1996. A second stage development will double that to 6MMcmd during 1997.Also near Palmyra will be Marathon's oilfield development, expected toyield some 1.1 MMcmd of associated gas by 2000. Final scheme involvesexpansion of production and processing capacity at the Jbeissahgasfield, where output will rise from 1.7 MMcmd now to 2.5 MMcmd.Getting this new gas to market will involve laying of 1,160 km of newpipeline. Utilisation will come mainly from new power plants such asthat at al-Zara (IGR 289/22), fertiliser production, refinery use, ironand steel production and general industrial use. By 2000, these willabsorb 12.85 MMcmd. Distribution through domestic grids will take 3.5MMcmd.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GADONNEIX TAKES HELM AT GAZ DE FRANCEPierre Gadonneix has succeeded Loik le Floch-Prigent as president ofGaz de France (GdF). The latter - who has socialist credentials as wellas a reputation for competent management - was sent in to pacify staterailway company Societe Nationale de Chemins de Fer (SNCF) whoseemployees were at the vanguard of the recent wave of French strikes. Itwas third time lucky for Gadonneix, appointed general manager of GdF inJuly 1987. In 1988, when Jacques Fournier left, Gadonneix saw FrancisGutmann get the top job. In 1993, le Floch-Prigent was appointed overhis head.Choice of the highly qualified Gadonneix - who has a doctorate from theHarvard Business School, as well as attending France's elite technicaluniversity Ecole Polytechnique, and the specialised Ecole NationaleSuperieure du Petrole et des Moteurs - also contrasts with the recentpolitically motivated appointment of Edmond Alphandery at the head ofGdF's sister organisation Electricite de France. But like Alphandery,Gadonneix will take part in nominating his deputy, which willstrengthen his presidential authority. Among names being mentioned forthe general manager's post are current deputy general manager JeanBalazuc, as well as director of the industry ministry's energydepartment Claude Mandil, and Michel Francony, director of EdF-GdFServices (which manages both utilities' distribution systems).It remains to be seen to what extent Gadonneix will pursue theinternationalist and market oriented policies of his predecessor. Hemust renegotiate the company's charter, which defines its activities.At home GdF faces challenges from both electricity and fuel oil andcould face challenges to its monopoly of gas distribution from suchestablished service companies as Generale des Eaux or Lyonnaise desEaux. Internationally, Gadonneix will have to manage assets alreadyacquired in Canada, Uruguay and US. Eventually, he will also have toface pressure from Brussels to deregulate, even if the EuropeanCommission has decided to focus its attention on deregulating theelectricity market in the first instance, and is taking its time.In his time at the industry ministry, Gadonneix worked with liberallyinclined ministers such as Michel d'Ornano, Rene Monory and AlainMadelin. But he will face fierce opposition from the trade unions toany proposals along the lines of le Floch-Prigent's plans to exchangeshareholdings with Russian gas company Gazprom, even if currentindustry minister Franck Borotra favours selling minority stakes to anElf or a Statoil, or to individuals.* GdF is to pay the state a dividend of FFr970m ($198.34m) for 1995,while Electricite de France is to pay FFr1.5bn, according to figurespublished in the official journal.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996POWER DEAL HOPES DASHEDForecasts of an accord by EU energy ministers on electricity marketliberalisation last month (IGR 289/16) proved unfounded. The thornyissue - with gas liberalisation even further away from agreement-- nowfalls in the lap of Italy which took over EU presidency from Spain on 1January this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HYDRO SEEKS 2000 OSEBERG GASNorsk Hydro has now submitted a NKr3.6bn ($569.8m) plan to Norway'sindustry and energy ministry for development and operation of gasreserves at its North Sea Oseberg field, with start of gas exportstargeted at 2000. Development would be via a new steel gas process andexport platform linked to the Oseberg field centre with gas exportstied into the existing pipeline system in the Heimdal area. RecoverableOseberg gas reserves are put at 115 Bcm and average gas export at 4Bcm/yr during 2000-2010, rising to 10 Bcm/yr thereafter.Investment costs are estimated at NKr2.5bn for the field installationsand NKrl.lbn for the pipeline. Oseberg started oil production in 1988,now running at some 0.5m b/d. Meanwhile, Norwegian state oil and gasfirm Statoil has now submitted a development and operation plan to theministry for the mid-Norwegian Aasgard field. A verdict on whether gasfrom the project will be processed at Kaarstoe or Kollsnes remainsoutstanding.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS DELIVERIES HIT NEW PEAKNorwegian gas deliveries to continental Europe hit a new peak in earlyDecember because of cold weather, according to state oil and gas firmStatoil. Daily gas delivery orders received by the gas sales centre atStavanger and the Bygnes operations centre set the record duringDecember 5-8. Almost 55 MMcmd was piped through the Europipe andStatpipe/Norpipe systems to Emden, Germany and the Zeepipe trunkline toZeebrugge, Belgium. With deliveries from Ekofisk on top, these salesensured maximum Norwegian deliveries in response to Europe's coldweather, said Statoil.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FINDS ADD 75 BCM OF GASHydrocarbons were found in 64% of wells drilled on Norway's continentalshelf last year but most were small, according to state oil and gascompany Statoil. Proven reserves are put at roughly 320m bbls of oiland 75 Bcm of natural gas, it said. Figures are provisional as some ofthe biggest finds have yet to complete testing.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EIB BACKS 'YAMAL' LINEThe European Investment Bank (EIB) is willing to finance up to 15% ofthe cost of the Polish section of the planned 'Yamal' natural gaspipeline from Russia to Germany, according to bank deputy presidentWolfgang Roth. The Polish section, to be built and operated by EuroPolGaz, a joint venture of Russian and Polish state firms Gazprom andPGNiG, is expected to cost $2.5bn. The EIB is already financing the$3.2bn Midal-Stegal gas pipeline system in Germany. Roth saidCommerzbank, which led commercial banks in a $940m funding of Midal-Stegal, was expected to play a leading role in arranging funds for thePolish line.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NORFRA GROUP URGES SHORT LOOPA 15-20 km by-pass loop linking Norway's Statpipe and Norpipe gastrunklines around the Ekofisk centre, should replace the existingconnection via the North Sea field, according to state oil and gas firmStatoil. It has put the proposal forward as operator of the NorFrapartnership planning a gasline from Norway to Dunkirk, France. Agovernment decision is expected by 1 March.Costed at NKr500m ($79.14m), the short loop is preferred by NorFrapartners to a longer 150 km alternative, said Statoil. Due ready bysummer 1998, it will feed gas from fields including Statfjord andGullfaks into the Norpipe line to Emden. Completion will coincide withcompletion of new facilities at Ekofisk which will in future handle gasfrom Ekofisk alone.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STATOIL/HYDRO TAKE NV STAKESStatoil and Norsk Hydro have each acquired 20% stakes in Naturgas Vestwhich aims to supply natural gas from the Troll gas terminal atKollsnes, near Bergen, according to Statoil. With share capital ofNKr680,000 ($107,627), the firm (name changed from Vestgas for theshare issue that brought in Statoil and Hydro) plans to deliver some 10-20 MMcm of gas a year to local industry and, in compressed form, to busoperators. Other shareholders include Hordaland county council, fourlocal authorities and local industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CLYDE GETS TRIPLE GREEN LIGHTUK independent Clyde Petroleum has won Dutch authorities' approval forsimultaneous development of three satellite gasfields offshore theNetherlands, all via tie-back to the existing P/6-A process facilities.Total project cost for developing P/2-NE and P/2-SE, both Rotliegendesfields, is put at Fls165m ($102.9m). First gas from the former is duein early 1997 and from the latter in mid-1997. Total project cost fordevelopment of the P/6 South field is put at Fls40m. First gas here isdue by end-1996. Total base case reserves for the three developmentsare put at 112 Bcf gross.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RUSSIAN OUTPUT SLIDES 2%Russian natural gas output for the first 11 months of 1995 was 539 Bcm,down 2% on the same 1994 period, according to the State StatisticsCommittee.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TURKMEN OUTPUT SET TO RISETurkmenistan plans to produce 41.5 Bcm of natural gas this year,exporting 30 Bcm, according to a draft 1996 budget passed by parliamentearly last month. According to official Neutral Turkmenistan newspaper,however, the Central Asian republic could produce up to 64 Bcm thisyear. That would be back in line with the 1993 tally of 63.5 Bcm beforeRussia cut off Turkmen pipe access to Europe. Production in 1994slumped to 35.6 Bcm and was planned at 34.6 Bcm last year. An increaseis now expected in the wake of the recent deal setting up joint Russo-Turkmen gas firm Turkmenrosgaz including Gazprom on the Russian side.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COLD SPELLS GOOD/BAD BG NEWSRecord low temperatures brought good news and bad news for beleagueredBritish Gas over the Christmas/New Year period. Gas demand hit newhighs with the previous peak in England and Wales exceeded by 2% whilein Scotland, where temperatures fell as low as minus 20 degrees Celsiusin Glasgow, demand was 10% up on the previous high. BG said it wasmanaging to meet demand in England from storage and higher North Seaproduction. In Scotland it was interrupting supply to businesses withinterruptible contracts. Bottled gas supplier Calor said it was selling50% more gas than a year earlier.Coming during a time of low industrial activity because of the holidayperiod, the demand rise was attributable virtually entirely to higherheating use. Spot natural gas prices firmed on the cold but the risewas modest, about 0.25p/therm to around 10.5p, as only theindustrial/commercial market is deregulated as yet. With the current UKgas glut posing major problems for BG, the higher cold weather demandwas welcome as one way of helping reduce the surplus.But this good news came hand in hand with bad as BG faced makingcompensation payments to thousands of customers for failure to respondswiftly when central heating systems broke down. The problem focussedon 3-star service contracts, for which customers pay over #100($152.3m) a year with an expectation of attention within 24 hours ofnotifying a breakdown. BG denied staff cuts were to blame for delaysand said weather conditions were exceptional. But the Gas ConsumersCouncil said it had tracked an increase in 3-star contract complaintsbefore Christmas and the cold snap.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BG APPOINTS CONTRACTS GURUBritish Gas has now appointed a special negotiator to handle the take-or-pay gas contracts problem that has faced it with costly write-downs.At the same time it has indicated first producers to agree torenegotiate contracts with BG will get best terms. So far North Seaproducers have shown no inclination to revamp long term take-or-paycontracts to supply BG at prices well above current competitive marketlevels. Job of BG's new chief negotiator Kenneth Gardener, a directorof Charterhouse Bank, is to persuade producers to come to the table.Gardener, who took on his new post on 1 January, has given up executiveduties at Charterhouse but remains a director. On his appointment lastmonth he acknowledged producers would be reluctant to re-open legallybinding contracts but said he believed a "win win" position couldemerge from negotiations. He has agreed to give at least two years tothe problem. Meanwhile, BG has also indicated it will increase pressureon producers after 1 February when the supply contracts will betransferred to a new trading subsidiary.News of the troubleshooter appointment was one factor in a sharp pre-Christmas rally in BG shares which added some 9% in just a couple ofdays, the price rising to 250p ($3.88); other factors were record coldweather and renewed market speculation, so far unfounded, that a bidmay emerge for BG from the likes of Shell or BP. BG also underlined theincreased significance of legal issues in its affairs with appointmentof William Friedrich, formerly with international law firm Shearman &Sterling, as its general counsel. Other recent senior appointmentsinclude promotion of Harry Moulson, head of BG pipe unit TransCo, toexecutive director and of Dr Pierre Jungels, formerly with Belgium'sPetrofina, as managing director, exploration and production.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HOMES COMPETITION 'ON COURSE'The UK government is pressing ahead with a pilot trial of domestic gasmarket competition this spring despite claims that necessary systemsare not ready. Some 0.5m household customers in southwest England aredue to be offered a choice of supplier, breaking the current BritishGas monopoly, from 1 April. BG pipeline unit TransCo sought delay ofthe trial, expressing concern over lack of time for computer testing.But in the run-up to Christmas industry and energy minister Tim Eggarrejected the move.Instead, it was agreed gas regulator Ofgas should appoint a'troubleshooter' or 'controller' to ensure problems are sorted out andthe timetable is maintained. Following the offer from Amerada Hess ofsavings of some 15% on current levels for households switching from BG,Total has waded in with announced savings of up to 16%, with Swebgas,regional electricity company in the southwest area, offering savings ofat least 17%. Texaco has also joined forces with LPG market leaderCalor to chase the domestic and small commercial natural gas markets.BG has yet to reveal its hand on how it will respond to the householdmarket challenge.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MINISTER RESIGNATION HITS GAS TAXResignation and replacement of Austrian finance minister AndreasStaribacher last week [2 January] will likely cause a further delay inintroduction of a tax on gas (IGR 287/12), variously labelled as anenergy, CO2 or environmental levy. Petroleum products came under thetax last May, with gas, electricity and coal to follow. Originally theextended tax was expected at the start of this year but parties to thediscussion, ranging from government to electricity and industrialinterests, have been unable to agree a formula which would be fair toall consumers. Staribacher had argued in favour of the tax on gas ongrounds that the tax should be part of a general energy levy toencourage reduced consumption, not to promote a shift from one energysource to another.As finance minister, he had been under considerable pressure to imposethe broadened tax as part of a programme to ease an unbearably largebudget deficit projected for this year. Staribacher's replacement asfinance minister is Viktor Klima, who leaves his previous post asminister for state industry, transportation and communications. Beforejoining the government, Klima was finance chief at OMV and will likelybe sympathetic to demands of the energy industry in view of OMV'smonopoly over gas imports.The cabinet reshuffle as well as expected complications in forming anew government following an indecisive election last month will nowprobably postpone any possible introduction of the levy on gas and theremaining energy resources until after mid-year at earliest. Once agovernment is established, the issue of the amount of the tax and theexceptions (such as gas used for electricity generation) will stillhave to be resolved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EVN/BAYERNWERKE LAND KOGAZSuccess of a joint $87m bid by Germany's Bayernwerke and Austria'sEnergieversorgung Niederosterreich (EVN) in the second tender forHungary's Kogaz regional gas utility (IGR 289/4) has cemented apartnership which could have further consequences. The two concernsincreased their offer for Kogaz by some $20m to win in their bid for a50% plus one share holding in the utility which serves three provincesin the southwestern part of the country bordering on Slovenia andCroatia. EVN had hoped rather to gain a shareholding in a gas utilitybordering on Austria, making supply synergies possible, but had to becontent with the Kogaz award.The Austrian concern has had a co-operation agreement with Kogaz forsome time. Kogaz  supplies about 190,000 customers in a service areawith a population of over 1m. Annual sales of about 700 Bcm are worthabout $6.2m. While EVN was the only Austrian utility to share inHungary's gas privatisation, the deal will not bring pleasure to OMV,which holds a virtual monopoly over gas imports to Austria.The reason is the stronger relationship which EVN will achieve withBayernwerke, seen by OMV and federal electricity authority Verbund asan unwelcome intruder on the Austrian energy scene. Bayernwerke alreadyshares with EVN  a holding in Austria's one private gas and oilproducer, Rohol Aufsuchungs AG (RAG). The German concern has madeoffers on several Austrian privatisations but has been rebuffed by OMVand the Verbund with support from the government, which prefers to seecontrol of the energy sector remain in Austrian hands.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDUSTRY CALLS FOR LPG TANK LAWAlthough Austria's proposed new law governing fixed-location LPG tankswas published last August, the legislation has not yet been passed.Industry has urged that the oNORM M 7323 technical standard, virtuallyidentical to the German TRB 610 standard which took effect as of 1January 1996, be enacted immediately in Austria. Industry points outthat the German standard was developed at some expense due to extensiveresearch and testing and that there is no reason the law not be adoptedat once. The regulation would apply to tanks used by private as well asindustry gas consumers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS TRADER REPORTS SUCCESSGWH Gas- u. Warenhandelsgesmbh, a joint venture trading house owned byAustria's gas import monopoly OMV and Russia's Gazexport, has reporteda successful 1995 with a trading volume of Sch1.9bn ($190m). The firmwas set up in 1994 to expedite dealings between the two concerns and toovercome Russian currency problems. Under agreements which run until2012, Gazexport last year supplied about 1.7 Bcm of gas in exchange for4,000 tonnes (t) of lubricants, 2,000t of polyethylene and about 1.2msq metres of geotextiles, with the latter products supplied by OMV'splastics subsidiaries for use in the Russian gas industry. GWH was alsoinstrumental in expediting a long-term contract for transport of anadditional 500 MMcm of Russian gas through Austria to Bavaria via OMVpipelines.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TIGAZ BOARD BACKS $280M PLANA board meeting of Hungarian utility Tigaz, whose control was recentlyacquired by Italy's Italgas and Snam (IGR 289/4 and see separatestory), has named Eugenio Lancellotta as chairman and approved a fiveyear, $280m business plan. Lancellotta is already deputy chairman andmanaging director of Turin-based Italgas. Among other appointments,Biagio Marino is Tigaz managing director and Enrico Monti financedirector, while Janos Szalai is operations manager. At the time ofpurchase of control last month, the Italgas-Snam consortium said itplanned to increase annual sales from 2.3 Bcm to 3 Bcm and the numberof customers from 800,000 to 1m.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996THREE PIPE PRODUCERS FINEDThree leading producers of steel pipe for pipelines have been orderedby Italy's Antitrust Authority to pay fines equivalent to 1% of their1994 sales because of price fixing. Tubi Dalmine Ilva will have to payabout L262m ($163,000); Arvedi Tubi Acciao, about L135m; and GeneralSider Italiana, about L124m. A statement said the three, which haveover 70% of the domestic market, "have falsified the play ofcompetition in a consistent manner". A fourth firm, Ilva Lamiere eTubi, had also been investigated but the authority found insufficientevidence of its involvement over any length of time.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN NORTH SEA GAS EYED AGAINBEB and its partners in the German North Sea Group are taking anotherlook at development of gas reserves in the German North Sea. Alloptions are being looked at and results of a Norwegian Aker study areexpected "at the beginning of 1996". Early in 1995 BEB said it hadtaken a look at exploitation prospects for the gas and condensate in1994 "but with the present state of the Deutschemark and an oil priceof, say, $15/bbl, it is not economic to produce now". That study wasbased on a pipeline from the reserves, in blocks A/6-B/4, to Denmark,and BEB then reckoned "that we need $20/bbl to make the scheme viable".An offshore power station and a spur line to the Ekofisk-Emden Norpipetrunkline have been other options considered. Front-running scheme nowis a tie-back to Amoco's Valhall platform in the Norwegian sector. AkerEngineering is looking at a pipeline from A/6-B/4 via Norwegian, Germanand Danish territorial waters (see also separate story). At the fieldsa small wellhead platform would be sited in about 50 metres of water.BEB last drilled a well in the area, B/4-4, in 1992; B/4-3 in 1988 wasa suspended gas find and previous finds had been made in A/6. Oneproblem with the gas is high nitrogen content. Gas has also been foundin H/15-H/18. BEB tells IGR that a A/6-B/4 "development would requirethe drilling of more wells". No drilling elsewhere off Germany isenvisaged by the company in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996REPSOL CONFIRMS T&T DEALSpain's oil, gas and chemical conglomerate Repsol confirmed in mid-December it has bought the 20% stake in Trinidad and Tobago's AtlanticLNG Co that was offered to Spain's industrial gas distributor Enagas.Enagas will still buy 40% of the LNG produced at the Trinidad plant tobe built at a cost of $1bn and scheduled onstream in early 1999 (seeseparate story). Repsol, whose gas operations now account for 25% ofits profits - Pta42.2bn ($349m) in the first nine months of 1995, up26.6% - spent $200m on its share, which makes it the third biggestpartner in the 400 MMcfd LNG plant, after Amoco Trinidad LNG Co, anaffiliate of US Amoco Corp with 34%, and British Gas Trinidad LNG with26%.The other partners are Cabot Trinidad LNG, an affiliate of Cabot Corpof the US, and Trinidad's public National Gas Co, with 10% each. Theremaining 60% of the 3m tonnes (t)/yr of LNG that the plant willproduce will be bought by Boston-based Cabot. Enagas and Cabot signedan initial deal with Atlantic LNG in July and Enagas was given theoption to acquire 20% of the equity.Although insiders thought Enagas would acquire the share, Repsol's moveis part of its own gas expansion programme. Repsol owns 45.3% ofSpain's domestic gas distributor Gas Natural, which in turn holds 91%of Enagas. Repsol now has a foot firmly in Trinidad's important gasmarket and Enagas will import a further 14.6bn thermies a year of LNG,equivalent to 18% of Spain's current annual consumption, over a 20-yearperiod.Enagas is holding talks with an unnamed shipping company to rent a125,000t tanker to bring the LNG to Spain's regasification plants atHuelva and Cartegena, with an option to buy the ship. Enagas has forsome years pursued a policy of expanding and diversifying its supplysources, to give more flexibility and security to the Spanish gassector. A Repsol spokesman said its participation in the project"strengthens the company's upstream integration and consolidates thegrowing importance of natural gas in its activities". The investmentwas made through Repsol affiliate Repsol International BV.Meanwhile, the Spanish Treasury and state industrial holding companySEPI are negotiating the 'destiny' of the approximate Pta80bn that willbe gained from the sale of 7% of Repsol shares in the New Year. Thestate, through SEPI, owns 21% of Repsol and SEPI executives would likethe privatisation cash to help alleviate the Pta700bn debt it was leftwith when defunct loss-making holding company INI was closed down lastyear and partially replaced by SEPI. Treasury officials are said towant to use the capital gain to help reduce the public deficit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW SWITCH TO GAS FUELThe Basque engineering unit of Babcock Wilcox has singed a Pta2bn($16.5m) contract with southern Spanish utility Sevillana deElectricidad to convert the fuel oil-fired Bahia de Algeciras powerstation to gas use, only the second thermal plant to make the move sofar in Spain. After conversion, the station's boiler will be able touse fuel oil or gas, or a mixture of both in any proportion. Gas deEuskadi, owned by the Basque government's energy enterprise Ente Vascode la Energia (EVE) and national industrial gas distributor Enagas,recorded nine-month 1995 gross profits of Pta917m, which compares withgross profits of just Pta485m for the whole of 1994.Gas de Euskadi in mid-December inaugurated a new distribution pipelinein the Zalla district close to Bilbao. The consortium behind the futureZabalgarbi gas-fired incinerator, the largest energy project under wayin the Basque country, has increased its capital from Pta400m toPta1.4bn. The consortium includes EVE and Babcock & Wilcox.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GN QUITS TELECOMS PLAYGas Natural has made a joint announcement with electricity utilitiesEndesa and Sevillana de Electricidad that they are pulling out ofSpain's third main paging company, Compania Europea de Radiobusqueda(Cersa), in which each holds a 9% stake. The three energy companieshave had this stake in telecommunications since 1992 through theconsortium Servicio de Radiotelefonia Movil (SRM), which holds 96% ofCersa. There are two main reasons for the apparent reversal of Spanishenergy companies' diversification into telecommunications.Late arrival of the paging service in Spain meant three large operatorswith important investors emerged in the same year, just as the moresuccessful mobile telephone sector was taking off. This meant thatCersa, with 25,000 clients, lost Pta420m ($3.5m) last year. One ofSpain's two leading paging companies is expected to buy the 27% ofshares to be put on offer - Mensatel, run by the semi-publictelecommunications giant Telefonia, or Sistelcom-Telemensaje, aconsortium which includes two utilities, Union Fenosa and Fecsa.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GN BOLSTERS TARRAGONA STAKEGas Natural has acquired a further 18.39% of its affiliate GasTarraconense to bring its share to 96.61%. The acquisition of the stakein the Tarragona company in the northeastern Catalonia region is partof Gas Natural's policy of strengthening its position in itsaffiliates. In 1995, Gas Natural increased its participation in otheraffiliates such as Gas Vic, Gas Fenedes, Gas Lleida and Gas Navarra.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PGNIG IN FRESH NORWAY MOVEPolskie Gornictwo Naftowe i Gazownictwo (PGNiG, Polish Oil and Gas) istaking a fresh interest in Norwegian gas from the North Sea. The Polishgas company sees construction of the 292 km, DM3bn ($2.20bn) Netrapipeline as a fresh opportunity to achieve some of its long standingambition of diversifying gas imports away from Russia. The pipeline -built by a consortium of BEB, Norsk Hydro, Ruhrgas and Statoil - linksthe German North Sea terminal at Etzel with the gas distributionnetwork of the former German Democratic Republic at Salzwedel. Thisbrings Norwegian gas to within 70 km of the Polish border, so puttingin an additional link to Poland would be a relatively simple matter.PGNiG hopes to start negotiations with owners of the Norwegiangasfields in the next three to four months, aiming for deliveries tostart in two or three years. Whether these talks will succeed remainsto be seen. But PGNiG was confident the Norwegians could produce thegas cheaply enough to deliver it at a price that would be attractive tothe Poles. That would be some $85-95/Mcm at the Polish border,preferably either in the region of Szczecin or Gorzelec (Goerlitz).Furthermore, Poland has made considerable economic progress in the lastfew years and has made its peace with the London Club of privatecreditor banks, thereby improving its credit rating. This shouldforestall the kind of difficulties the Poles experienced when theytried to buy gas from the British North Sea a couple of years ago.Those talks failed when the owners required payment for three yearsahead, and guarantees of quantities to be bought further ahead thanthat.At the same time, the Norwegian energy minister Jens Stoltenberg hasnoted Russian gas supplier Gazprom had grasped that its clients wantedto diversify supplies and now saw this as a normal condition of doingbusiness in Europe. France takes no more than 30% of its gas fromRussia and Germany has adopted a similar target after its supplies weredisrupted by a dispute between Russia and the Ukraine, through whoseterritory the pipeline feeding Germany runs.The Poles get nearly 60% of their supplies from Russia, which providessome 6 Bcm/yr out of a total Polish consumption of some 10.5 Bcm; theremaining 4.5 Bcm is produced in Poland. It is unlikely any Norwegiangas would get Poland's dependence on Russia quite as low as 30%. PGNiGis looking to import perhaps 2 Bcm to 3 Bcm a year from the North Sea,which would represent no more than 15-20% of demand by the time itstarted landing since Poland's gas requirements are expected to risesharply - to perhaps 27 Bcm by 2010, depending on growth and fuel mixassumptions made.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SUBSEA ROUTE FOR CADIZ GASAllseas Marine Contractors has been contracted by RepsolInvestigaciones Petroliferas to carry out major work on Gulf of Cadizgasfields. Involved are the Poseidon North and Poseidon South fieldssome 40 km offshore. Allseas will design, fabricate and install threesubsea manifolds together with 63 km of 10-inch pipeline, split intothree sections. Tie-in work is also involved, both at wellheads andmanifolds. Control umbilicals will also be laid. The work, in up to 132metres of water, will be carried out early in 1997, using the Lorelayand Trenchsetter barges. Cost of the development, start-up andproduction rates have yet to be released. All gas will flow to shorefor processing in a plant yet to be contracted.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INTERCONNECTOR TRANSIT INTERESTBelgium's Distrigaz will shortly invite companies to indicate interestin subscribing for transit pipeline capacity in Belgium linked to theproposed UK-Zeebrugge Interconnector gas pipeline project. Responseswill be required by February next year at latest. Distrigaz gas supplyand sales director Jean Vermeire last month said he wanted to "removesome uncertainties that may still exist with respect to our positionon, and the progress of, the planned enhancement of our transitcapacities". He told a Financial Times natural gas conference in Londonwork on Belgian grid reinforcements required for transit gas flowsassociated with the Interconnector was on course."I can assure you that all studies and preparatory work are on scheduleto put the required transit capacity in place by October 1998, or suchlater date as may be determined by the effective start-up of theInterconnector or the readiness of new onward connections in transitdestination countries (referred to as the Commissioning Date)," hesaid. "In order to determine which transit capacity the market mayrequire and hence to finalise design and size of new pipelines and gridreinforcements, Distrigaz will very shortly solicit formal expressionsof interest in subscribing for transit capacity with a view toconcluding long-term transit contracts."Vermeire said potential shippers willing to enter into such long-termcommitments by the end of second-quarter 1996 - the point at which pipeand other equipment orders would have to be placed - would then beassured of availability of the requested transit service from theCommissioning Date. Subsequent shippers would get different terms. Adetailed information memorandum on transit services on offer was beingmade available to potential shippers before end-1995. This wouldprovide relevant information for shippers to allow them to declaretheir interest by February 1996 at the latest. Earlier, he said the go-ahead decision for the Interconnector could double the gas transit flowthrough Belgium - an estimated 15 Bcm this year - by around the turn ofthe century.Dr Burckhard Bergmann, board member of major German gas supplierRuhrgas, told the conference many issues still remained open on theInterconnector (IGR 288/6). These included the destination of thevolumes and how they would be moved on from Zeebrugge. Outlets appearedfeasible which led to a higher netback than the current spot price atthe UK beach. But the question was to what extent it made sense forproducers to commit themselves to these prices on a long-term basis.There was a wide spectrum of driving forces.But what was unsatisfactory was that these forces were not gearedtowards sustainable developments. Instead, they originated in a UKdisequilibrium which had not ensued from a misjudgement of supply anddemand "but from permanent regulatory intervention. It would be naiveto assume that the currently low spot prices in the UK are the outcomeof liberalisation and the result of high efficiency gains. They areinstead the consequence of a supply overhang resulting largely from thepermanent regulatory corrections made once the privatisation structureof British Gas in 1986 was found to be unsatisfactory".Bergmann continued: "What disturbs us, therefore, is not that abalanced liberal gas market should have repercussions for the westEuropean Continent via the Interconnector but that there is exposure tothe disequilibrium of the current regulatory transformation and finallyalso a growing marginal cost approach to the Interconnector itself."One key issue, he said, would be whether producers who had participatedin the Interconnector increasingly viewed the investment as a sunkcost.Nevertheless, Ruhrgas expected the disequilibrium, and hence theeffects for the north-western part of Continental Europe, to be reducedvia the Interconnector. Although the spot market would not completelydisappear, it would most probably remain confined. The destination forInterconnector gas on the Continent was still unclear. "Many look tothe German market, the largest but also well-supplied market. A greatdeal will depend on whether a substantial quantity can be supplied toItaly via France. It remains to be seen whether a separate transitpipeline through Belgium to Germany also materialises."There are also other interesting transport opportunities for companieswishing to obtain gas for Germany from the Interconnector. It must beborne in mind when constructing a separate pipeline via Belgium - aswith the Interconnector - that the carrying capacity commitments willcover a longer period than the prospective duration of deliveries."Bergmann noted that Central European countries were also interested inobtaining gas from the UK continental shelf. "We support their effortsin this respect but the long distance makes it very hard to find aneconomical solution."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STORAGE WINS GRONINGEN TIMEDevelopment of DFL2.5bn ($1.59bn) worth of natural gas storage in theNetherlands will meet short to medium term supply needs but extensivecompression, possibly costing DFL4bn, will be needed on the giant DutchGroningen field in about a decade to meet future requirements. That isone of the conclusions of an assessment of Dutch gas storage needs byconsultant Wood Mackenzie*. Main driver is a decline in peak deliverycapacity of leading Dutch gas marketer Gasunie. Dutch oil and gascompany NAM and Amoco of the US are currently working to bring threepeak shaving storage facilities on stream in 1997 (IGR  288/14).WoodMac notes that with the exception of the Maasvlakte LNG facility,no dedicated peak shaving/gas storage facilities have been developed inthe Netherlands to date.This has been avoided by availability of large local gas reservestogether with high production capacity, flexible supply contracts and acomprehensive infrastructure. Seasonal and short term demand rises havegenerally been met through higher output directly from producingfields. With Dutch output dominated by Groningen, this field has beenconserved as a strategic reserve and swing producer. Last year 42% ofthe total annual gas volume (82.1 Bcm) bought by Dutch gas marketerGasunie was produced from Groningen. The rest came from other onshorefields (19%), offshore fields (35%) and imports from Norway (3.5%) andthe UK (0.5%). But during peak demand periods Groningen provides about75% of deliveries.As of 1 January 1995 some 2,070 Bcm of gas had been produced in theNetherlands but Gronigen still holds estimated remaining recoverablereserves of some 1,275 Bcm, says WoodMac. A further 700 Bcm is heldwithin other developed fields and future Dutch developments. At currentproduction rates, reserves are sufficient to supply domestic and exportmarkets for nearly a quarter of a century. Over the next five years theanalyst expects total gas sales in the Netherlands to rise 5-6% from 44Bcm in 1995 to 46 Bcm in 2000. With the Netherlands established as amajor gas exporter, Gasunie in 1994 exported 38.3 Bcm, 47% of totalsales; of this 59% went to Germany, 14% to Belgium, 13% to France, 14%to Italy and 1% to Switzerland. Overall exports are expected to stayrelatively flat in the medium term.WoodMac reckons domestic Dutch production will rise about 7% from some82 Bcm/yr currently to about 88 Bcm/yr in 2000. Current imports ofabout 3 Bcm/yr from Norway and the UK are expected to rise notably inthe next five years, although not to much over 6 Bcm/yr or 7% of totalDutch supply. However, these deliveries have relatively limitedflexibility in terms of swing to reflect demand variations. Importcapacity is also partly constrained by Gasunie's role as a transporterof some 10 Bcm/yr of gas for third parties, including Norwegiandeliveries to France and Belgium.Moreover, although Dutch output is expected to rise, output fromexisting offshore fields and onshore fields other than Groningen isexpected to fall in the late 1990s and after 2000. Consequently,greater demand will be placed on Groningen production. In the absenceof a major upturn in exploration/development activity, which theanalyst does not currently foresee, or substantially increased imports(such as could potentially arise through the UK-BelgiumInterconnector), output from Groningen, while falling in the shortterm, is expected to rise to about 40 Bcm/yr in 2000.At the same time, however, the flexibility provided by Groningen is nowbeing limited by the fall in reservoir pressure in the field and thisproblem will be compounded when the higher output levels are needed,says the report. Therefore, despite its access to more than sufficientgas volumes to meet projected overall demand for many years to come,Gasunie has had to initiate projects to maintain its delivery capacityin order to keep supply and demand in phase as the flexibility of olderfields, particularly Groningen, to provide necessary swing falters."This decline in delivery capacity could affect Gasunie's supplycommitments," says WoodMac; "indeed, without the provision of new peakshaving facilities there is a real possibility that Gasunie would beunable to supply sufficient gas during a severe winter from 1996."Of the three new gas storage facilities now planned (see table), twowill be operated by Shell/Esso joint venture NAM (50% holder ofGasunie) - one at the partly depleted Langelo/Norg gasfield in theDrenthe concession in the north of the country, the other at theGrijpskerk gasfield. Amoco will develop the third project at theAlkmaar field in the Bergen concession, strategically located close tothe large industrial market in the west of the country, notes WoodMac.The three are due to be phased in from 1997, becoming fully operationalby winter 2000/01, at which stage they should hold some 7 Bcm of gasand provide peak delivery capacity of 184 MMcmd, the additionalcapacity representing about 30% of expected peak demand for Dutch gasin 2000. In the longer term, Alkmaar could be extended to provide 500MMcm of storage and a maximum delivery rate of 36 MMcmd, says thereport.In overall terms, these developments will not boost total deliverycapacity substantially over recent levels, it says. But they will ingeneral compensate for the declining flexibility of producing fields.In addition, Gasunie's new export contracts incorporate a lower levelof swing than older contracts, helping relieve pressure on deliverycapacity. However, as gas to gas competition increases in Europe, adecline in delivery flexibility could cut the competitive advantageheld by Gasunie, warns WoodMac.The new facilities will provide a solution for the company's gasdelivery capacity problems in the short to medium term and provideextra flexibility in the longer term at a cost of about DFL2.5bn inmoney of the day (mod). Their development has allowed a delay ininstallation of extensive compression facilities at Groningen."However, this compression, which could cost around DFL4bn (mod), isexpected to be needed around the middle of the next decade in order tomeet future supply requirements and ultimately improve the recoveryfactor of the field." WoodMac also notes provision of gas storage inthe Netherlands is a new area of opportunity for upstream companies toexpand their role downstream and add value to the gas they supply.* Northwest Europe Report, October 1995, Wood Mackenzie, Edinburgh,Scotland; tel: +44 (0)131 225 8525; fax: +44 (0)131 243 4435).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NOW TOTAL GAS DEAL CLOSE?Total is reported to be close to signing a deal (possibly inpartnership with Spain's Repsol) to exploit the Tin Fouye Tabankort(TFT) field in the Algerian Sahara, southeast of Hassi R'Mel, near theborder with Libya. The field is estimated to contain 144.6 Bcm ofnatural gas, 15.6m tonnes (t) of gas which can be turned into LPG, and16.6mt of condensates. This deal would be based on the same legislationthat made BP's contract at In Salah possible (see separate story).Since gas is considered a national asset in Algeria, it took a speciallaw to allow Sonatrach to go into partnership with a foreign oilcompany. As soon as the BP deal was signed, Algeria's oil ministerAmmar Makhloufi said it should serve as a model for other deals.Algeria is keen to exploit its gas, which accounts for some 95% of itsexport revenues. Indeed, the country plans to increase liftings fromsome 30 Bcm in 1995 to 60 Bcm by 2000. That is why contracts are beingsigned. At the same time, signings are proof the recent electionvictory of President Liamine Zeroual has reassured western oilcompanies Algeria will enjoy a sufficient measure of politicalstability.Elsewhere, Total has announced it plans to invest some 15% of new fundsin Asia, with a view to making 20% of its operating profits in thearea. Gas will figure prominently. In particular, the natural gasliquefaction plant at Bontang in Borneo is to be extended with aseventh and eighth liquefaction line. The oil company also plans to getinvolved in building gas-fired electricity generating stations in theregion.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RASGAS AWARDS $200M CONTRACTSQatar's Ras Laffan LNG Co Ltd has awarded three equipment contractsworth $200m to Japanese and American firms, according to Qatari and USofficials. Japan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries has an LNG storage tankscontract. Air Products and Chemicals Inc has a deign, build, installcontract for a heat exchanger and fellow US firm Elliot will supplycompressors. No breakdown was given but Ras Laffan managing directorNeil Kelly said the contracts were together worth over $200m. Officialsadded the main $4bn engineering, procurement and construction (EPC)contracts for the project's onshore and offshore facilities wereexpected to be awarded in March. Nine international consortia arebidding. Closing date for EPC bids is 6 January.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996QATAR/ITALY IN PIPELINE TALKSQatar is in discussions with Italian companies on export of Qatarinatural gas via pipeline to Europe, according to Italian envoy to Doha,Ignazio di Pace. It had been agreed to set up a joint technicalcommittee representing Italian firms and Qatar General Petroleum Corp,he said. Italian energy group Eni had presented a pipeline study lastOctober and company officials were due to visit various countries whichmight be involved in the project.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996QATAR IN PHILIPPINES TALKSQatar is considering supplying LNG to First Gas Holdings Corp (FGHC) ofthe Philippines, according to FGHC officials cited by Reuters. Qatarenergy and industry minister Abdullah Bin Hamad Al Attiyah met withcorporation officials on a visit to the Philippines, it said. First Gasis a joint venture of First Philippine Holdings and British Gas and hasbeen planning gas fired power generation in the Philippines.Meanwhile, Qatar hopes to sign a $680m loan with international banks inMarch for offshore facilities for the Qatar Liquefied Gas Company(Qatargas) LNG project, the country's first, according to an energy andindustry ministry official. The loan would be a mix of buyers creditand commercial debt, covering 70% of the offshore portion of theproject, he told Reuters. Qatargas is to sell 4m tonnes (t)/yr of LNGto Japan's Chubu Electric over 25 years from January 1997 and another2mt/yr to seven other Japanese power and gas utilities for 25 yearsfrom mid-1998.A consortium of Japan's five major shipping firms is to invest Y250bn($2.42bn) to build 10 tankers to ship Qatari LNG to Japan, economicdaily Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported. The five are Nippon Yusen KK,Mitsui OSK Lines, Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha, lino Kaiun Kaisha and ShowaLine. The tankers will ship 6mt/yr starting in 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FIRMS PLAN AMMONIA PRODUCTIONMozambique's state owned National Hydrocarbons Company has signed anagreement with Canada's Scimitar Production and Zarara PetroleumResources of the United Arab Emirates to build an ammonia productionplant targeted at exports to Zimbabwe by end-1997, according to Maputodaily Noticias. It quoted Mozambique deputy energy and mineralresources minister Castigo Langa as saying the Zimbabwean market wasguaranteed and work would start "very soon".The plant, expected to produce 100 tonnes/day of ammonia for export toZimbabwe, will use natural gas reserves in Buzi district southwest ofport city Beira. A pipeline will also be built from Buzi to Beira wheregas will generate electricity for the city. Zarara's Shukri Salehcautioned, however, that known Buzi gas reserves would support ammoniaproduction for only eight years. He urged Mozambique to start searchingfor other gas reserves believed to exist in the area.Mozambique towards end-1995 separately signed an agreement with EnronCorp of the US for development of its Pande gasfield, targeted atfeeding markets in South Africa via a 1,300 km pipeline. Customers haveyet to be lined up.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SOUTH AFRICA GROUP EYES MOSSGASSouth African chemical and synthetic fuel firms Sasol Ltd, AECI Ltd andSentrachem Ltd have set up a group to talk with the South Africangovernment about buying the financially troubled Mossgas oil-from-natural gas plant. The Department of Mineral and Energy Affairs latelydecided to seek a buyer (IGR 289/20). Mossgas has said that unless thecomplex is sold it will have to be mothballed when current gas suppliesare finished in 1997 or new offshore fields must be exploited.The government believes the $3bn plant could be sold for about $675m,then turned into an oil refinery or a methanol producer. A recentlyfinished study found methanol production from it was feasible atinternationally competitive prices. The bidding group reckons itsmethanol route would require only 25% of the gas needed to makesynthetic fuels.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MORE GAS SET FOR PETCHEMSEgypt is prepared to supply more gas to Israel for use as apetrochemical feedstock but the exact amount will depend on needs.Potential customers had until end-December to provide the Israelienergy ministry with estimates of their demand, following meetingsbetween Israeli and Egyptian officials. Earlier last year Israelienergy minister Gonen Segev said he had received official confirmationfrom Egyptian General Petroleum Corp, Agip and Amoco on supply of 2.5Bcm/yr of Egyptian gas for 20 years (see also separate story). At thattime he said up to a fifth of the gas would be used for petrochemicals,mainly ammonia. Israel has long been pressing for a supply of naturalgas from Egypt, notably for production of electricity. For some yearsit has received a modest regular supply of Egyptian oil.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UMC WELL COMES GOODUnited Meridian Corp (UMC) has sunk an eighth consecutive successfulwell in block CI-11 off the Ivory Coast. With six Lion field oil wellsand two Pathere field gas wells on stream, the company anticipatesproduction of 20,000 b/d of oil and 24 MMcfd of gas at start-1996. TheB-3 well followed recently successful sixth and seventh holes (IGR283/12).  The new wildcat flowed 5,970 b/d of oil and 4.6 MMcfd of gasthrough a 56/64-inch choke from 63 net ft of gas pay and 169 ft of netoil pay in a new fault block over a total depth of 10,419 ft. B-3 alsoconfirmed the presence of Senonian gas sands 4,000 ft southeast of theB-1 Lion discovery well.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MAGHREB LINE WINS NEW CREDITSThe Maghreb-Europe natural gas pipeline from Algeria to Spain andPortugal won two new credit lines before the New Year. First theEuropean Investment Bank conceded a Pta22.2bn ($187m) credit to Spain'sindustrial gas operator Enagas to help finance the section that willrun from Tarifa on the southern coast into Portugal. Then Spain'sInstituto de Credito Offical (ICO) agreed a $200m credit to helpfinance the section of the pipeline being built in Morocco. Enagas, 91%owned by Gas Natural, is financing the Spanish section which will runfrom Tarifa via Cordoba to Portugal through the Spanish regions ofAndalucia and Extremadura.The guarantors of the loan are the Grupo Gas Natural, the EuropeanInvestment Fund and a banking syndicate. The Spanish stretch of thepipeline will cost $400m of the total amount of $2.6bn The ICO creditfor Europe Maghreb Pipeline Ltd, jointly owned by Portugal's publiccompany Transgas and Spain's Sagane, will help finance the 540 kmsection that runs from the Algeria-Morocco border to Moroccaninternational water limits in the Strait of Gibraltar.Meanwhile, oil, gas and chemical conglomerate Repsol - which owns 45.3%of Gas Natural - has agreed to change the route of a local pipelinewhich is to link two gasfields in the southwest province of Huelva tothe national network. The line would have passed through the Donananational park, one of Europe's most important wetlands for migratorybirds. Repsol's announcement, which will mean extending the line bynearly 30 km, followed protests from the park authorities andecologists.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PRICE HITCH FOR PIPELINE PLANSMuch trumpeted plans to pipe Qatar and Iran gas to Pakistan have runinto further trouble with the two countries demanding a higher pricefor gas they plan to supply to Pakistan. This obstacle has been createdin the early stages of the project, sources close to the Pakistanigovernment said. An official of the petroleum and natural resourcesministry, speaking on condition of anonymity, said both Iran and Qatarhad come up with new demands for the gas price and expressed theirinability to sell at the previously agreed tariff. He said negotiationsbetween the three countries were, however, continuing.Chaudrhy Nisar Ali Khan, former minister of petroleum and naturalresources in the government of Nawaz Sharif, said the Bhuttoadministration had signed agreements for supply of gas from Iran, Qatarand Turkmenistan which provided for completion of feasibility studiesin 12 months. But three months had elapsed and they were still notcomplete. The question of gas tariff had also been sorted out at thattime but the government had allowed it to become an issue, he claimed.Sources close to the government said that besides the question of gastariff, there were other issues hampering implementation of memorandaof understanding Pakistan signed with Iran and Qatar. However, theydeclined to discuss them.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TWO BIDS FOR PAK-IRAN LINEThe Pakistani government has so far received two bids frommultinational oil companies for construction of the planned 1,700 kmPak-Iran gas pipeline project for import of 1.6 Bcfd of gas from Iran.The companies bidding include a consortium of four firms comprisingBritish Gas, Gaz de France, Shell International and Calgery ofMalaysia. The other bidder is Australia's BHP. Industry sources saidlast date for submission of bids with proposals for import of gas fromIran to Pakistan was 30 November, but on the request of bidders thedate was extended to 12 December, as they were busy finalising issuesamong themselves.Sources in the petroleum and natural resources ministry said BHPsubmitted its bid on schedule - 30 November. Initially, the governmenthad issued letters of intent to six companies including Canada's NovaGas in September but that company pulled out of the project, while mostof the rest of the firms decided to establish a consortium. Theproposed Pak-Iran gas pipeline project would import 1.6 Bcfd of naturalgas at an estimated cost of $3.5bn. The 1,700 km pipeline is expectedto be completed by 2002.Industry sources said bids would be opened in mid-January. Thesuccessful company would be asked to start construction of the pipelineby June 1996. The firm would also be responsible for operation andmaintenance and the project would be based on a build-own-operatebasis. The agreement package would include purchase of gas from Iranand its delivery to Pakistan at an agreed point at a price consistentwith the price offered by other gas exporters such as Qatar andTurkmenistan.The Bhutto government is negotiating with Turkmenistan and Qatar forimport of a similar quantity of gas to meet growing demand in thecountry. Discussion with the Turkmenistan government is in earlystages, industry sources said. But negotiations with Qatar authoritieshave been delayed for more than a year due reportedly to a disputebetween the Qatari government and sponsor of the gas pipeline project,Crescent Petroleum Co, which would be responsible for importing gas toPakistan, over the price for gas it will pay Qatar.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996QATAR/TURKEY LNG DEAL 'CLOSE'Qatar and Turkey will shortly sign a deal for a sales and purchaseagreement (SPA) on supply of 2m tonnes (t)/yr of Qatari LNG to Ankara,according to a Qatari official. "We believe we can come to anunderstanding shortly on 2m tonnes later," Jaber Al Marri, vicechairman of state-owned Qatar General Petroleum Corp (QGPC) said. QGPCand its joint venture partner Mobil Corp signed a preliminarymemorandum of understanding with Turkish pipeline company Botas inJanuary under which Turkey would buy an initial 2mt of Qatari LNG for25 years.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EGYPT-ISRAEL ACCORD FLAGGEDA letter of intent vis a vis planned supplies of Egyptian gas to Israelis likely to be signed this coming week, according to Israeli sources.The document will define "late 1996 or early 1997" as deadline fornegotiations but will not refer to prices or quantities. Sources alsosay Israel has virtually completed assessments of its gas needs, havingcompleted a survey of major potential consumers. Meanwhile, there hasbeen growing activity in Israel by groups interested in the project. On18 December Israel's largest private fuel company Paz, announced acooperation agreement with Amoco, one of the companies with gasfieldsin Egypt slated for the Israeli market. Paz is two-thirds owned by theLiberman-Bino group and one third by Renaissance-Claridge and others.Apart from being the largest gasoline retailer, it holds 35% of thecountry's total LPG market and 40% of the residential LPG market(600,00 households). Amoco's Cairo-based vice president (Mideastnatural gas) Tony Barrett said Paz and Amoco had "been exploringopportunities in various segments of the natural gas industry -including transmission, storage and distribution to the end markets".Energy minister Gonen Segev has ruled out the possibility of any groupcontrolling both transmission and distribution of the gas, so the newconsortium will have to choose in which area it wishes to compete.Paz board chairman Mordechai Ben Shach described Amoco's approach tothe gas project as "vertical" but added "we are waiting for a decisionby the state. Whatever tender we decide to bid for, the partnershipwill be on a basis of equality, both regarding ownership andinvestment". The Paz-Amoco deal caught most energy observers bysurprise as Amoco was expected to team up with a big company consortiumcomprising the Mashav, Delek and Dankner groups with whom it had beennegotiating for more than a year.However, leading Israeli business daily Globes reported subsequentlythat - despite the Amoco-Paz deal-the consortium was still negotiatingwith Amoco about involvement in setting up gas-fired power stations inthe region. And two days after the Paz-Amoco announcement, Enron'sexecutive in charge of negotiating an LNG deal with Israel, RebeccaMark, said the Mashav-Delek-Dankner group and Enron had a cooperationagreement regarding import of LNG from Qatar. Together with Enron, theconsortium would invest in a $300m plant in Israel to gasify LNG.Marks said that - for economic reasons-Enron would prefer the facilityto be located at Eilat or Aqaba rather than Ashkelon, the sitepreferred by Israel's energy ministry. This would enable Jordan toparticipate in the project and lower the gas price. Mark reportedlysaid that "in principle" Enron preferred Eilat to Aqaba. If Aqaba waschosen, an 8 km pipeline connection to Israel would be needed and Enronwould seek Jordanian partners for the gasification project. (Pressreports said negotiations with Enron were deadlocked because Israelconsidered the price being asked for the LNG - more than $4/MMBtu - asexcessive).Meanwhile, on 2 January Globes reported Gaz de France (GdF) was on theverge of signing an agreement with the Mashav-Delek-Dankner group forjoint activity in the tenders relating to import of Egyptian gas. Thepaper quoted unidentified energy sources as saying GdF's involvementcould be problematic because in 1994 a GdF-affiliated company,Sofregaz, had carried out the feasibility study for the Egyptian gasproject on behalf of the Israeli energy ministry. The sources said theissue would probably have to be decided by the government's legaladviser. However, energy minister Segev "does not believe GdF'sparticipation in tenders will represent a problem", according toGlobes.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COST CUTS MAY FORCE MERGERSUncertainty over MTBE prices and the need to keep methanol productioncosts in check (IGR 270/14) is forcing Sabic to take another look atthe structure of its industry. Now, in an attempt to cut administrationcosts, the company is mulling the merger of two subsidiaries based inal-Jubayl. If the plan goes ahead, methanol producers Ar-Razi and IbnSina will merge, as will MTBE producers Ibn Zahr and Ibn Sina.Unclear is whether Sabic intends to split Ibn Sina's methanol and MTBEsides so as to form a single methanol producer and a single MTBEmanufacturer. Even larger cost savings should be possible if all threefirms come together. One problem facing Sabic, however, is theownership structure of the companies. Ar-Razi is 50% owned by aJapanese consortium led by Mitsubishi Gas Chemical. Ibn Sina is 25%owned by Hoechst Celanese with another 25% in the hands of PanhandleEastern.Ibn Zahr is 10% owned by Neste, 10% by Ecofuel and 10% by Apicorp.Sabic reckons it might be necessary to cut back on the foreignshareholdings in order to effect mergers. That assumes a willingness toco-operate on the part of the foreign partners. It also assumes Sabiccould do without the marketing expertise (and in some cases markets)provided by those partners. Unitisation might provide the answer butthe mood in Saudi Arabia at present is not in favour of foreignownership in general.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SHIP CHARTER SLASHES COSTOman LNG has scrapped plans to build dedicated LNG tankers for itsplanned LNG-export scheme. That, says general manager Tony Hanna, willcut overall costs from $6bn to $5bn. To handle the 3m tonnes/yrintended for Korea Gas, chartered ships will be used instead. Detailedterms for the 25-year contract are currently being negotiated, saysHanna, but it is already decided that outside finance will be soughtfor 70% of the cost. Oman LNG shareholders will put up 30% - $1.5bn -in proportion to their holdings. That pans out at $765m from the Omanigovernment (51%); $510m from Shell (34%); $90m from Total (6%); $45meach from Mitsui and Mitsubishi (3% each); $30m from Partex (2%); and$15m from Itochu (1%).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PETRONAS DETAILS NEW LNG PLANTMalaysia's third LNG plant, for which a deal was signed last month (IGR289/33), will have two liquefaction trains of 3.4m tonnes (t)/yrcapacity each, boosting Malaysian LNG output to 22mt/yr. Mohamed HassanMarican, president and chief executive of Malaysian state oil and gasfirm Petronas, said gas from the new project was expected to be takenup by traditional buyers Japan, South Korea and Taiwan and also newmarkets like India, China and Thailand. Asia Pacific area LNG demand,currently 56mt/yr, was forecast to rise to about 80mt/yr by 2005, hesaid.The new LNG plant at Bintulu, Sarawak will be owned 60% by Petronas and10% each by US parented Occidental LNG (M), Japan's Nippon Oil Co,Shell Gas BV and Sarawak state. Hassan gave no project cost but said aguide was the 17bn ringgit ($6.7bn) investment in Malaysia's second LNGplant. An initial deal between Petronas, Nippon and Oxy was reached in1993 with Shell, already a major LNG player in Malaysia, invited inlater with Sarawak. The new plant will process gas from fields found byOxy, Petronas, Nippon and Shell offshore Sarawak.At the same time as the LNG signing, Petronas (60%) signed a deal withlocal firm Land & General Bhd and Japan's Mitsui and Co (20% each) fora $300m, 0.4mt/yr capacity vinyl chloride monomer (VCM) plant targetedat commercial production start by late 1998. Officials said Mitsui andLand & General would spend another $100m to set up a separate polyvinylchloride (PVC) plant for which VCM is a feedstock. The two plants willbe at Kertih in Trengganu state which, Hassan said, Petronas aims toturn into SE Asia's largest petrochemicals centre. He said a"worldscale" 0.6mt/yr ethylene plant would be built at Kertih, while anexisting ethylene facility in the area would be expanded from 0.32mt/yrcapacity to 0.4mt/yr.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DUTCH FIRMS IN LPG PROJECTThe city government of Guangzhou in south China has joined with twoDutch firms, LPG company Nuon and Union Chase, for joint investment of$25m in building and managing piped LPG supply for the city, accordingto Xinhua news agency. The city also signed two memoranda ofunderstanding to set up an international consortium to build a gasfired power generation plant involving investment of some $2bn,according to Xinhua.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TEPCO PLANS LNG CAPACITY BOOSTTokyo Electric Power Co Inc (Tepco) says it plans to build additionalpower generation facilities to boost output at its Futtsu plant inChiba prefecture east of Tokyo. Two new generators would add 3.04mkilowatts (kW) of output capacity at Futtsu, which can currentlyproduce 2m kW, it said. Tepco also plans to build four LNG tanks andone LNG berth for extra fuel supplies. Construction is due to start in1998, the company said.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FLUOR/MITSUBISHI FORGE LNG LINKJapan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries says it plans to pursue the marketfor LNG engineering projects via a global tie-up with major USengineering company Fluor Daniel. The two would cooperate on allactivities from business development to construction.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UEA IN CHINA GAS VENTUREJingshan Port office of Tangshan city in north China has linked with aUnited Arab Emirates trading group to set up a petroleum gas jointventure near Tangshan, according to Xinhua news agency. TangshanInternational Petroleum Gas involves investment of $22m of which $4.4mwill be from the port office, the agency said. The joint venture wouldbuild a 10,000 tonne (t) berth for petroleum gas transportation, a20,000t gas tank and supplementary facilities including storage for520,000 cubic metres of petroleum gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TENNECO WINS GASLINE LICENCEAustralia's Queensland state said it had granted a pipeline licence toTenneco Energy Australia Pty Ltd, part of US Tenneco Inc, to build a750 km, 90 petajoules/yr capacity gasline between Ballera in southwestQueensland and Wallumbilla, near Roma. Tenneco had indicatedconstruction work would start immediately targeted at operation of theline by end-September 1996, state minerals and energy minister TonyMcGrady said. Tenneco was chosen as preferred developer in late 1994.Construction of the line would mean gas markets in southeast andcentral Queensland were assured of future access to plentiful gassupplies as existing reserves around Roma were depleted, said McGrady.The line's capacity was over double current east coast market demand,he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SANTOS TESTS RECORD GAS FLOWSantos Ltd said its Pennie-l well in the South Australia PatchawarraEast Block flowed 18.9 MMcfd of gas on test, the highest flow rate everrecorded from the Cooper Basin. The Pennie well, located about 12.5 kmsouth of the Cuttapiria oil and gas field and 118 km north of theMoomba gas plant, flowed gas from Permian Epsilon Formation sands at2,849-2,868 metres depth on a 3/4-inch surface choke. The well wasfirst test of a number of undrilled prospects in the area, two of whichare due to be drilled this year, said Santos.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996WOODSIDE DECAMPS TO PERTHWestern Australia's Northwest Shelf gas project operator WoodsidePetroleum says it plans to move its head office to Perth from Melbourneduring first-half 1996. It noted the company had extensive explorationand development interests in WA and offshore north Australia and thatPerth was rapidly becoming the centre for upstream hydrocarbonsindustry activity in Australasia. Chief benefit of the move would becloser links between senior corporate management and operatingsubsidiaries, enabling stronger ties between technical, commercial andfinancial activities. Woodside will keep an office and boardroom inMelbourne.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CALTEX IN LPG STORAGE PLANCaltex Petroleum Corp and China's Shantou Ocean Enterprises (Group)Petroleum & Petrochemical Co have announced plans to invest $125m tobuild China's largest LPG storage facility. The underground storageunit in the Shantou special economic zone between Guangdong and Fujianprovinces will be first of its kind in China. Capacity will be 100,000tonnes (t) of gas, more than triple China's current 30,000t capacity,according to Caltex senior vice president Matthew Saunders.The facility will also have capacity to blend over 1mt/yr of LPG andinclude three ocean berths and eight tank truck bays for import,storage, manufacturing and distribution of high quality LPG. Projectoperations start is expected in mid-1998. Caltex, a joint venture of USfirms Texaco Inc and Chevron Corp, will meet 60% of investment costsand Shantou 40%.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996YACHENG GAS FEEDS HONG KONGChina on 1 January started piping natural gas from the South China SeaYacheng 13-1 field offshore Hainan Island to Hong Kong under a 20 yearcontract to feed power generation, according to officials of stateowned China National Offshore Oil Co (CNOOC). Owned 51% by CNOOC, 34.7%by US parented Arco China and 14.3% by Kuwait Foreign PetroleumExploration Corp (Kufpec), the $1.2bn Yacheng 13-1 development hasannual production capacity of 3.4 Bcm and total reserves of about 82Bcm, according to CNOOC.Some 2.9 Bcm/yr shipped via a 790 km gasline will feed the Hong KongBlack Point power plant of Castle Peak Power Corp, a 50/50 jointventure of Hong Kong's China Light and Power and Exxon Corp of the US.The remaining 0.5 Bcm/yr will feed power and chemicals plants on HainanIsland via another 91 km gasline. According to Xinhua news agency,Hainan plans to invest 10bn yuan ($1.2bn) to build three syntheticammonia and urea plants on the island in the next five years, fed bynatural gas.Using some 2.2 Bcm/yr these plants would, on completion produce about0.45m tonnes (t)/yr of synthetic ammonia and 0.78mt/yr of urea, saidXinhua. Hainan also planned to build a methanol plant of 1mt/yrcapacity, a chemical works and acetylene salt chemical works. Annualnatural gas output in the area round Hainan was expected to reach some10 Bcm by end-century and 21 Bcm by 2007, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CHINA 'CUTS LPG TARIFF BY 3%'China will cut LPG import tariffs from 9% to 6% starting 1 April,according to an official from state refining company Inopec as quotedby Reuters. Xinhua news agency earlier said Beijing had relaxed curbson numerous imports.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ALLIANCE FOCUSES ON GAS MARKETConsolidated Natural Gas and Australia's biggest electricity utility,MetNorth Energy (MNE), are planning an alliance to exploit Australia'snew-look energy industry. The focus will be on boosting gas marketingopportunities and aiding MNE's industrial and commercial clients tofind apt energy sources. Opportunities in Asia will also be examined.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SABAH GAS WORK UNDER WAYMalaysian state oil firm Petronas has begun work on extra gas transportfacilities in the state of Sabah. Work involves laying a 65 km pipelinefrom the Erb West field offshore to Kota Kinabalu (IGR 278/18),upgrading Erb West units and building an onshore terminal. The projectshould start up in about two years.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FERTILISER FIRM UP FOR SALEPakistan's Privatisation Commission is seeking bids for NationalFertilizer Corp's Pak-Saudi Fertilizer Ltd, which it earlier said wouldbe put up for sale in first-half 1995. In 1992 the government rejectedoffers for the state entity, saying it had decided to divest thecompany through public offerings. During 1994 Pak-Saudi operated atover 100% capacity to make 617,095 tons of urea employing Snamprogettitechnology. Sales for the year rose to nearly Rs2.02bn ($59m) fromRs1.56bn in 1993. The commission says Pak-Saudi's plant is free fromany long-term financial liabilities. It is situated on almost 570 acresat Mirpur Mathelo, is near the National Highway and is fitted with goodinfrastructure and production units.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DABHOL D-DAY LOOMS - AGAINThe fate of the Dabhol power generation project is likely to be decidedon 6 January. Maharashtra Chief Minister Manohar Joshi says a specialmeeting of the state cabinet has been called that day to consider thematter. Later, as IGR went to press, local reports quoted an unnamedstate minister as saying a revised deal had been approved by the stateand announcement was a formality. The state government has been pushedinto a decision before 15 January when arbitration proceedings at thebehest of the US project promoters Enron, Bechtel and GE are scheduledto resume in London. The promoters had earlier agreed to postponementof the proceedings until 10 December, the deadline set by Joshi fordecisive action (IGR 289/4).But the opinion of senior state government officials to seek morecapital cost and tariff cuts than agreed with an experts committeecompelled him to pursue an apparently tough negotiating line. Extramileage gained in the negotiations can also yield electoral dividendsto the ruling Shiv Sena-Bharatiya Janata Party coalition which is keento rake up the corruption issue in coming elections against the mainrival Congress party whose government approved the Dabhol deal.Sources say a compromise has been reached after Enron Development Corppresident Joseph Sutton conveyed to Joshi in late December that itwould not yield further on cost and tariff cuts. This provides for amarginal reduction of tariff from the Rs1.89 ($0.054) levelised tariffagreed earlier with the experts negotiating group. In return,Maharashtra State Electricity Board will agree to lift power at morethan the 90% Plant Load Factor mentioned in the original Power PurchaseAgreement. This arrangement will keep intact the internal rate forDabhol Power Co.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MOBIL IN LPG JOINT VENTUREAbout 0.5m tonnes (t)/yr of LPG is to be imported to India by PeeveesPetroleum Products Ltd (PPPL), a joint venture announced between MobilAsia Pacific Pte from Singapore and a Dubai-based Indian. Mobil has a45% stake in PPPL which is to spend Rs830m ($23.71m) in the first phaseof the project to import, bottle and market 150,000t of LPG in southernIndia. Two bottling plants of 50,000t capacity each are to be built atChaliyam in Kerala and Karur in Tamil Nadu in the first phase to becompleted by December 1996 when coverage will include 700,000 domesticusers and 50,000t of bulk supply to industries. A RCC jetty with 2,800ttankage will go with it. Port dredging to 11 metres depth for 20,000ttanker parcels and a further 20,000t cryogenic tankage is to be takenup in the second phase to increase LPG volume handling capacity to500,000 t/yr.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ESSAR/PREMIER LAND R FIELDSIndia-UK consortium Essar Oil-Premier Oil has been picked by selectionpanel authorities for development of the R-series of hydrocarbon fieldsin the Bombay offshore. It has proposed peak output of 22,865 b/d ofoil based on an estimated 87.24m bbls of oil in a 22-year productionprofile. R-series fields figure among the eight medium-sized and 33small fields offered by the government in October 1993 for productionof oil and gas in joint ventures with national oil companies Oil &Natural Gas Corp (ONGC) and Oil India Ltd.The Tenders Evaluation Committee (TEC) selected Essar-Premier inpreference to close rival Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL)-Santa Fe, anIndo-US combine. The committee noted "the scheme proposed by Essarconsortium may be more appropriate technology for production comparedto the gas lift scheme of the RIL consortium, in a scenario where thereis uncertainty about the availability of the requisite amount of gasfrom ONGC over the life of the contract". The TEC report will beconsidered by a committee of secretaries with final award of the dealto be decided by the cabinet.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAIL SEEKS GAS PLAN PARTNERSGas Authority of India Ltd (GAIL) is soliciting offers from privateinvestors by 15 February for a joint venture for distribution ofnatural gas in Agra and Ferozabad towns of northern state UttarPradesh. GAIL and the private sector promoters are to hold 26% stakeseach in the 2:1 debt-equity venture, estimated to cost Rs650m($18.57m), with the balance of 48% equity to be subscribed by the stategovernment, local bodies and the public. The project is part of a 10-point programme to reduce atmospheric pollution in the Taj Trapeziumarea. GAIL says it will provide pipelines to city gate stations at theoutskirts of Agra and Ferozabad and the joint venture will furtherdistribute the gas to industrial units. The government has allocated0.6 MMcmd of gas for distribution in the two towns.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UNION TEXAS/OXY IN LPG PLANTwo US oil firms - Union Texas and Occidental Energy Venture Corp -will set up an LPG extraction plant with a production capacity of130,000 tonnes (t)/yr and a 132 MW gas-fired combined cycle power plantat Badin, Sindh province. Total estimated cost of the two projects willbe $180m. A delegation of representatives of the two companies metpetroleum and natural resources minister Anwar Saifullah Khan inIslamabad recently and said the proposed project would be based onindigenous petroleum streams from the Badin Petroleum Concession blockawarded to Union Texas recently.Saifullah said the Bhutto government would provide all possibleassistance for completion of the two projects. He asked the jointventure delegation to ensure local private sector involvement in thescheme as it would provide an opportunity to Pakistan's private sectorto learn technical know-how as well as encourage it to invest in thepetroleum sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PAKISTAN SET FOR NEW ROUNDPakistan will shortly invite a second round of bidding for offshore oiland natural gas projects, a petroleum and natural resources ministryannouncement said. "We hope to attract investments worth $9bn in oiland gas exploration, $4.5bn in domestic pipelines and $6bn in refineryfacilities to cope with growing energy demand over the next 30 years,"it added. The announcement further said international companies wouldbe invited to conferences in Houston and London in April to bid foroffshore oil and gas exploration in Pakistan. Preliminary response fromfirms had been encouraging, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FIELD NARROWS FOR $700M PROJECTNineteen out of 34 international consortia vying for the $700m naturalgas utilisation scheme in Burma have made it to the shortlist of theRangoon regime. The list includes seven Japanese heavyweights likeMitsubishi, Mitsui, Sumitomo, a South Korean league of Daewoo, Hyundaiand Samsung, and groups consisting of Total and Unocal, Bechtel, NorskHydro, British Gas as well as the Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT)and the Thai giant conglomerate Charoen Pokphand, according to sourcesparticipating in the tender.The bid calls for the rights to engage in the so-called "three-in-one"project to utilise natural gas from Burma's known largest gasfieldYadana, some 320 km south of Rangoon in the Gulf of Matarban. Thescheme involves construction of a 200 MW gas-fired power plant, a570,000 tonnes (t)/yr urea fertiliser plant and a 250 km gasline totransport Yadana gas ashore to the project site near the Burmesecapital.Rangoon authorities have indicated to bidders they would be able toannounce a final decision on the choice of bidders in late January orearly February 1996. Due to magnitude of the scheme, the Burmesegovernment is expected to pick as many as five companies to undertakework, rather than awarding the entire contract to just one company.Industry sources clarified that Mitsui remains one of the contendersthough it may have provided some feasibility studies for the scheme toSlorc last year (IGR 282/17). The three-in-one project will be based onthe 125 MMcfd of Yadana gas supply which the field production sharingcontractors including Total, Unocal Corp and PTT Exploration &Production Plc (PTTEP) of Thailand will deliver to Rangoon under anaccord signed in February 1995 (IGR 269/21).The majority of Yadana gas supply will be piped to Thailand under a 30-year export contract concluded last February. The deal is for deliveryof 525 MMcfd of Yadana gas which will be used primarily for powergeneration in Thailand. Yadana gas production is scheduled to start inmid-1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UNIQUE/MITSUI CHASE MARKETSUnique Gas and Petrochemicals Plc of Thailand and Japan's Mitsui & Cowill use their first joint venture on LPG and ammonia marketing inVietnam to spearhead into a wider range of energy-related businesses inthis socialist state. This strategic plan was outlined by seniorexecutives of the two firms specifically in a bid to capitalise onextensive market opportunities in the country of 73m people.That conforms with Unique Gas' target to expand its businesses in thisregion and diversify its business lines beyond LPG and ammonia toinclude other speciality gas, chemical and other products to become oneof Southeast Asia's leading chemical and energy concerns. Earlier lastyear, Unique Gas formed a joint venture with Malaysia's state oil firmPetronas to develop a network of service stations in Thailand offeringa full range of petroleum products under the Petronas brand name.For Mitsui, the joint venture with Unique Gas in Vietnam forms anintegral part of its expansion of its businesses there where it hasbeen active in marketing fertiliser, among other areas. Unique Gas andPetrochemicals (Vietnam) Co, equally owned by Unique Gas and Mitsuigroup, early in December opened its $5.02m LPG and anhydrous ammoniaterminal in Long Thanh district of Dong Nai province, about 70 km southof Ho Chi Minh City.The terminal serves as platform for the joint venture to launch its LPGand ammonia marketing in Vietnam where demand for those products isexpanding dramatically. Unique Gas president Phaibul Chalermsaphayakornand Mitsui & Co (Thailand)'s Hiroyuki Maruko said they were convincedabout "bright" economic growth potential.Maruko said Unique Gas and Mitsui would broaden product lines inVietnam to include products like fuel oil in the near future. However,execution of such a project was very much subject to Vietnameseauthorities' approval, a difficult and time consuming process, he said.In spite of that, Mitsui, on its own part, will start looking into theviability of setting up what would be the first LPG cylinder productionplant in Vietnam.It has also been eyeing opportunities for establishing a natural gasseparation plant in Vietnam to process indigenous natural gas producedfrom oil and gas fields off the country's southern coast, he added. ForUnique Gas, Phaibul noted the company has been assessing thepossibilities of establishing businesses including LPG distribution inneighbouring countries, particularly Burma.Established n 1982, Unique Gas has been active in distribution of LPGand ammonia in Thailand. Vietnam is the first foreign country whereUnique Gas has an investment. The Unique Gas and Mitsui alliance inVietnam has had a firm plan to enlarge its operations in the country inline with the expected dramatic jump in consumption of LPG. Phaibulannounced the joint venture plans to inject some $2m in additionalcapital to boost the LPG storage capacity of its Long Thanh terminalfrom the current level of 400 tons by 200 tons in February 1996 andanother 400 tons in 1997, so that at end-1997 combined capacity will be1,000 tons.Unique Gas Vietnam targets industrial users, especially those locatedin Go Dau industrial zone where its terminal is situated, as its mainclientele for LPG, accounting for roughly 60% of its expected salesvolume of some 6,000 tons in 1996. The remaining 40% would be sales toresidential and commercial sectors in the form of cylinders. Unique GasVietnam general director John Lu said total LPG and ammonia demand inVietnam was expected to more than double by 2000 and the company hopedto grow with the market.An industry estimate puts present LPG demand in Vietnam in the range of4,000-5,000 tons a month. The Thai-Japanese joint venture expects tocapture a 10-15% share in Vietnam's LPG market currently dominated bylocal suppliers like Saigon Petro, Elf Gas and Petrolimex - all withlocal government participation.Initial LPG supplies to Unique Gas Vietnam are from Thailand, Malaysiaand Indonesia. There is no local production of LPG in Vietnam. UniqueGas Vietnam is the first wholly-owned foreign venture in LPG andammonia business to be licensed by the Vietnamese authorities. Thecompany's terminal covers an area of 111,000 sq metres; only a fractionhas been utilised. In Thailand, Unique Gas operates two LPG/ammoniaterminals in Bang Pakong and Surat Thani, two LPG tankers, 55 LPG roadtank trucks and 63 LPG bottling plants.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PTT MULLS HIGHER BURMA TAKEPetroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT) is considering raising itspurchase of natural gas from Burma's offshore Yadana field by 200-300MMcfd over agreed contractual levels. PTT governor Pala Sookawesh spokeof the possibility since the Yadana field developing group expectshigher gas productivity from the field and in light of additional gasdemand spurred by private power plant operators in Thailand under theindependent power producer (IPP) and small power producer (SPP)programmes. He said recent information obtained from Yadana operatorTotal indicated the field, some 320 km south of Rangoon in the Gulf ofMatarban, could prove additional gas reserves and deliverability.According to PTT, Yadana's present certified recoverable gas reservesare put at 5.7 Tcf. The 30-year contract PTT concluded with the Yadanadeveloping group in February 1995 calls for initial gas delivery of 141MMcfd in mid-1998 before building up to 525 MMcfd 14 months later (IGR268/16). Total executives have said earlier that Yadana is quiteproductive and does not require Total to drill as many wells asexpected. Only some 10-15 wells would be needed in the initial stage toachieve the contractual production level of some 500 MMcfd (IGR270/18). Meanwhile, Pala said he had received assurance from partiesconcerned that production and delivery of Yadana gas to PTT would startwithin the contractual date.Lately, Burmese ministers have also assured the PTT governor theproblem of most concern to PTT and the Yadana developing group - layingof part of the gasline over areas in southeastern Burma where ethnicKaren and Mon guerrillas have been waging war against the Rangoonforces - would no longer pose a threat. They reportedly said thesouthern part of the area holding most of the onshore section to theThai western province of Kanchanaburi was now controlled by ethnic Monsallied with the Rangoon regime. The only problem at the border was theminority Christian Karens who still dominated the area north of thegasline route, though their Bhuddist faction had defected to thegovernment's Slorc. Pala said work related to the Yadana gas project onthe Burmese side, including the $1bn field development and the 300-pluskm off/onshore gasline was well under way.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CAMBODIA MULLS PTT MODELCambodia has started considering establishment of a state oil firm tomanage its indigenous petroleum resources, particularly offshorenatural gas, which could be discovered and developed in future. PouSotirak, Cambodian industry, mines and energy minister, said thegovernment had accepted it was the right time for the country to have a"national" oil firm, possibly similar to those created in neighbouringAsean states such as the Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT). Heindicated the starting point would be when the country discovered"practical" size resources, perhaps of Thailand's scale. "If we don'thave any reserves, then there is no need for a national oil company,"he added.Sotirak said he was "still thinking very hard" about the role of theproposed national oil body. But generally Cambodia wanted to optimiseits economic exploitation of natural gas and petroleum, if it had any."It must serve the benefits of the public and the government." He saidhe had asked PTT governor Pala Sookawesh if PTT could "teach a fewtricks" on establishing a national oil firm and developing personnel torun the organisation."Right now we are still searching for petroleum (offshore); if wediscovered something I have to quickly visit Mr Pala to learn toestablish a national oil firm," he added. Cambodia has high hopes offinding substantial natural gas reserves at locations near the so-called overlapping areas of Thai-Cambodian territorial claims in theGulf of Thailand, given the fact Unocal Thailand has been producing gasand condensate from the general area. Bangkok and Phnom Penh are stillunable to resolve their disputes over the offshore territorial claims,said to be highly gas prospective.Phnom Penh has mooted the idea that Thailand and Cambodia adopt a"Joint Development Area (JDA)", as Thailand Malaysia have done, inresolving the disputes in the southernmost part of the Gulf ofThailand. Thailand has not accepted this, insisting on its claims onthe overlapping tract covering tens of thousands of square kilometres(IGR 285/21).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HONDO WARNS GASLINE IN DOUBTHondo Oil & Gas Co this week warned completion of a Colombian naturalgas pipeline it plans with Amoco of the US is now in doubt because ofchanges in Colombian regulations on pipeline tariffs and natural gasprices. It also said the planned Opon 5 development well in the countryhad been delayed indefinitely because of right of way disputes withlandowners. Hondo cited adoption of new regulations by recently formedgovernment agency Comision de Regulacion de Energia y Gas, part of themines and energy ministry.It said the regulations set a ceiling price for natural gas and amaximum 12.5% rate of return (before Colombian taxes) for pipelinetariffs. The ceiling had been interpreted to include costs or fees fornatural gas processing, so that process costs could not be passed on tobuyers. "These new regulations will reduce the amount the companyexpects to receive for natural gas and pipeline tariffs in the future,"said a Hondo statement.Earlier, Hondo said the new regulations affected terms agreed in amemorandum of understanding announced last summer with Colombian stateoil and gas firm Ecopetrol for construction of an 88 km pipeline fromthe Opon Association Contract (OPC) area to Ecopetrol's refinery atBarancabermeja. This called for recovery of pipeline investment via atariff. Negotiations were continuing with Ecopetrol on relief from theregulations' effects and meantime pipeline work was continuing, saidHondo. Plans for 1996 OPC area exploration and development projectswould be reconsidered during the first quarter.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEB DETAILS EXPORTS IMPACTTotal volumes of Canadian gas to be exported under long term contractsup to 2014 represent 11% of remaining and undiscovered western Canadareserves, according to the National Energy Board (NEB). Known and yetto be found reserves totalled an estimated 164 Tcf at 1 November 1995of which 63 Tcf was remaining reserves and 101 Tcf undiscovered, saidthe board. Authorised volumes under long term contract totalled 18.2Tcf. The volume did not include licences for gas exports from theMackenzie Delta totalling 9.2 Tcf. NEB said volumes authorised for longterm export to the USA included 40% to the northeast, 32% to themidwest, 15% to California and 13% to the Pacific northwest.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HANSON SELLS SUBURBAN PROPANEIndustrial conglomerate Hanson has announced plans to sell a majorityequity stake in Suburban Propane, third biggest retail propanedistributor in the USA, through a public offer. Hanson expects to raiseabout #500m ($776.3m) through the offer and a related debt issue. Thepublic offer will represent about 62% of equity in a new 'masterlimited partnership' dubbed Suburban Propane Partners LP. Suburban willalso issue $425m of senior debt maturing in 2002-2011. Hanson will keepan approximate 38% combined subordinated and general partnershipinterest in the new MLP, it said.The structure would enhance Suburban's ability to expand by usingpartnership units to acquire other propane distributors. Suburban isthird largest retail and wholesale distributor of propane gas in the USfor residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural uses. Itsretail operations are run through 353 sales and service centres servingnearly 0.8m customers in 39 states. Suburban has about 6% of the USretail propane market, said Hanson. A substantial slice of net proceedsfrom the unit offering and debt issue would be used to make payments toHanson subsidiaries.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FLYING START FOR MARITIMES LINEA recent open season for Phase I of the planned Maritimes & NortheastPipeline project resulted in nominations for over 410 MMcfd of naturalgas transportation services, according to lSource Development Co, aunit of Panhandle Eastern Corp, one of the line sponsors, early lastmonth. With announced initial capacity on Phase I just 60 MMcfd,nominations far exceeded expectations, said 1Source. Phase 1, due tostart transportation services in 1997, comprises 63 miles of 24-inchgasline linking Dracut, Massachusetts with Wells, Maine. Other sponsorsof the project to market natural gas from the Sable Island areaoffshore Nova Scotia are Westcoast Energy Inc, Mobil Corp, Shell Canadaand Eastern Enterprises.1Source said the open season response demonstrated the strong demandfor natural gas service in Maine and New Hampshire and the variety ofshippers nominating was evidence of a rapidly emerging, competitivenatgas marketplace there. "This is good news for the Maritimes &Northeast project as a whole since Phase I is the project's gateway tomajor markets in the eastern United States," said lSource. For Phase Isponsors will now look to seal binding precedent agreements with futureMaritimes & Northeast customers, with federal approval to proceedexpected to be sought this month.1Source said sponsors were keen to move ahead on Phase II for which itexpected the response in Maine and the Maritimes to be as encouraging.The overall project will eventually involve construction of a 630 mileunderground pipeline crossing areas in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick inCanada, Maine and New Hampshire before interconnecting with the NorthAmerican pipe grid in Massachusetts. Scheduled pipeline capacity is 400MMcfd with service due to start in November 1999. Sable Offshore EnergyProject companies are Mobil, Shell Canada, Petro-Canada Inc, ImperialOil and Nova Scotia Resources Inc. They aim to tap about 3 Tcf ofrecoverable natural gas from six fields in the Sable Island area.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CORPOVEN PLANS NGLS LEAPState owned PDVSA unit Corpoven says it plans to boost natural gasliquids (NGLs) output by some 160% over the next 10 years with outputexpected to reach 6.22 Bcf in 2005 from 2.36 Bcf currently. It said theforecast was based on "large proven reserves of natural gas" inVenezuela totalling 138 Tcf of which Corpoven held 62%. The companyplanned to invest 262bn bolivars ($771.6m) in various projects to boostNGLs output. Main project was the Eastern Cryogenic Complex, or Accro,in eastern Monagas state.Its latest component, a $300m cryogenic plant, was inaugurated at SantaBarbara last November. Third and final phase is due complete in 2004.Accro output was expected to reach 290,000 b/d of NGLs by 2005 against82,000 b/d now. Up to 30% of Venezuelan gas liquids are exported,mainly to the USA. Corpoven estimates market capacity in the Americasat about 150,000 b/d.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SHV CALOR EXPANDS IN BRAZILThe international LPG joint venture of Calor Group of the UK and DutchSHV Energy is spending $62m for a 49% stake (with 50% voting rights) inSupergasbras Distribuidora de Gas, Brazil's fourth largest LPGdistributor. The two partners in SHV Calor Brasil are investing $31meach. The deal follows acquisition last August of a majority stake inMinasgas, Brazil's fifth largest bottled gas supplier. Calor said thetwo firms would be operated as separate companies but it wouldencourage the rival suppliers to make cooperation arrangements for thefuture. The two supply a combined total of 1.35m tonnes/yr of LPG toover 40m people.Last summer Calor unveiled plans to spend about #70m ($108.7m) onprojects in Asia and Latin America, in conjunction with SHV which has acontrolling stake in Calor, seeking to reduce its dependence on the UKLPG market. Calor financial controller John Taylor this week said thegroup had about #40m to spend on other projects, mostly in Asia.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CPUC SEEKS POWER COMPETITIONThe California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) is back in theprecedent-setting business with a late December move to bringcompetition to all electric power sales in the Golden State. The broadderegulation plan, a refinement and stretch-out of the pioneering free-market initiative launched by the commission last April, will affectvirtually every aspect of the $20bn California electricity market. Inthe process, it may be the beginning of the end for CPUC itself, atleast as presently constituted. And, like so many other thingsCalifornian, it is likely to serve as a bellwether for other statecommissions seeking a roadmap to successful deregulation of their ownelectric utilities.For gas interests, the CPUC move is expected to result, at leasteventually, in a further proliferation of small-scale, independentpower production facilities, most of which are likely to be fired bynatural gas. "Market mechanisms", said CPUC, will be used "to minimisetransition costs [and] utilities will be allowed the opportunity forfull recovery of the transition costs associated with existing powercontracts and prior regulatory commitments".The commission added it would also permit "accelerated recovery of netbook value of undepreciated assets combined with a reduced cost ofcapital". However, the new plan was approved on a sharply divided 3-2vote of the commissioners, signalling lengthy fights beforederegulation in California becomes a fait accompli. And the plan mustreceive concurrence from California Governor Pete Wilson and from theFederal Energy Regulatory Commission (Ferc).Timing of the transition to open markets remains ambitious:deregulation would begin in less than two years, on 1 January 1998,continuing through the first day of 2003 when power markets wouldbecome completely open. In a repeat of part of its original proposalthat resulted in extensive criticism from various energy industrysectors, the new CPUC plan includes preferences for "renewable" fuelsand penalties for failure to achieve minimum purchase requirements forpower generated using environmentally benign technologies.The new regulatory regime would also use "performance-based" criteriato spur operational efficiency at the state's utilities. CPUC said itwould strive during first-quarter 1996 to achieve a "CaliforniaConsensus" among state and local officials and electricity customers.The commission pledged to submit the envisaged consensus to Ferc inwhat it termed "a spirit of cooperative federalism", and what cynicssuggested was an end run to co-opt the Washington regulators.Rather than phasing the deregulation plan in by customer classes, thenew CPUC plan would select a "representative" group from all customersfor participation in the first phase two years hence. That initial moveinto uncharted waters would last just one year, during which selectedcustomers could shop around among electricity providers for the bestdeals. After that, full open market conditions would be implemented.State regulation of rates and services would continue in instanceswhere true competition did not occur, said CPUC, although traditionalcost-of-service standards would be supplanted by overall performancecriteria. In the CPUC view, that would lead to increased profitpotential for the most efficient producers and investor penalties forthose who failed to cut costs sufficiently.To assure open transmission access for all power producers, the CPUCsystem would establish an "independent system operator" (ISO) to assumecontrol of utility-owned transmission assets and manage the use ofthose resources. The ISO would also be responsible for assuringadequate power supplies and reliability of transmission facilities, aswell as fixing any problems that develop. In short, major utilitiescould continue to own transmission properties but could not operatethem independently of the ISO.In an element likely to be among its most controversial, the CPUC planwould require California's Big Three electric utilities - Pacific Gasand Electric, Southern California Edison, and San Diego Gas andElectric - to divest half their fossil-fired generation facilities ifthey wish to avoid "market power" accusations. Another "politicallycorrect" aspect of the CPUC decision would require a "public goodscharge" on retail electricity sales, with proceeds to be used to fundenergy conservation and efficiency initiatives "not provided by thecompetitive market that are in the broader public interest".CPUC also mandated that electric rates include a "competitiontransition charge" that could not be bypassed in sales transactions.That charge would be collected from all power consumers, whether theyreceive conventional bundled service from utilities or buy powerdirectly from independent producers. As the dust began to settle on theCPUC announcement, gas industry analysts were hedging their bets onexactly what the impact might be on gas use.However, most observers concurred that if the plan is endorsed by thegovernor and by Ferc, the increased access of independent generatorswould inevitably favour greater gas use in California. If other stateschoose to copy California once more, the consensus is that gas use forpower generation could increase substantially, with few observerswilling to speculate on precise growth figures.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COLD SPARKS PRICE SPIKEAbnormally cold weather in the eastern half of the US, combined with aperception among traders that gas storage inventories are decliningrapidly enough to raise questions about sufficiency of gas suppliesthrough the 31 March end of the winter heating season, produced anunprecedented upward spike in gas futures prices on the New YorkMercantile Exchange during the week before Christmas, with high pricesfor the January futures contract climbing close to $4/MMBtu in dailytrading before settling back into the $3.00 range for the week.The abrupt jump also marked the highest gas futures prices on the Nymexsince trading in those instruments began. As the New Year's holidayweekend began, gas futures contracts were trading back in the $2.50range. Traders appeared more worried this season about the "early" coldsnaps that have occurred in the eastern US. While periods ofexceptionally cold weather in the last several years have often beencolder and more prolonged than those in recent days, they occurredcloser to the end of the winter season, when concerns about the season-long adequacy of gas supplies were less severe.Questions along the lines of "can we make it until April?" haveoccurred with increasing frequency. For the week ending 22 December,the American Gas Association reported gas in storage totalled 2,257Bcf, or 70% "full". For the same reporting period last year, storagevolumes were nearly 400 Bcf higher, and inventories stood at 83% full.Spot wellhead gas prices rose by 25 cents/MMBtu to $2.30 during theweek before Christmas, closing at 83 cents more than the year-earlierweek. For the week between Christmas and New Year, prices rose another29 cents to $2.59, closing at $1.15/MMBtu above the year-end week of1994. Meanwhile, figures for average spot wellhead prices for full year1995 came out at $1.45/MMBtu.The dramatic increases in gas futures prices during the year's lastfortnight gave rise to a formal complaint filed by an ad-hoc groupcalling itself "the Nymex floor members", seeking an investigation bythe Commodity Futures Trading Commission into the volatile fluctuationsin gas futures contract prices just before the end of the year. Theleap of 94.4 cents/MMBtu registered by the January gas futures contractbetween 18 December and the closing of the January contract on 21December brought the contract price to $3.448/MMBtu, a record for thecontract. Representatives of Nymex insisted the price volatility was anatural result of exceptionally strong gas demand, rather than anymismanagement or wrongdoing on the part of the exchange or individualtraders.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW PIPE TALLY 8,000 MILESMore than 8,000 miles of new US natural gas transmission line orpipeline looping have been built, are under construction or areproposed, according to the American Gas Association (AGA) in its latestannual report on new construction. Additionally, AGA lists 47 proposednatural gas storage projects in various stages of development to addmore than 500 Bcf of working gas storage capacity and, if built,increase total US working gas storage capacity by nearly 20%.Through 1993 and 1994, more than $9bn of new gas pipeline constructionprojects were in various stages of development. AGA classifies theseprojects as either built in 1993 or 1994 and operational, or currentlyunder construction, proposed and pending. In aggregate, the projectstotal 8,087 miles of new line and looping, 1,098,940 hp of additionalcompression, and 15.3 Bcfd of additional capacity. The existing US gastransmission network consists of more than 2,984,500 miles of line andmore than 14m hp of compression with a total book value of nearly$54bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ENGINE IN SCHOOL BUS EXAMEngineers at South-western Research Institute, San Antonio aredeveloping an electronically controlled natural gas engine for schooland commercial buses. Based on an existing PowerTech Deere natural gasengine, it is part of an Energy Department-funded project to build safeschool buses powered by natural gas. The modified 8.1 litre engine haselectronic fuel injection, an electronic drive-by-wire throttleactuator, an electronically controlled wastegate and a direct-fire,coil-on-plug ignition system.So far, it is said to have demonstrated low emission levels with betterperformance and fuel efficiency than any heavy-duty, natural gas enginecommercially available. Deere plans to produce a commercial version ofthis engine this year. The engine is currently undergoing lean-misfireand knock-limit tests to determine operating limits. Researchers arealso identifying the influence of various engine components onperformance and emissions with the goal of lowering nitrogen oxideoutput while maintaining engine efficiency.During the next several months, they will evaluate different controlstrategies for keeping the desired air-fuel ratio, spark timing, boostpressure and other parameters during steady-state and transientoperation. They are also developing systems for knock and misfiredetection and catalyst efficiency monitoring. Once proven, the enginewill go into a prototype, ultrasafe bus being designed by Blue BirdCorp. Natural gas will be stored in four composite-wrapped aluminiumcylinders located within the frame rails underneath the bus which isexpected to have a range of more than 300 miles. Besides sporting a newengine, the ultrasafe bus will be lighter weight for optimum fuelefficiency.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELTRON IN NEW SYNGAS R&DEltron Research Inc is developing a 'ceramic membrane reactor' (CMR)technology for electrochemical conversion of humidified natural gas tosynthesis gas. In addition to the yield being up to 90% in a singlepass, the reaction is thermodynamically spontaneous and thereforerequires no externally imposed voltage. Further, it needs no externalsource of pure oxygen, cutting production costs by 30-50%, says projectmanager Michael Schwartz. Maintained at some 900oC, the CMR is equippedwith a tubular mixed-conducting membrane with methane held inside andthe air (for O2) outside.The methane side of the membrane is coated with a partial-oxidationcatalyst, while the outer side contains a reduction catalyst. The highconductivity of the membrane materials for electrons and oxygen ionspermits the reaction of oxygen with methane while preventing directcontact between methane and oxygen. In addition, oxygen becomesseparated from atmospheric nitrogen via the membrane. Eltron is seekingpartners to build a largescale CMR prototype.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BUYERS TO HOOK INTO US SYSTEMLate this year, Mexico's PMI Trading Co hopes to take delivery of thefirst NGLs shipped through newly-formed Rio Grande Pipeline Co. Thelatter is a new joint venture formed by Mid-America Pipeline, AmocoPipelines and Navajo Pipeline companies to link the US NGL grid to itssouthern neighbour. Liquids will originate at Hobbs Station, Texas andother points on Mid-America Pipeline's 16,000 km system to the PemexGas y Petroquimica Basica Mendez terminal in Ciudad Juarez.To achieve this, Rio Grande is buying Navajo's existing 8-inch pipelinefrom Odessa, Texas to a point near El Paso. A new 8-inch line will linkthis point to the Mendez terminal in Mexico. Mid-America will beoperator of the system. Volume to be moved has yet to be announced.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW INDIANA PLANT ON STREAMPSI Energy and Destec Energy have begun commercial operations at theirjoint venture coal gasification plant at West Terre Haute in Indiana.The Wabash River plant has taken two years to build and will convert2,7000 tonnes/day of high-sulphur coal - supplied from Peabody Coal'sHawthorn mine in the state - to an ultimate 262,000 kW of electricity.The latter will stem from PSI's existing Wabash River coal-fired plant,being converted to a syngas-fired combined-cycle unit. Destectechnology is being used throughout. In the gasification plant, thecompany claims to remove 98% of the coal's sulphur content prior togasification.That seems set to be sold for use in fertiliser production. Airpollution is said to be just a fraction of the limit set for 2000 bythe Clean Air Act. Acid rain pollutants are also said to be reducedsignificantly. A further by-product is ash derived from thegasification plant. This is converted to an inert vitrous aggregatesaid to be ideal for road building. Now Destec aims to use the sametechnology to use unsaleable residues from refineries as basic fuel forgasification.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CMS BUYS PETAL STORAGECMS Gas Transmission and Storage Co has bought Chevron's Petal GasStorage Co for an undisclosed sum. As part of the sale agreement,Chevron will continue to receive long-term storage service from Petal,which owns a high-deliverability peak-shaving storage unit in ForrestCounty, Mississippi. With a capacity of 3.2 Bcf, the salt-dome cavernprovides up to 320 MMcfd delivery for up to 10 days and can be refilledin 20 days. At present it is connected to two interstate pipelines -Tennessee Gas and Koch Gateway.Access to other pipelines is being mulled by CMS, along with thepossibility of expansion. "We believe Petal's high-flexible peakingtype of service is what the market wants," says William Haener,president at CMS Gas Transmission & Storage. The company complementsCMS' existing storage business and will allow the latter to tailorspecific services to satisfy a wide variety of customer needs, he adds.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BECHTEL LANDS LNG EPC CONTRACTAtlantic LNG Co of Trinidad and Tobago has taken two major decisionswhich will ensure it maintains its deadline for delivering LNG to itstwo customers, Cabot and Enagas, by first-quarter 1999. One is choiceof the Phillips optimised cascade system, developed by PhillipsPetroleum Co, as the preferred liquefaction process for the 425 MMcfdplant. Overseas Bechtel, one of three companies asked to submit frontend engineering design for the plant, based its proposals on thePhillips process and has been awarded the engineering, procurement andconstruction (EPC) contract.Negotiations on an overall contract price will begin with Bechtel inJanuary, led by Atlantic's recently-appointed vice president forengineering and construction, David Jamieson. Ground should be brokenfor construction early in the second quarter. The other major decisionis to break that ground elsewhere than at La Brea, the site insouthwest Trinidad originally chosen for LNG, mainly on the insistenceof the last government, which wanted to develop the area.But the abandoned wells left behind from discontinued oil and gasoperations could not be cleaned up in time and the existence of thenearby Pitch Lake meant the area would remain inherently unstablegeologically. The LNG site has been shifted five miles further down thesouthwest coast to Point Fortin, where ample reclaimed land and goodharbour facilities, which have accommodated oil tankers for decades,are available.The move will also help provide alternative jobs for workers maderedundant by closure of Petrotrin's Point Fortin refinery, which isimminent because no one seems interested in buying it. Bechtel beat twoother contenders to the prize contract, likely to be worth close to$1bn. Chiyoda Corp/Hudson Engineering had offered an LNG design basedon the Air Products and Chemicals liquefaction process and a jointventure of MW Kellogg and JGC Corp also submitted a bid.Atlantic believes its strategy of inviting engineering designs firstand then awarding an EPC contract was the best way to control projectcosts. As David Wight, president of Amoco Trinidad, whose associatecompany, Amoco Trinidad LNG, owns 34% of Atlantic, says: "We now have agood idea of what our costs are going to be and can control them."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GASLINE PLANS 'MAKE PROGRESS'Negotiations on the Bolivia-Brazil gas pipeline continue apace andaccording to a consultant close to the action there has been concreteprogress "with all technical and planning aspects in place". He wasreferring to the pipeline being built in two Brazilian sections, withcompletion of the Corumba-Sao Paulo section before that from Sao Pauloto Port Alegre instead of simultaneously. The pipeline diameter hasbeen fixed at 32 inches (instead of 28 inches) permitting a maximumvolume of 30 MMcmd rather than 16 MMcmd.The source said: "There are no problems with existing legislation forthe pipeline to go ahead; all that is really needed is long termdistribution contracts with utilities. All the partners (Enron, YPFB,Petrobras, British Gas, Tenneco and BHP) are basically in agreement."Asked about the pipeline's timetable, the consultant put a dateline ofmid-1996 for all existing problems to be overcome and a "veryconservative and cautious maximum timescale for contracts for gas powerprojects to be signed and capable of seeking finance by April 1997".One major reason for cheerfulness for the companies involved in thegasline project was a decision by Brazil's federal electricity holdingEletrobras to include gas-fired power for the very first time in itsrevised long-term plan (1996-2004) to be published this January. Enronhas always argued the Bolivian pipeline must be primed by electricitygenerating projects from day one of operation so that it is producingmoney from the start while industrial and residential markets aredeveloped.The Eletrobras plan for gas-fuelled generation consists of 1,800 MW inthe states of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, 450 MW in Mato Grosso and390 MW in Mato Grosso do Sul. The Bolivia pipeline will enter Brazil atMato Grosso do Sul (Corumba) and go straight to the contiguous state ofSao Paulo where the main market is. Sao Paulo currently takes gas fromRio de Janeiro state but when Bolivian gas arrives this flow is plannedto be reversed.A branch pipeline will probably leave the Bolivia-Brazil main pipelinewithin Bolivia (between Santa Cruz de la Serra and Puerto Suarez) inorder to serve Mato Grosso state, probably entering Brazilian territoryat the river port of Caceres. Enron is understood to have signedprotocols of understanding for establishing gas-fired power stationswith the state electricity companies of Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso doSul.There are apparently two issues still to be resolved. One is thequestion of the gas price to distribution companies. Negotiations arecentred on the equation of volume and prices. The pipeline projectcompanies have been arguing for high volumes and lower prices whiledistribution company estimates of demand have tended to be conservativeand consequently the price offered has tended to rise. The use of gasin power stations will go some way to breaking this particular log-jamby raising initial throughput and lowering the price.Another problem, aired for some time, has been the allegation thatBolivian reserves will be insufficient for the projected gasline flows.Opponents of the gas pipeline say the certified reserves (byNetherlands, Sweel and Associates of Dallas) do not cover the estimated100 Bcm Brazil would consume over the 20 year contract period. Therespected Dallas company put Bolivian reserves at 80.8 Bcm proven; 30Bcm probable and 25.9 Bcm possible. The consultant was confident thisproblem "could be settled fairly quickly", without specifying how.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS VEHICLE PRODUCTION OK'DBrazil's mines and energy minister Raimundo Brito has authorised themotor industry to start production of natural gas fuelled cars andtrucks. Until now only buses have been purpose-built to use gas whiletaxis could be converted to the fuel. Ministry officials expect thecars will be produced with the option of alcohol use in order toincrease their range outside major cities. One of the reasons given forallowing gas-fuelled car production is the increasing levels ofpollution in the two Brazilian cities with developed natural gas roadvehicle infrastructure: Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996US INVOLVEMENT NOW LIKELYOne at least of the new ammonia/urea complexes planned for location atJose in Antzotegui state Venezuela is set for US participation (IGR287/25). Pequiven has signed a letter of intent with Arcadian tojointly study feasibility of a $700m project involving a 700,000tonnes/yr (t/yr) urea plant, fed by twin 600,000 t/yr ammonia units.Assuming the study is positive and finance can be secured, Arcadiansees a construction period running to three years. The move, saysArcadian president Doug Campbell, would allow the company to move intothe fast-growing Latin American market for agriculture fertilisers,with Venezuela's hefty gas reserves making that country a natural placefrom which to operate.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CRISTOBAL NEEDS HIGHER PRICEPartners in Sucre Gas SA, the joint venture backing the plannedCristobal-Colon LNG export project, will wait until late 1996 beforecommitting themselves to a go-ahead. So says Ronald Pantin, planningchief at Petroven, whose Lagoven subsidiary holds 33% of Sucre. For theproject to be economically viable, says Pantin, prices in the US willhave to be $2.50/MMBtu, while those in Europe will have to hit$3.50/MMBtu. On recent forecasts (IGR 288/18), pipeline gas from almostany source will undercut the European price suggested, US prices maywell top the $2.50/MMBtu level by end-century (IGR 285/30) but thespate of new gas being released by the price-rise-inspired explorationhike puts some doubt on higher prices lasting for long.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ATCO NEGOTIATING SALE OF ATCOR RESOURCESCanada - Atco Ltd is negotiating sale of subsidiary Atcor Resources toan unnamed buyer. Expected to fetch up to C$150m ($110m), Atcor hasreserves of 132 Bcf of gas and 13m bbls of oil, producing 46 MMcfd and4,100 b/d respectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AGAC BUYS ACIA, THE LOCAL REFUSE COLLECTION COMPANYItaly - Agac, the gas and water utility of Reggio Emilia in the PoValley, has bought for L32.1bn ($20.2m) Acia, the local refusecollection company. Both companies are consortia of the municipalityand of various - though different - local authorities nearby.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EL PASO BUYS PREMIER GASUSA - El Paso Natural Gas has bought Premier Gas, which markets tocommercial and industrial gas users in the Mid-continent, as well asutilities in the Great Lakes.Last year's sales were 150 Bcf. Premier now becomes a unit of Eastexenergy, which has sales around 2 Bcfd.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MCN BUYING CONSOL COAL'S COALBED-METHANE BUSINESSUSA - MCN Corp is buying the Virginia assets of Consol Coal's coalbed-methane business, including 130 wells, 80 miles of gathering line, a50% stake in a 40 mile export line and 100,000 acres of methanedevelopment land.Cost of $120m covers reserves put at 250 Bcf proved, 250 Bcf probableand potential, and 1.9m bbls of oil.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NGC BUYS OKEENE GAS-GATHERING SYSTEMUSA - NGC has bought Oneok's OKeene gas-gathering system in Oklahoma.NGC plans to install central compression on the 180 mile system,enabling field-gathering pressures to be reduced.It can then be consolidated into the low-pressure Ringwood and Rodmansystems already owned by NGC. Costs will thus be reduced, while wellproductivity could be boosted.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BULGARIAN GAS FINDBulgaria - State firm Commgeo says gas has been founded at Bazovets,150 km north of Sofia. Geologist Margarita Nikolova says the find wasmade at a depth of 3,857 metres, while flow is put at 200,000 cmd ofgas and 40,000 cmd of condensate.Local head of the firm, Hristo Gamzakov reckons 1-2 years' furtherdrilling will be needed before a proper reserve estimate can be made.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DEMAND FOR CANADIAN NATURAL GASCanada -  Demand for Canadian natural gas, including exports, willrequire aggressive drilling programmes for the next 15 years, Canada'sNational Energy Board (NEB) predicts.In a supply/demand study covering 1993-2010 it says operators havefound about 3.5 Tcf/yr since 1987. But that is 1 Tcf less than thevolume needed to keep reserves from declining.It forecasts Canadian gas production will increase from a current 4.5Tcf/yr to more than 6 Tcf/yr by 2005. On the price side, it projectedprices rising to about $4/Mcf by 2010, or $2.50/Mcf after adjustmentfor inflation.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COPHILL PLUGGING WELL IN PHILIPPINESPhilippines - Cophill Exploration Corp was plugging its Dalingding-lwell in northern central Cebu Island having found only salt water andsmall gas traces, the Philippines energy department said this week.Total well depth was 1,508 ft.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AMMONIA PLANT AT CABO NEGROChile - A first ever ammonia plant is to be built at Cabo Negro, on theMagellan Strait, by local firm Enaex as a joint venture with state oilfirm Enap, using local gas as feed for the 400,000 tonnes/yr unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FINANCING FOR SUI NORTHERN GAS PIPELINEPakistan - The Bahrain-based Faysal Islamic Bank Ltd (FIBL) is toprovide a lease financing of Rs100m ($2.9m) to Sui Northern GasPipeline Co Ltd (SNGPL). The agreement is in addition to Rs125mprovided by FIBL to SNGPL in 1994. The new loan would extend for a fouryear period.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDONESIAN LNG SHIPMENT TO SOUTH KOREAIndonesia/South Korea - Indonesian LNG is now moving to South Korea inthat country's first 130,000 cubic metre membrane-type vessel. HanjinPyeong Taek, built in Pusan by Hanjin Heavy Industries, looks likebeing the forerunner of a new wave of LNG carrier orders from Korea GasCorp due soon (IGR 284/21).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996THAI LPG PROJECTThailand - Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT) recently awarded a$2.02m contract to Foster Wheeler International Corp of the UK toprovide engineering consultancy services for LPG and oil depotprojects.The LPG project involves a $22m investment to expand storage capacityat PTT's Khao Bor Ya terminal in Chon Buri, about 100 km east ofBangkok, by 5,000 tons.Installation of three additional LPG spheres and related loading andunloading facilities as part of the expansion of Khao Bor Ya terminalis expected complete by 1997.The expansion facilitates a significant increase of LPG throughputvolume at the terminal, resulting from a substantial rise in locally-produced LPG and the need to export surplus LPG which is expected to be453,000 tons.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996START-UP OF NORSK HYDRO'S PORSGRUNN COMPLEXNorway - Following start-up of a 0.5 tonnes/day demonstration unit lastJune at Norsk Hydro's Porsgrunn complex, UOP and Hydro are offeringlicences for their new natural gas to olefins process.The MTO process uses methanol produced from natural gas to extend thereaction to produce ethylene and propylene. In effect it is an add-onto the usual natural gas to methanol route, allowing petrochemicalfirms to vary end product according to state of the markets.Using a fluidised-bed reactor and a highly-selective molecular-sievecatalyst, the process is now reckoned to be commercially proven.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW YORK TO CONVERT SOME TAXIS TO COMPRESSED NATURAL GASUSA - New York State's Energy Research and Development Authority EDCOCorp of College Point, Queens and New York City Department ofEnvironmental Protection are funding a demonstration programme toconvert about two dozen medallion taxis (yellow cabs) to use compressednatural gas (CNG).EDCO Corp manufactures the carbon-fibre CNG fuel tanks that will beinstalled in the taxis which will initially be dual-fuelled with smallreserve petrol tanks. New York City has about 12,000 medallion taxis inservice.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDIAN PETROCHEMICALS TO RAISE POLYETHYLENE CAPACITYIndia/UK - State firm Indian Petrochemicals Corp late last year said itsigned a technology deal with BP Chemicals of the UK to raisepolyethylene capacity at its Maharashtra Gas Cracker Complex, Nagothanefrom 160,000 tonnes (t)/yr to 220,000t/yr. The enhanced capacity wasexpected on stream by mid-1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TAIWAN FACES A NEW WORRY:  SUBSIDENCETaiwan - Taiwan, already bothered by a shortage of land to develop itspetrochemical and gas industries, now faces a new worry: subsidence.National Taiwan University reckons land at the site of Formosa PlasticsGroup's projected naphtha cracker complex (IGR 282/20) is beingundermined by over-pumping of an aquifer by nearby fish farmers.A university team says land has sunk by over 30 centimetres in the lastfour years and thinks it is likely to get worse. Much of the pumping isillegal.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SIAM CEMENT AND DOW CHEMICAL JOINT VENTURE TO PRODUCE LLDPEThailand - Siam Cement, one of Thailand's largest conglomerates, and US-based Dow Chemical announced a 4.75bn baht ($190m) joint venture to setup a linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE) production facility inThailand.The new plant, designed to produce 30,000 tonnes/yr (t/yr) of LLDPE,will strengthen SCC's production capacity of polyethylene and propyleneand its derivatives to 1mt/yr in 1999, said to be the largest scale inAsia.According to SCC petrochemicals vice president Apiporn Pasawat, SCC andDow have incorporated Siam Polyethylene Co with a registered capital of1.5bn baht to carry out the venture.The two parties have an equal share in the scheme, to be located in MabTa Phud Industrial Estate, Rayong. The plant, to be built ontechnologies supplied by Dow, is scheduled on stream in 1999. Dow hasalready been a partner with SCC in four other petrochemical projects.Thai Polyethylene Co, part of Siam Cement, is currently the country'ssole producer of LLDPE with an annual production of 80,000 t/yr.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-21IA059-000325-B005-340http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey58.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233209 text/html 19449HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:30:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:05 GMTContent-length: 19262Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey58.html Sample Issue Copyright JAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES OIL & GAS MITI to strengthen supervision of power plants+ (168 words) Crude Oil imports fall 8.8% in Nov.++ (285 words) TEPCO to pay more than 2 bil. yen over labor dispute+ (206 words) MITI to rectify notorious LPG trading practices+ (213 words) Oil industry makes political donations to ruling parties+ (139 words) NUCLEAR POWER Miyagi Pref. takes dim view of leak at reactor+ (237 words) Antinuclear group calls for Monju reactor closure+ (189 words) Donen rapped for improper system to handle Monju leak+ (499 words) Agency publishes revised report on Monju sodium leak+ (332 words) 2nd high-level nuclear waste shipment to Japan postponed+ (229 words) CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MITI to strengthen supervision of power plants+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) willinstruct operators of electric power facilities under itsjurisdiction to establish a safety system for their operation, asenior MITI official said Monday.     MITI will urge power plant operators to step up training andinspection to prevent accidents, and ensure a system for an immediatereporting to the ministry in the case of emergency, said TomioTsutsumi, vice MITI minister, during a news conference.     Tsutsumi was apparently referring to the recent attempt by theoperator of the Monju prototype fast-breeder reactor to cover up theextent of an accident.     Monju and other atomic power plants are under the jurisdictionof the Science and Technology Agency while ordinary power reactorsare supervised by MITI.     A large amount of sodium leaked at Monju on Dec. 8, forcing theplant's shutdown.     A government organ in charge of running Monju has been underfire for deliberately editing or withholding videotape taken insidethe plant shortly after the accident.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Crude Oil imports fall 8.8% in Nov.++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Japan's imports of crude oil in November decreased 8.8% from ayear before, posting the fourth consecutive month of year-to-yeardeclines, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI)said Monday.     The decline was in reaction to a sizable year-to-year gain of14.6% registered in November last year when domestic fuel oil demandsurged due to a drought in the nation earlier in the year, MITIofficials said.     The United Arab Emirates was the biggest supplier of crude oilin November with 37.61 million barrels, down 9.5% from a year before.     The UAE was followed by Saudi Arabia with 24.34 millionbarrels, down 19.4%, Iran with 13.96 million barrels, up 5.2%, andIndonesia with 11.28 million barrels, down 23.3%, MITI said.     Of the total imports, those from the Organization of PetroleumExporting Countries accounted for 82.3%, up from 80.6% in October,while imports via the Strait of Hormuz represented 72.1%, down from72.7%.     Imports from the Middle East reached 78.9%, unchanged.     The amount of crude oil processed during the reporting monthcame to 128.32 million barrels, down 3.3%, MITI said.     Production of fuel oil in November sank 3.0% to 119.57 millionbarrels, the first decline in three months, MITI said.     Output of naphtha, jet fuel oil and heavy oil decreased but thatof gas oil and gasoline hit record highs.     Domestic sales of fuel oil came to 130.89 million barrels, up3.6%.     Sales of fuel oil B and fuel oil C slid but others increased,with gasoline, naphtha, gas oil and jet fuel oil reaching recordhighs for any November.     Imports of fuel oil surged 39.2% to 19.00 million barrels butexports sank 10.8% to 9.62 million barrels, MITI said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TEPCO to pay more than 2 bil. yen over labor dispute+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Tokyo Electric Power Co. (TEPCO) signed an agreement Monday topay more than 2 billion yen in compensation to 165 employees fordiscriminating against them on grounds that they are communists.     The agreement, reached out of court under a proposal by theTokyo High Court after a 19-year legal battle, also calls forpromotion and fair treatment for those still on the payroll.     ''This has been a very long legal battle that lasted 19 yearsand two months and we all are happy now.  I'm confident that thiswill help promote liberty and democracy for the basic rights ofworkers,'' said Hideo Nihei, who led the plaintiffs.     ''We decided to reach an out-of-court settlement in view of thecircumstances surrounding the case such as the court proposal and thelong duration of the trial,'' a TEPCO spokesman said.     The plaintiffs first took their case to court in 1976, demandingthe company pay a total of some 3.7 billion yen in damages fordiscriminating against them in wages and promotion due their beliefsas members of the Japanese Communist Party.     TEPCO had justified the wage differentials, saying theyreflected the employees' job performances.     The high court recommended an out-of-court settlement lastDecember.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MITI to rectify notorious LPG trading practices+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The Ministry of International Trade and Industry will try torectify practices related to the trading of liquefied petroleum gas(LPG), ministry officials said Monday.     To answer consumer criticism that the LPG price system isunclear, the ministry is considering revising the Law Concerning theSecuring of Safety and the Optimization of Transactions of LiquefiedPetroleum Gas.     When the ministry reviews the law, it plans to include penaltiesto prevent inappropriate trading practices from having adverseeffects on consumers.     The move will be made because a subcommittee of the PetroleumCouncil, an advisory body to the international trade and industryminister, called for rectification of LPG transactions in its interimreport issued Monday.     The report proposed that how LPG prices are calculated should bewritten on paper, which traders will issue when they sign contracts.The ownership of pipes and equipment in houses will also be madeclear, the report also said.     The ministry will issue a ministerial ordinance to force tradersto make clear on paper such things as prices and ownership of pipesand equipment.     To punish traders who do not issue such papers, the ministrywill revise the law.  A bill designed to revise the law will bepresented before the next ordinary Diet session.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Oil industry makes political donations to ruling parties+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     The Petroleum Association of Japan disclosed Friday it has madepolitical donations to two conservative parties in the rulingcoalition in response to their requests.     The association of oil producers and distributors said 60million yen went to the Liberal Democratic Party, the main force inthe tripartite ruling coalition, and 3.5 million yen to New PartySakigake, the coalition's smallest party.     Last year, the association donated 50 million yen to the LDP.It increased its donation in order to strengthen its ties with theparty in response to a request by the powerful Federation of EconomicOrganizations (Keidanren), association officials said.     Keidanren asked member organizations and corporations tocontribute funds to help the LDP repay 10 billion yen borrowed fromcommercial banks to finance its campaign for the general election inJuly 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Miyagi Pref. takes dim view of leak at reactor+SENDAI, Japan, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Miyagi prefectural authorities said Monday they take a''serious view'' of a leak of water at a reactor operated by TohokuElectric Power Co. in the prefecture in northern Japan despite thecompany's assurance that it involved only a minute release ofradioactivity.     The leak occurred near a hygroscopic moisture heat separator onthe plant's No. 2 reactor at Onagawa, a light-water, boiling watertype with an 825,000-kilowatt power output.     Operators began shutting down the reactor manually on Sundaynight after the leak was discovered and completed the process bymidday Monday, after which they began investigating the cause of theleak.     Yutaka Suto, head of the company's nuclear power division, tolda press conference that radioactivity in the coolant water amountedto ''a mere trace.''     Prefectural officials counter by saying they view the case as''an extremely serious mishap'' since the reactor had only recentlybegun operations in July.     An investigation by prefectural and company officials indicatesthat the site of the problem was a device that adjusts the high watermark on a drain tank on a second stage heater forming part of ahygroscopic moisture heat separator installed to more effectivelyremove steam generated in the reactor.     At 6:15 p.m. Sunday, operators found water leaked from theheater between the high- and low-pressure turbines.     When the most recent inspection was carried out Dec. 10, noabnormality was found.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Antinuclear group calls for Monju reactor closure+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     A citizens' group opposed to the development of nuclear powerplants petitioned the head of the Science and Technology Agency onMonday, demanding the fast-breeder nuclear reactor Monju be closedimmediately.     The Citizens' Nuclear Information Center, in a letter to agencychief Yasuoki Urano, also demanded that the agency reconsider itsplans to use plutonium in nuclear reactors in Japan's energydevelopment plans.     Jinzaburo Takagi, executive director of the center, said theagency should have known that the government-funded Power Reactor andNuclear Fuel Development Corp. (Donen), which operates the prototypereactor, was concealing the accident.     ''If (the agency) did not know, it has lost its power as amanager,'' said Takagi.     On Dec. 8, liquid sodium from the reactor's secondary coolingsystem leaked and forced a shutdown of the reactor in Tsuruga, FukuiPrefecture along the Sea of Japan coast.     The group is also demanding that information concerninginvestigations into the accident be made available to the public.     ''The agency has not answered criticism from the outside, andhas given birth to a situation in which it is essentially protectingDonen,'' said Takagi.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Donen rapped for improper system to handle Monju leak+FUKUI, Japan, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The Fukui prefectural government, host to the prototypefast-breeder reactor Monju that was shut down after a huge sodiumleak, criticized the reactor's operator Monday for lacking thenecessary system to deal with such accidents.     The prefectural government made the criticism against thegovernment-funded Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corp.(Donen) in a report on the Dec. 8 accident at the plant located inTsuruga, Fukui Prefecture, on the Sea of Japan coast.     In the report, the local government said that the management ofsodium coolant is basic to operating a fast-breeder reactor, but withthe present system and equipment at the Monju reactor, Donen isunable to act promptly after a sodium leak.     The prefectural government also rapped Donen for its delay ininforming the public of the accident.     Donen reshuffled three senior officials who withheld videotapestaken at the site of the accident.  The three officials withheld thevideotapes in an attempt to cover up the extent of the leak.     A panel of the three-party ruling coalition discussing the Monjuaccident agreed Monday to send a fact-finding mission to the reactorsite in Tsuruga early next year, coalition officials said.     The coalition panel also agreed to reconsider, if necessary,government policy promoting nuclear fuel recycling, in whichplutonium is removed from spent nuclear fuel to be reprocessed foruse as nuclear fuel again, they said.     It is one of Japan's major energy policies, and the governmentaims to put the system into practical use in the first half of the21st century.     Meanwhile, Donen officials said the corporation is consideringdiverting more than half the plutonium shipped from France threeyears ago for use at the Monju reactor to other reactors.     The officials said Donen is considering the move due to theindefinite delay of operations at Monju following the sodium leak.     Donen decided to shift the plutonium because Monju requireshigh-grade plutonium and current stocks could degrade if stored foran long period, the officials said.     Japan shipped 1 ton of plutonium from a reprocessing plant inFrance amid protests from countries along the shipping route.     At the time, Donen and the Science and Technology Agency saidthe shipment was a vital replacement fuel for Monju.     But because of delays at a factory in Japan making plutonium forMonju, the processing of the imported plutonium did not begin untilDecember 1994.     Some 600 kilograms, or more than half the transported amount, isstill unprocessed and in storage at the village of Tokai in IbarakiPrefecture, northeast of Tokyo.     A Donen official said the fuel could be used at an experimentalfast reactor known as Joyo at Oarai in Ibaraki Prefecture and at aprototype heavy-water reactor known as Fugen in Tsuruga.     The diversion of the fuel would not involve major problems inregard to nuclear fuel treaties with France and the United States,but Japan would have to explain its actions to gain internationalunderstanding, the Donen officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Agency publishes revised report on Monju sodium leak+TSURUGA, Japan, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The Science and Technology Agency on Tuesday published arevised report on a coolant leak at the prototype fast-breedernuclear reactor Monju after the first report submitted by itsoperator turned out to have been falsified.     The revised report was submitted to the agency Monday by theoperator, the governmental Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel DevelopmentCorp. (Donen).  It contains corrections on the first report submittedlast week.     The revised report says the time at which the first inspectionat the accident site was made was 2 a.m. Dec. 9, instead of 10 a.m.on the day as reported previously.     The new report also includes detailed chronological records oncontacts between Donen and the local and central governments sinceimmediately after the accident in Tsuruga, Fukui Prefecture, on theSea of Japan coast.     Meanwhile, Donen on Tuesday dismissed another senior official incharge of the controversial nuclear plant over the cover-up attemptto conceal the extent of the sodium leak that forced the shutdown ofthe plant Dec. 8.     Donen, which has been accused of editing and withholding videostaken inside the plant shortly after the accident, said TadaoTakahashi, a director in charge of Monju operations, will be replacedby Atsuhiko Kishida.     The corporation dismissed three officials last weekend over theissue -- Yasuhito Omori, who headed construction works at the Monjuplant, his deputy Isao Sato and Futoshi Maeda, a section chief.     At the Monju plant, a specially established working group of thegovernment's Nuclear Safety Commission launched a probe into theaccident Tuesday.     The group has been set up to clarify the causes of the accidentand recommend steps for the prevention of a recurrence.     The group will conduct a separate investigation, independent ofthe Science and Technology Agency's inspection team.     Meanwhile, the Tsuruga municipal assembly handed agency chiefYasuoki Urano a statement saying that the city will not allow thereactor to be restarted until after it is convinced of its safety.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19962nd high-level nuclear waste shipment to Japan postponed+AOMORI, Japan, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The planned second shipment of high-level nuclear waste fromFrance to Japan's nuclear recycling plant in the village of Rokkashoin northern Japan has been delayed, electric companies and JapanNuclear Fuel Ltd. said Tuesday.     France's state-owned nuclear fuel company COGEMA, whichreprocesses Japan's spent nuclear fuel, has not yet drawn up a planfor the transportation, Japan Nuclear Fuel officials said.     In April, the British ship Pacific Pintail, owned by BritishNuclear Fuels Ltd., carried the first shipment of high-levelradioactive waste in 28 vitrified blocks from France, where it wascreated as a byproduct of reprocessing spent nuclear fuel on behalfof Japanese electric power companies.     The shipment of the waste is the first of several that Japan hasplanned over the next decade, in which over 3,000 vitrified blocks ofwaste will be shipped to Japan after spent nuclear fuel isreprocessed by COGEMA and British Nuclear Fuels.     Another 96 vitrified blocks were to be brought to the Rokkashoplant in Aomori Prefecture in the second half of fiscal 1995, throughthe end of March 1996.     The waste would then be buried deep underground, but a finalstorage site has not yet been decided.     The April shipment drew strong protests from the countriesalong the shipment route as well as from environment protectionorganizations and local residents in Aomori Prefecture.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-22IA059-000325-B005-379http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey10.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233328 text/html 121390HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:31:05 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:51 GMTContent-length: 121202Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey10.html Sample Issue Copyright MINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNet JUNE 18, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES IN FACE OF MSHA CIVIL PENALTIES, FINES J&T COAL CO. FILES FOR CHAPTER 7 (241 words) PAYMENTS REQUIRED UNDER NEW FUNDS LAW ARE 'TAXES,' HAVE BANKRUPTCY PRIORITY (469 words) PARTNERSHIP MAY STILL BE LIABLE FOR INCOAL'S WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY (493 words) FOURTH CIRCUIT DENIES BENEFITS TO WIDOWS IN TWO SEPARATE CASES (607 words) PYRO FOREMEN HIT WITH $2,000 FINES; MUST PAY FOR PROBATION SUPERVISION (457 words) SCHOOLS IN W.VA. BENEFIT FROM SENTENCE (159 words) JUDGE THROWS CONTRACTOR INTO JAIL (119 words) COAL VENDOR PLEADS TO RACKETEERING (213 words) ALJ IMPROPERLY AWARDED BACKPAY TO MINER ON REMAND, FMSHRC RULES (306 words) SIXTH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS ALJ DECISION (172 words) MAY ACCIDENTS CLAIM SEVEN LIVES; 36 HAVE DIED SINCE JANUARY (558 words) BLAST DEBRIS KILLS CAR PASSENGER (140 words) MSHA EXTENDS FINAL RULE STAYS (267 words) MSHA DIST. 6 INSPECTORS ACCUSED OF HARASSING COAL MINE OPERATORS (379 words) EASTERN FILES NLRB CHARGES AGAINST UMW; COURT GRANTS PEABODY RESTRAINING ORDER (420 words) PEABODY, CONSOL HIT IN LATEST ROUND OF UMW SELECTIVE STRIKES (237 words) PEABODY BACKS OFF FIRING 163 UMW MINERS, INSTEAD ISSUES FOUR DAY SUSPENSION (298 words) DECERTIFICATION ELECTION UP IN AIR FOR BUCK CREEK COAL CO. MINERS (236 words) VOTE SCHEDULED AT ZEIGLER SUBSIDIARY ON HEELS OF SUCCESSFUL MARROWBONE VOTE (327 words) BCOA FILES SUIT TO STOP AMAX WITHDRAWAL; AMAX SAYS IT WILL BARGAIN WITH CYPRUS (371 words) Variances (2167 words) IRREBUTABLE PRESUMPTION PROVISION OF KY. LAW CONSTRUED BY STATE COURT (293 words) ALABAMA COURT UPHOLDS BENEFITS AWARD TO MINER WHO EARNED MORE AFTER INJURY (178 words) Review Commission Decisions (31 words) Judges' Decisions (1178 words) Judges' Decisions Ordered Reviewed (238 words) BONDS FROM TENNESSEE INTERIM PROGRAM MUST BE FORFEITED TO OSM (364 words) ANDALEX TRUCK ROUTE TOO DANGEROUS BECAUSE OF SCHOOL, RESIDENTS SAY (275 words) CALIFORNIA DESERT MUST BE PROTECTED FROM MINING, EXPLOITATION, SAYS BABBITT (512 words) STATEMENTS AVAILABLE ON TWO PROJECTS (184 words) COURT CONSIDERS AMAX PERMIT (152 words) OSM, MONTANA HOLD ENFORCEMENT MEETING; MERIDIAN SUSPENDS WORK UNTIL SEPTEMBER (239 words) EPA PROPOSES OFF-ROAD EQUIPMENT RULE FOR ENGINES BIGGER THAN 50 HORSEPOWER (599 words) ASARCO NAMED PRP AT TRIUMPH (149 words) GOVERNMENT CLOSES 13,886 ACRES OPENS ONLY 130 ACRES (502 words) Discovery (516 words) Jurisdication (220 words) Placer Mining (260 words) Reclamation (259 words) UNUSED FORFEITED BOND COULD BE RETURNED IF SITE IS MINED BY ANOTHER OPERATOR (203 words) CIVIL PENALTY MODIFICATION APPROVED (189 words) AMENDMENTS FACE COURT CHALLENGE (135 words) BONDING LANGUAGE PROPOSED (135 words) MSHA HEALTH AND SAFETY COURSES AVAILABLE UPON REQUEST (874 words) Meetings (634 words) CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993IN FACE OF MSHA CIVIL PENALTIES, FINESJ&T COAL CO. FILES FOR CHAPTER 7     A Lee County, Va. coal company faced with morethan $320,000 in civil penalties, and even more inpotential criminal fines from a fatal roof fall, hasfiled a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in federal court.     J&T Coal cited a lack of assets for its filing.J&T's deep mine in St. Charles, Va. was the site of amassive roof fall that left four workers dead (MRR3/1/91, p. 85).     Earlier this spring J&T was convicted in U.S.District Court on six criminal counts in connectionwith the fatal accident (MRR 3/26). That rulingcould increase the cost to the company anywherefrom $600,000 to $3 million in additional fines.     The bankruptcy filing could complicategovernment efforts to collect the fines.     Also U.S. District Judge Samuel Wilson hasrefused to back off an 18-month prison sentence formine superintendent Garry Williams. Williams'lawyers had asked to delay formal entry of judgmentfor 30 days, so they could file a motion forreconsideration of the sentence.     Defense lawyers had earlier agreed to a lightersentence endorsed by federal prosecutors, but thefederal judge is not bound to adhere by such pleaagreements.     Wilson had issued the tougher sentence afterreading an MSHA letter regarding unpaid safetyfines from operations Williams had run in the past.Williams' lawyers still have until June 19 to appealthe sentence, officials said.     Wilson stood by his sentence during courtproceedings June 9.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PAYMENTS REQUIRED UNDER NEW FUNDS LAW ARE 'TAXES,'HAVE BANKRUPTCY PRIORITY     The recently enacted Coal Industry Retiree HealthBenefit Act, which imposes costs on coal miningcompanies in order to stabilize the UMW retireehealth funds, applies to a company in Chapter 11reorganization proceedings.     The U.S District Court for the Southern Districtof New York rejected LTV Steel Co.'s argument thatthe new funds law does not apply to it. The courtalso held that required contributions are "taxes"entitled to first priority under the Bankruptcy Code,and the obligations imposed by the new law shouldbe given first priority in LTV's bankruptcyproceeding (MRR Document No. 0529).     LTV Steel was a signatory to several industry-wide wage agreements, which were the product ofmulti-employer bargaining by the Bituminous CoalOperators Assn. with the UMW. LTV filed forChapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1986 and soughtto terminate health benefits to retirees.     In 1991, LTV won a court battle when a federalappeals court held it was not required to provideretiree benefits after January 1988 when the 1984wage agreement expired. However, the new fundslaw enacted in late 1992 makes all companies thatonce signed any wage agreement with the UMWliable for perpetually funding the retiree health caresystem on a per-head basis. Under the new law,contributions are paid to the UMW Combined Fundwhich in turn provides benefits to retirees.     LTV is now preparing to emerge from Chapter 11and has scheduled a confirmation hearing on a planthat does not provide for payments under the newfunds law, which LTV claims will be at least $12million annually.     LTV argued that any claim the Combined Fundhas against it is a "pre-petition claim" and barredbecause it was not filed on time. However, the courtruled the Combined Fund did not have a "claim"before LTV's bankruptcy petition was filed becauseany claim "simply did not exist" until the funds lawwas enacted in 1992.     The court also agreed with the Combined Fundthat contributions required by the new law are"taxes" imposed by the federal government and,therefore, are administrative expenses entitled to firstpriority under the Bankruptcy Code. "Coal Actobligations are appropriately described as 'taxes' dueto their overwhelmingly involuntary nature, theirexplicitly stated public purpose and their obviouspotential to be imposed pursuant to the taxingpower," the court said.     The court added that LTV's charges under thenew law are a "direct consequence of its continuedcorporate existence," noting the law only imposesobligations on signatories which are still "inbusiness," and are therefore best classified as"administrative expenses."     LTV and other companies have also attacked thenew funds law on constitutional grounds (MRR 2/12,p. 56; 4/9, p. 167).     LTV Steel Co. v. Shalala, DC SDNY, No. 93 Civ.0554, 5/7/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PARTNERSHIP MAY STILL BE LIABLE FORINCOAL'S WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY     A partnership under "common control" withIncoal Inc. may still be liable for Incoal's $810,610withdrawal liability to UMW pension plans after arecent federal appeals court decision.     The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia Circuit ruled the lower court erred inletting Double A Farms off the hook based on itsfinding that there was no economic connectionbetween the two entities.     The D.C. Circuit stressed it is not necessary tofind an economic connection in order to establishthat an enterprise is a "trade or business" undercommon control with an employer and liable for itsunpaid withdrawal liability (MRR Document No. 0525).     The court refused to decide the merits of the issueand sent the case back to the U.S. District Court forthe District of Columbia to rethink its finding thatDouble A Farms was not a "trade or business."     However, the D.C. Circuit said it was inclined toside with the trustees of the UMW pension planswho sued Double A Farms to collect Incoal's unpaidwithdrawal liability.Incoal conceded liability     Incoal, owned by the Adkins family, went out ofbusiness in 1985 and conceded withdrawal liabilityto the pension plans under the EmploymentRetirement Income Security Act. The Adkins familyestablished Double A Farms in 1979 after acquiringseveral hundred acres of land in Kentucky, and thefamily claimed it bought the land for recreational andinvestment purposes.     Under ERISA, when an employer incurswithdrawal liability, a "trade or business" under"common control" is also responsible for paying thewithdrawal liability to the pension plans. The districtcourt ruled that Double A Farms was not a "trade orbusiness" under ERISA because there was noeconomic connection with Incoal (MRR 2/14/92, p.62).     Reversing the lower court on this issue, the D.C.Circuit said any inquiry into an economic connectionbetween the two enterprises is "irrelevant" indetermining whether Double A Farms is a "trade orbusiness" under ERISA.     The appeals court sent the case back to the districtcourt to "find the facts" on this issue. However, theappeals court set forth several guidelines and pointedto a 1987 U.S. Supreme Court decision interpreting asimilar "trade or business" provision of the InternalRevenue Code.     The Supreme Court said the "primary purpose forengaging in the activity must be for income or profit"and that there must be "continuity and regularity" ofinvolvement.     The D.C. Circuit said these factors appear to befulfilled in this case, noting Double A Farmsreported tobacco and cattle sales for at least sevenconsecutive years.     The court added it is not dispositive that the landis used partly for recreational purposes and warnedthe lower court not to base its findings on thefamily's "self-serving" statement that they did notintend to start a trade or business.     Connors v. Incoal Inc., CA DC, No. 92-7023,6/4/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993FOURTH CIRCUIT DENIES BENEFITS TOWIDOWS IN TWO SEPARATE CASES     In two separate cases, the 4th U.S. Court ofAppeals denied benefits to widows seekingsurvivors' benefits under the Black Lung BenefitsAct.     In a decision issued June 2, the court found thatsubstantial evidence supported an ALJ's decision thatBramble Grizzle died from lung cancer and thatpneumoconiosis was not a substantially contributingcause or factor leading to his death.     Grizzle worked in coal mines for 35 years beforehis retirement and subsequent death in 1983. TheALJ found that Grizzle had pneumoconiosis to somedegree at the time of his death, that he also sufferedfrom severe emphysema and heart disease, and thatthe direct cause of his death was a pulmonaryhemorrhage caused by lung cancer.     Grizzle's widow presented the testimony of theminer's personal physician that black lung diseaseweakened his heart and lowered his resistance so thathe could not withstand bleeding caused by hiscancer. Grizzle's physician added thatpneumoconiosis caused the miner's emphysema andheart problems and may also have caused his lungcancer.     However, the ALJ relied on the reports of twoother physicians who stated that the miner wastotally disabled by emphysema caused by cigarettesmoking; that his lung cancer was also caused bysmoking, not by his black lung disease, and that hehad only a mild case of pneumoconiosis.     The ALJ found that Grizzle's pneumoconiosiswas not a substantially contributing or acomplicating factor in his death under 20 CFR718.205(c)(2) and he denied his widow's claim.Widow urged use of 'true doubt rule'     Appealing to the 4th Circuit, Grizzle's widowargued that her physician's diagnoses raised at leastsome doubt that black lung disease substantiallycontributed to her husband's death and that she wasentitled to the benefit of the "true doubt rule."     However, the court, while affirming the use of the"true doubt rule" in limited situations, refused toapply it to the widow's claim, noting the ALJ clearlyfound the opinions of the employer's doctors farmore persuasive than the contrary view of Grizzle'sphysician.     The court also rejected her argument that atreating physician's opinion is entitled to greaterweight than the reports of non-treating doctors.     One judge dissented, stating the case should beremanded in light of the recent 4th Circuit decisionin Shuff v. Cedar Coal Co., in which the court heldthat pneumoconiosis is a "substantially contributingcause" of death if it hastened the miner's death in anyway (MRR 7/17/92, p. 337).     In an unrelated decision issued May 26, the 4thCircuit ruled that Eula B. Lester failed to show herhusband had suffered from complicatedpneumoconiosis. Under Sect. 921(c)(3) such ashowing entitles a claimant to an irrebuttablepresumption that pneumoconiosis caused death ordisability (MRR Document No. 0521).     The widow relied on a conforming chest X-rayreading, but the court noted that all the other medicalevidence, including biopsy and autopsy results,showed that, at most, her husband suffered fromsimple pneumoconiosis.     Grizzle v. Pickands Mather & Co., CA 4, No. 91-1078, 6/2/93.     Lester v. Director, OWCP, CA 4, No. 92-1329,5/26/93.     Attorneys for Grizzle: Vernon Mandel Williamsand Bobby Belcher, Wolfe & Farmer, Norton Va.     Attorneys for Pickands Mather: Mark ElliottSolomons and Laura Metcoff Klaus, Arter &Hadden, Washington, D.C.     Attorneys for Labor Dept. in Grizzle case:Christian Barber and Jeffrey Goldberg, U.S. LaborDept., Washington, D.C.     Attorney for Lester: Thomas Johnson, Johnson,Schaaf, Jones & Snelling, Chicago, Ill.     Attorneys for Labor Dept. in Lester case: MartaKusic and C. William Mangum, U.S. Labor Dept.,Washington, D.C.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PYRO FOREMEN HIT WITH $2,000 FINES;MUST PAY FOR PROBATION SUPERVISION     Four Pyro foremen received $2,000 fines andthree must pay for their supervision costs for theirrole in conditions leading to the methane explosionthat killed 10 miners in September 1989.     Despite the differing number of counts againsteach man, they each paid the same $2,000 fine, andthree paid supervision costs of $1,383. All four alsopaid a special assessment.     An information filed March 10 against three ofthe foremen charged them with violating 30 CFR75.324 and 75.1802 for knowingly and willfullystating in the preshift, onshift and daily report bookthat no hazardous conditions had been observed byor reported to them, when in fact methane was inexcess of 2% and had caused equipment todeenergize.     Chris Johnson, 33, of Nebo, Ky., was sentencedon June 1 to one year of probation and a specialassessment of $125.     The information on Johnson said that on fiveoccasions, March 31, 1989, April 1, 1989, May 11,1989, June 22, 1989 and Sept. 11, 1989, methanewas reported to and observed by Johnson, inconcentrations at or above 2% in the workingsection, and that mining equipment had been de-energized from the methane.     Perry Ray, 36, from Clay, Ky., was alsosentenced June 1 and must pay the fine, supervisioncosts and a $25 special assessment for not reportingmethane problems. He was a foreman on acontinuous mining unit when methane had beenabove 2% and equipment had de-energized on May12, 1989.     Eddie Frank Barber, 36, of Earlington, Ky., wasfined and put on probation for one year for notreporting methane conditions on July 14 and July 22,1989. Barber had to pay a special assessment of $50.     These three foremen had to pay $1,383.60 for thecosts of their supervision.     The fourth foreman, Gary Johnson, 39, ofMortons Gap, Ky., was sentenced to four months ofhome confinement as part of a one-year probationterm. He had to pay a special assessment of $150.     Gary Johnson was charged in a six-countinformation with violating:     -- 30 CFR 75.324, for failing to report high        concentrations of methane.     -- 75.1315(a), for firing shots outside the confines        of a borehole.     -- 75.1313(b), for ordering the improper storage        of explosives.     -- 75.1310(c), for firing explosives with an        impermissible blasting unit.     -- 75.316, for ordering the operation of two        longwall shearers at the same time in violation of the        methane and dust control plan.     -- 75.1101-23(c), for failing to conduct mandatory        fire drills and reporting in the "Fire Drill Record        Book" that fire drills had been conducted.     Johnson was sentenced in accordance with a pleaagreement, in which he agreed to cooperate in thecontinuing investigation and related prosecutionsstemming from the explosion.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993SCHOOLS IN W.VA. BENEFIT FROM SENTENCE     A mine operator will pay a $50,000 criminal fineand provide computers to Mingo County, W.Va.,schools as part of the sentence stemming from ablasting accident that injured one miner in 1989.     The company, Meador Energy, pleaded guilty tofour counts of violating the Mine Act at its No. 1mine near Newton, W.Va. The company had beencharged with five counts in a criminal informationfiled Feb. 3 (MRR 2/12, p. 59).     The Sept. 8, 1989, blasting accident injured oneminer whose arm was broken in four places. Thecompany pleaded guilty to using faulty pillarrecovery methods; firing unconfined explosives;placing primed explosives without deenergizingnearby electrical equipment; and allowing anunqualified miner to fire shots.     The company also gets four years' probation. Aspart of the probation, the company volunteered toprovide 25 personal computers to five Mingo Countyschools, along with installation and training.     The company had faced a $1 million fine.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993JUDGE THROWS CONTRACTOR INTO JAIL     Saying coal dust sampling fraud must stop, afederal judge in Beckley, W.Va., sentenced acontractor to one year in jail and three years'probation.     West Virginia contractor Glen Morgan, whooperated under the name Kanawha ValleyEnterprises and later General Safety Services hadpleaded guilty in March to submitting false dustsamples to MSHA on behalf of operators as recentlyas June 1991 (MRR 4/9, p. 168). Morgan alsoadmitted to providing false certification for requiredminer training.     U.S. District Judge Elizabeth Hallanan also finedMorgan $5,000. Following his prison term, he cannotengage in training miners or coal mine dust samplingfor three years.     Morgan had faced a $250,000 fine and five yearsin prison.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993COAL VENDOR PLEADS TO RACKETEERING     Sentencing is scheduled Aug. 31 for abusinessman who has pleaded guilty in connectionwith a racketeering scheme which bilked coalcompanies of more than $900,000.     Robert S. Painter, owner/operator of Bluefield,W.Va.-based Abbs Valley Electric, entered the plearecently before U.S. District Judge Samuel Wilson inAbingdon, Va.     Painter, along with other defendants, are said tohave defrauded several companies of more than$900,000 over a five year period. Companies burnedin the scheme included Peabody Coal, EasternAssociated Coal, Island Creek, CONSOL, CanadaCoal and Pittston subsidiary Sea B Mining.     "The investigation revealed that Painter providedcash kickbacks, prostitutes, and other items to coalcompany employees to induce them to direct theiremployers' business to Abbs Valley Electric,"according to a government statement.     False billings generated proceeds which were thenused by Painter to pay cash to the coal companyemployees. Painter also pleaded guilty to conspiracyto defraud the government of income taxes, andillegal dumping of hazardous wastes.     Also pleading guilty on conspiracy or income taxcharges were Painters' daughter and son-in-law,Sherri and David Bailey; Abbs Valley salesmanGerald Tabor; ex-Island Creek purchasing agentHoward Cook; and Painter's brothers-in-law RichardWeiner and Albert Harless. Nine defendants wereoriginally indicted.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ALJ IMPROPERLY AWARDED BACKPAY TOMINER ON REMAND, FMSHRC RULES     An ALJ erred in awarding backpay to a minerwhen he reconsidered his decision on remand fromthe commission, FMSHRC ruled.     The miner, Ronny Boswell, won hisdiscrimination complaint filed against NationalCement Co., but ALJ Roy Maurer, in his initialdecision in February 1991, found the miner was notentitled to backpay. Maurer found that the operatorhad illegally disqualified Boswell from his job as autility laborer and reassigned him to a position as apayloader operator based on a series of protectedwork refusals.     The operator appealed the case to the commissionand the panel sent it back to Maurer, asking him toreconsider whether a particular incident involvedprotected activity (MRR 3/13/92, p. 110).     On remand, Maurer again sustained Boswell'scomplaint, but this time he decided the miner wasentitled to a $6,094 award of backpay and interest, inaddition to his prior award of reinstatement (MRR4/24/92, p. 188).     The commission agreed with National Cementthat Maurer lacked jurisdiction to reexamine theissue of Boswell's damages. The miner neverappealed the ALJ's initial ruling that he was notentitled to backpay and that ruling became a finalcommission decision, FMSHRC said.     The panel also noted that it directed Maurer toanswer two questions on remand relating to themerits of Boswell's discrimination complaint andnever ordered him to reopen the issue of damages.FMSHRC vacated his supplemental damages awardand refused to review his other rulings in favor of theminer.     Boswell v. National Cement Co., FMSHRCDocket No. SE 90-112-DM, 6/7/93.     Representative for Boswell: Larry Myers, UnitedPaperworkers International Union, Dist. Council No.5, 229 Roebuck Plaza Dr., Suite 203, Birmingham,Ala.     Attorney for National Cement: Thomas Campbell,Lange, Simpson, Robinson & Somerville, 1700 FirstAlabama Bank Bldg., 417 20th St., N., Birmingham,Ala 35203.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993SIXTH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS ALJ DECISION     A federal appeals court affirmed an ALJ decisionthat a miner was illegally discharged for makingsafety complaints.     In a brief, unpublished decision, the 6th U.S.Circuit Court of Appeals rejected Kem Coal Co.'sclaim that it discharged Charles T. Smith forswearing at his supervisor (MRR Document No. 0528).     The court said that ALJ William Fauver"correctly pointed out that [the supervisor] provokedSmith's outburst by flatly denying that he had everordered Smith to work under falling coal."     The court also found that "Smith's complaintabout the hazards of the falling coal, [hissupervisor's] denial of his order to work under it andSmith's reaction" by swearing "are inseparable."     The 6th Circuit added that the company'saffirmative defense fails because the miner'sswearing "cannot reasonably be isolated as anindependent motive for the discharge."     The commission had denied Kem Coal's petitionfor review of Fauver's decision and the companyappealed the decision to the 6th Circuit.     Kem Coal Co. v. FMSHRC, CA 6, No. 92-3734,5/24/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MAY ACCIDENTS CLAIM SEVEN LIVES;36 HAVE DIED SINCE JANUARY     Seven miners lost their lives in May miningaccidents, with two deaths in underground mines andfive deaths at surface operations.     Year-to-date reports show 36 fatalities sinceJanuary, with 15 miners dying in metal/nonmetalaccidents and 21 dying in coal accidents. Twenty-one of the YTD deaths occurred at surface operationsand 15 at underground operations.     Two miners were killed in machinery accidents inMay.     David Workman was killed May 10 at theMurphy No. 1 Preparation Plant of Min, Inc. inWharncliffe, W.Va. He had only one month ofexperience.     Workman, who was a general laborer for FieldingHydroseeding, was washing a Bowie hydroseederwhen he fell into the augers through an opening ontop of the tank. An access cover on top of the tankhad been removed.     Roger D. Smith, Jr., a repairman for LimousineCoal, Inc., was killed May 13 at the No. 3underground mine in Dayhoit, Ky. He had threeyears' experience and had been with the company forone year.     Smith was performing maintenance work with abolting machine and was positioned across a drillboom. When his filter SCSR and lamp belt becameentangled in the controls, the boom raised and pinnedhim to the roof, crushing him in the chest area. Hedied less than two hours later.     Three miners died in power haulage accidents inMay.     Bruce E. Schoolcraft was killed May 12. He had14 years' mining experience.     Schoolcraft was an underground mine foremanfor Cross Mountain Coal, Inc.'s No. 6 mine in LakeCity, Tenn. He was operating a six-ton batterylocomotive when he became caught between themine roof and the frame of the locomotive. He diedinstantly from head injuries.     Bret Hatfield was killed May 3. He was anapprentice mechanic/welder for Stewart-Nuss, Inc.'sBlackstone Pit and Mill in Fresno, Ca.     Hatfield was driving a welding truck when hecollided with a haul truck traveling in the oppositedirection on a pit haul road. Hatfield's truck burstinto flames on impact, and he died instantly. He hadover three years' mining experience.     Glen Baese died on May 10 when he was crushedby a screw conveyor. He was a plant foreman forCarl Schlegel, Inc.'s Clinton County Pit mine in St.Johns, Mich. He had three years' mining experience.     Baese and two other employees wereinvestigating why a sand stacking conveyor hadstopped. While a dewatering screw was still running,the buildup of sand at the top end of the screw tankscaused the support structure of the unit to collapse.The two employees assisting Baese jumped to safetyand escaped uninjured.     Bill Anderson, a superintendent working atHardin County Materials Co.'s Plant No. 2, died onMay 17. Anderson got up on a conveyor belt toexamine spillage from a primary crusher and fell 14feet to the ground. He had 30 years' of miningexperience.     Thomas Reaska was killed May 27 at MidwestMaterial Co.'s Lacon Plant in Lacon, Ill. He had 13years' mining experience.     Reaska, a mechanic at the mine, was dismantlinga crane boom to extend its length for other work.When he drove an assembly pin out of the boom, theboom fell on him.     Reaska's accident was the third fatality involvinga boom this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BLAST DEBRIS KILLS CAR PASSENGER     MSHA and OSM investigators are looking into ablast at the Sugar Ridge Coal Co. surface mine inTennessee that caused small boulders and mud to fallonto Interstate 75, killing a car passenger.     The mine had been closed for more than a weekwhile MSHA tried to interview all the miners. Theaccident occurred June 4, a Friday, and MSHA wasat the site that weekend.     Investigators were supposed to conductinterviews June 8. But as of June 14, one miner didnot want to be interviewed until his attorney got backfrom vacation.     Killed was Brian Agujar, 16, of Louisiana. Hewas travelling with his family on vacation.     MSHA said the company was blasting 240 feetfrom the road, which is the legal distance. However,blasting must be strictly controlled so debris does notleave a blast site.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MSHA EXTENDS FINAL RULE STAYS     Industry has been given a temporary reprieve onprovisions in the controversial explosives andventilation final rules.     MSHA has stayed nine explosives provisions formetal/nonmetal mines until Dec. 31 and stayed twoventilation provisions for underground coal minesuntil July 1, 1994.     On the explosives rule, stayed are:     > 30 CFR 56./57.6000, the definition of a "blastsite," which industry asked MSHA to clarify.Industry asked MSHA to add language that unloadedholes are not part of a blast site unless they arewithin 30 feet of a loaded hole.     > 56./57.6130(b) and 56.57.6131(a)(1) forexplosive storage facility provisions which may be inconflict with other federal regulations.     >  56./57.6202(a)(1), which would require thatvehicles containing explosives be structurally soundand well maintained.     > 56./57.6304(b) on primer protection. Industryhas asked for additional language that rigidcartridges or bags could be slit and the contentspoured to cover the primer. There was also concernover how much water should be in a hole whencartridges are dropped.     >  56./57.6306 on loading and blasting and whatactivities are permitted in the blast site.     > 56.57./6501(a) on nonelectric initiationsystems.     > 56./57.6902(b) on the special precautions thatmust be taken when blasting sulfide ores.     > 56./57.6903 on burning explosive material.Industry worries the current language would bemisconstrued by some who would stay to fight firesinvolving explosives.     On the ventilation regulation, stayed are:     > 75.313, covering main mine fan stoppages withpersons underground.     > 75.344(a)(1), which would require electriccompressors to be located in a noncombustiblestructure or area.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MSHA DIST. 6 INSPECTORS ACCUSED OFHARASSING COAL MINE OPERATORS     MSHA says it is looking into complaints thatMSHA inspectors are harassing operators in Dist. 6out of Pikeville, Ky.     According to a letter written by David Gooch,president of the Kentucky-based trade group CoalOperators & Associates Inc., Dist. 6 operators havehad "problems with plans, enforcement and threats. ... Most of the difficulties seem to be traceable toJesse Cole, the District Manager."     MSHA spokesperson Kathy Snyder said Cole isan "experienced and highly respected manager withMSHA," but added that the agency is investigatingGooch's concerns.     Gooch said his group has had meetings with Coleregarding his policies and "taken as many as 40operators with us at times." He said he even went toMSHA headquarters in Arlington, Va., to meet withCole's superiors.     Gooch says he is out to get evidence thatoperators are being harassed, and he has put hismembers on notice that they need to documentproblems.     "We need to be able to prove there is a pattern ofharassment, a pattern of inspectors and supervisorypersonnel who have intentionally gone above andbeyond the scope of their authority, a pattern ofinspectors being allowed to do their jobs in animproper manner," Gooch said.     Gooch said an "improper manner could beanything from loafing all day on your job, asking forsomething of value, making threats, writing citationsand orders for non-existent violations and other suchimproprieties."     Operators have been told to keep a record ofinspections and write down what the inspectors dowhile they are at the mine site. "If he sits in youroffice three hours drinking coffee and leaves, writethat down. If he makes a threat or says anything thatis not according to regulations and policy, write thatdown."     But all of the documentation the industry groupwants, Gooch said, will all be kept confidentialbecause many of the operators "are afraid ofretaliation from MSHA."     Meanwhile the local American Federation ofGovernment Employees union warned MSHAinspectors to "be careful."     Hugh Smith, the AFGE union president, toldMSHA inspectors in a memo: "It is evident that thereare coal operators trying to gather informationagainst you that could mean your job. Let's becareful out there. Write what you find anddocument!!!"Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993EASTERN FILES NLRB CHARGES AGAINST UMW; COURT GRANTSPEABODY RESTRAINING ORDER     Eastern Associated Coal Corp. has charged theUMW with threatening and intimidating thecompany's suppliers and vendors, while PeabodyCoal Co. was able to get a court order limiting strike-related activity.     The union has been on strike at these mines sinceJune 2.     In charges filed with the National Labor RelationsBoard, Eastern says UMW actions violate previouslyissued NLRB orders from strike-related cases withother companies.     Eastern is seeking to halt what it calls strike-related misconduct at its Federal No. 2 Mine inMonongalia County, W.Va.     The company filed four charges against the UMWinternational and its affiliated members.     The company filed two charges against theinternational and UMW Local 1570.     Eastern said the union has conducted "masspicketing in numbers as high as 40 to 50" at BerryTrucking of Rivesville, W.Va. Eastern said theUMW has threatened to use violence against BerryTrucking owners and threatened to damage Berry'sproperty.     Berry Trucking is an independent contractor forEastern and "has a preexisting relationship to haulcoal before the strike," according to the filing.Because of this, the union is actually conducting a"secondary boycott," which violates Sect. 8(b)(4) ofthe National Labor Relations Act, Eastern said.     Eastern spokesperson Tom Gallager said thecharges were filed against the international and localbecause local UMW members were picketing atBerry's property. Picketing must be authorized by theinternational. There was no evidence the district wasinvolved.     Two other charges are aimed at the international,the district and the local.     In this case, Eastern charges the three unionaffiliates with interfering and threatening suppliersand employees who try to enter or leave the mine.The union is also charged with trying to damagevehicles that have attempted to cross the picket line.Traffic on public roads halted, says Peabody     In the Peabody case, the Warrick County, Ind.,Circuit Court granted a temporary restraining orderpreventing the UMW from obstructing traffic at thecompany's Lynnville No. 1 mine near Lynnville, Ind.     The court ordered the union to limit the numberof picketers to no more than two at any of the threeintersections where the obstructions have occurred.     In its filing with the court, Peabody said thatUMW members were walking in "a slow and close-file line" at the mine entrance and at county roadcrossings adjacent to the mine. The union wasrefusing requests to let traffic through and forceddrivers to wait up to three hours, according to thecompany statement.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PEABODY, CONSOL HIT IN LATEST ROUNDOF UMW SELECTIVE STRIKES     The UMW has expanded its selective strike tomore than a dozen additional mines for PeabodyHolding Co. and CONSOL in West Virginia, Illinoisand Kentucky.     The fifth wave of the UMW strike against theBituminous Coal Operators' Assn. affects anadditional 3,000 miners and brings the total numberof strikers to 12,000. The job action addssubcontractors to the list of operations being struck,and the union said it will strike Peabodysubcontractors.     "We have targeted the two largest coal producersand the leadership of those companies, George 'Sam'Shiflett at Peabody and Bobby Brown at CONSOL,who are principal spokespeople for the BCOA," saidUMW President Richard Trumka.     "And you can always tell when a strike is havingan effect when the coal companies become morefrantic in their actions," Trumka said of Peabody'saction against 163 miners in Kentucky.     CONSOL operations hit in this latest phaseinclude Burning Star No. 2 in Illinois and RobinsonRun in West Virginia.     Peabody operations hit include Baldwin mine andRandolph preparation plant and related surfacefacilities in Illinois, and the Martwick mine inKentucky.     Eastern Associated was hit at Tygart River,Lightfoot No. 1 and Colony Bay mines as well as theRocklick plant in West Virginia. "The UMWA-elected officials are trying to damage EasternAssociated but in the process, they may be cuttingoff future job opportunities for our employees," saidEastern President Peter Lilly.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PEABODY BACKS OFF FIRING 163 UMW MINERS, INSTEADISSUES FOUR DAY SUSPENSION     Peabody Coal Co. has backed off its initial plansto fire 163 union members who allegedly tried toshout down company President Sam Shiflett.     Having originally announced it was suspendingthe Camp No. 1 employees with intent to fire,Peabody downgraded the punishment to a four-daysuspension without pay.     In explaining its decision, the company said theJune 3 episode was probably instigated by unionleaders, but individuals miners must be heldaccountable for their own actions. The mine resumedoperation Wednesday June 9 after being idle theprevious Friday, Saturday, Monday and Tuesday.     "We're glad they have come partially to theirsenses," said UMW spokesperson Greg Hawthorne.The union will still appeal the suspensions becausethe miners were exercising "protected" activity, hesaid.     Peabody had announced plans to fire the minersfor insubordination after they refused to give Shifletttheir attention during a company meeting, bychanting "contract, contract." UMW PresidentRichard Trumka the Peabody move a "high-handedtactic befitting a plantation owner."     But the critique by industry sources wasn't muchkinder.     One lawyer said Peabody was smart to back offits original hardline because attempting to sack theminers would be a "grievous blunder in laborrelations."     There was no way the firings would have everpassed muster with the National Labor RelationsBoard, the attorney said. It's silly for Peabody toexpect union miners would "sit there and listen to apropaganda speech" while there's a strike going on.     Another official expressed fear the UMW couldmake potential firings into the type of rallying issuesimilar to cancellation of retiree health benefitsduring the Pittston strike. The episode also adds fuelto the UMW argument that it's involved in an unfairlabor practices strike, at least in connection withPeabody, the source said.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993DECERTIFICATION ELECTION UP IN AIR FORBUCK CREEK COAL CO. MINERS     The lawyer for a group of Buck Creek Coalemployees who want out of the UMW has renewed arequest for a decertification election, but the NationalLabor Relations Board said no such vote will happensoon.     A May 6 decision by a three-member panel of theNLRB was a mixed verdict for Buck Creek and theUMW.     The panel upheld an ALJ ruling that Buck Creekimplemented a flex schedule without first bargainingwith the union -- but also struck down the judge'sdecision to add nine months onto the union's"certification year." That's the time period in which aunion has to reach a labor contract with a newly-organized operation.     As a result of the latter development, Jim Hanson,a lawyer for the "Vote No Committee" at BuckCreek, has renewed his request that the NLRBproceed with a decertification election.     The board has yet to respond to Hanson's letter,but "at this point it does not look like there's going tobe an election any time soon," said an NLRBofficial.     Before the petition could move forward BuckCreek must comply with NLRB's May order. Alsocurrent unfair labor practice charges filed by theNLRB must be cleared up before any decert vote.The union went on strike against Indiana's biggestdeep mine in April. Although the operation wasorganized in late 1991, the two sides have failed toreach a contract.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993VOTE SCHEDULED AT ZEIGLER SUBSIDIARY ON HEELS OFSUCCESSFUL MARROWBONE VOTE     With the UMW on an emotional high from itsapparent victory at Marrowbone Development, acertification vote is set June 28 for another non-union subsidiary of Zeigler Coal Holding.     Zeigler's SMC Mining stands behind the decisionof management at Wolf Creek Collieries to"vigorously oppose" the UMW drive, said companyofficial Vic Svec.     Wolf Creek is located just across the Kentuckyline from Marrowbone. The National LaborRelations Board confirmed that Marrowboneemployees had voted 256-to-151 to join the union.There were 33 challenged ballots. The company hadnot announced by press time if it planned tochallenge the election or the campaign leading up toit.     Industry opinions vary on whether Marrowbonesignals a brighter day for UMW or was merely aflash in the pan.     An official with a rival coal company subscribesto the latter theory. The UMW had some "reallystupid management helping them" at Marrowbone,he said. The source thinks the UMW also has anexcellent chance at Wolf Creek.     Wolf Creek returned to work in late-Mayfollowing a two-and-a-half week walkout sparked bychanges in retiree medical benefits, officials said. It'shard to say how the Marrowbone vote may affect theBituminous Coal Operators' strike. Most officialsthink it will hearten the UMW. Others think BCOA'sB.R. Brown could use it as evidence that the UMWcan organize mines without extensive job rights atnon-union operations.     Marrowbone has filed formal objections to theway the union conducted its campaign leading up tothe certification vote. The company claims UMWofficials made unlawful threats and promisesthroughout the campaign.     Among the claims in the two-page document is anallegation that the union said it would add 10 yearseligibility toward the UMW pension after two yearsof credited service, as an inducement to vote pro-union. "By such conduct, petitioner unlawfullyinterfered with employees in their exercise of freechoice in the election."Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BCOA FILES SUIT TO STOP AMAX WITHDRAWAL; AMAX SAYS ITWILL BARGAIN WITH CYPRUS     The Bituminous Coal Operators' Assn. has filed alawsuit against AMAX Coal Co. to prevent AMAXfrom exiting the multi-employer bargaining group.     AMAX announced last week, following adecision to merge with Cyprus Minerals Co. ofEnglewood, Colo., that it would withdraw from theBCOA. Cyprus bargains independently of theBCOA, and its current contract does not expire untilJuly 1.     "If I were on BCOA I'd be furious and I'd filesuit," said an industry source the day before the suitwas filed.     BCOA has accused the union of "inducing" AMAX towithdraw from BCOA in the midst of contract talks toenable the nation's third-largest coal producer tonegotiate its own agreement. BCOA said the law isclear, and that once negotiations begin, companies ina multi-employer group must be bound by the contractnegotiated by that group. They cannot cut their owndeals.     AMAX said last week it is withdrawing from thegroup because it will be governed by the laboragreement that its merger partner, Cyprus Minerals,is negotiating with the UMW. Cyprus is talking withthe union about its Emerald and Cumberland minesin Pennsylvania and the Kanawha mine in WestVirginia.     But the provision that limits AMAX's or anyother company's right to leave BCOA is a murkyarea of labor law. Defections are acceptable under"unusual circumstances" -- a term that has neverbeen explicitly defined by the courts. Some think theCyprus-AMAX consolidation constitutes suchcircumstances.     One industry source finds the AMAX defectionfrom BCOA more puzzling now than if it had comebefore the merger announcement. AMAX's presencewould have given the Cyprus-AMAX hybrid insightinto BCOA bargaining. The source also describedAMAX as a "fairly soft" member of BCOA -- whileCyprus Minerals has not been reluctant to lock hornswith unions in the past.     The same industry official thinks it does the unionlittle good to knock off contract deals one-by-one.The union doesn't appear to have the ability toconduct more than one set of major talks at once, thesource said. Furthermore, the UMW is still not goingto make any real gains without eventually goingthrough Peabody and CONSOL, the source said.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993VariancesMoving Machine Parts Variance Requests     Franklin Construction Inc., of Paradise, Calif.wants to modify 30 CFR 56.14107 to its FranklinSand Plant in Butte County, Calif.     The code requires moving machines parts shall beguarded to protect from contacting gears, sprockets,chains, drive, head, tail, and take up pulleys,flywheels, coupling shafts, fan blades, and similarmoving parts that can cause injury.     The company proposes to use substantial one-inchscreencloth guards on a small underhopper feederwith warning signs permanently installed adjacent tothe guards instead of suing the two 18-inch wideaccess slots, and to keep the guards in place when theelectrical disconnect switch for the machine is notlocked out [Docket No. M-93-03-M].     Hearing requests are due July 12.Methane Monitor Variances Granted     Falls Mining Inc. of Woodbine, Ky. was granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.313 to its No. 1 Mine inKnox County, Ky.     The code requires that methane monitors must beinstalled on any electric face-cutting equipment,continuous miner, longwall face equipment andloading machine. The monitor must degenerize theequipment when it is not working properly or whenmethane reaches 2%. It must sound alarm whenmethane reaches 1%.     The company proposed to use a hand-heldcontinuous-duty methane and oxygen monitor onpermissible three-wheel tractors with drag bottombuckets (MRR 11/20/92 p. 566) [Docket No. M-92-131-C].     Hearing requests are due June 27.Face Ventilation Control Devices Variances Denied       Turris Coal Co. of Elkhart, Ill. was denied avariance for 30 CFR 75.330 to its Elkhart Mine inLogan County, Ill.     The code requires face ventilation control devicesto be made on flame resistant material approved byMSHA and to protect against harmful gases, dusts,smoke and fumes. The devices must be installed nolater than 10 feet from the area of deepest penetrationthat the face has advanced unless an alterationdistance is specified and approved.     The company had proposed to modify a minimumof 9,000 cfm of intake air in the line of crosscuts toaugured and a minimum of 5,000 cfm of intake airpassing across the auger machine while auguring.The company would continuously monitor the airfrom the company face through a 3/4-inch pipe MRR1/29/93 p. 38 [Docket No. M-92-189-C].     Comments are due July 1.Construction of Seals Variance Requests     K and L Coal Co. of Shamokin, Pa. wants tomodify 30 CFR 75.335 to its No. 1 Slope inNorthumberland County, Pa.     The code requires that each seal constructed afterAugust 15, 1992 shall be constructed of solidconcrete blocks at least six inches by eight inches,laid in a transverse pattern with mortar between alljoints.     The company proposes to construct anoverlapping one-inch hardwood board to a minimumof two inches thick and coat with a flame retardantcoating as a seal for its anthracite coal mine, to makea daily visual inspections of the stopping, and to takeair measurements before and after a series ofstoppings [Docket No. M-93-75].     Hearing requests are due July 12. Air Courses and Belt Haulage Entry VarianceRequests     Genwal Coal Co. of Huntington, Utah wants tomodify 30 CFR 75.350 to its Crandall Canyon Minein Emery County, Utah.     The company proposes to use the belt air toventilate the face and to install a low-level carbonmonoxide detection system in all belt entries used asintake air courses as an early warning fire detectionsystem [Docket No. M-93-68-C].     Hearing requests are due July 12.Automatic Emergency Parking Brake Variances Granted     CH and S Coal Co. of Birchleaf, Va. was granteda variance for 30 CFR 75.523-3 to its No. 3 Mine onScott County, Va.     The code requires that except for personnelcarriers, rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulageequipment used in the active workings ofunderground coal mines shall be equipped withautomatic emergency-parking brakes.     The company proposed to operate S&S 482scoops without emergency brakes because of theslope of the mine and coal bed undulation (MRR12/4/92 p. 597) [Docket No. M-92-149-C].     Hearing requests are due July 8.Preshift Examination Variance Requests     Costain Coal Inc. wants to modify 30 CFR 75.360(b) to its Baker Mine in Webster County, Ky.     The code requires that the person conducting thepreshift examination shall examine for hazardousconditions, test for methane and oxygen deficiency,and determine if the air is moving in its properdirection, at the following locations.     Due to the deteriorated conditions and roof fallsin the intake entry in the 2nd Submain Eastimmediately adjacent to the room necks, travel inthis entry would be unsafe. The company proposes toestablish two continuous monitoring stations withboth audible and visual alarm signals to monitor theair passing through the affected area [Docket No. M-93-66-C].     Hearing requests are due July 12.Methane Examination Variances Denied     Turris Coal Co. of Elkhart, Ill. was denied avariance for 30 CFR 75.362 (d) to its Elkhart Mine inLogan County, Ill.     The code requires a qualified person to test formethane, at 20-minute intervals, before equipment isenergized, taken into, or operated in a working place.The tests must be made at the last permanent roofsupports, unless the ventilation plan requires them tobe made closer to the working face.     The company proposed to have a qualified persontest before an auger machine is deenergized and touse the machine's continuous methane detectionsensor to test air before auguring begins. Thecompany would have continued testing at intervals of20 minutes (MRR 1/29/93 p. 40) [Docket No. M-92-188-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Weekly Examination Variances Granted     Consolidation Coal Co. of Pittsburgh was granteda variance for 30 CFR 75.364 (b) to its Osage No. 3Mine in Monongalia County, Pa.     The code requires that at least every seven days,an examination for hazardous conditions at thelocations shall be made by a certified persondesignated by the operator.     The company proposed to establish evaluationpoints to monitor the quantity and quality of air inthe affected area (MRR 10/9/92 p. 495) [Docket No.M-92-119-C].     Hearing requests are due June 23.     Bear Coal Co. of Somerset, Colo. was granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.364 (b) to its Bear No. 3Mine in Gunnison County, Colo.     The company proposed to establish evaluationpoints to monitor the quantity and quality of airentering and leaving affected area (MRR 10/23/92 p.520) [Docket No. M-92-118-C].     Hearing requests are due June 27.     McElroy Coal Co. of Pittsburgh was granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.364 (b) to its McElroy Minein Marshall County, W.V.     The company proposed to establish new checkpoints to monitor the quantity and quality of air bothentering and leaving the affected areas asserting thatthe proposed alternate method would provide at leastthe same measure of protection as would themandatory standard (MRR 11/20/92 p. 506) [DocketNo. M-92-142-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Weekly Examination Variances Requested     New Warwick Mining Co. of Mount Morris, Pa.wants to modify 30 CFR 75.364 (b) (1) to itsWarwick Mine in Greene County, Pa.     The code requires at least every seven days, anexamination for hazardous conditions at the locationsshall be made by a certified person designated by theoperator and in at least one entry of each intake aircourse, in its entirety, so that the entire air course istraveled.     Due to deteriorating roof conditions in certainareas of the intake aircourse, the company proposesto establish check points to monitor the affected areaweekly [Docket No. M-93-71-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Consolidation Coal Co. of Pittsburgh wants tomodify 30 CFR 75.364 (b) (2) to its Loveridge No.22 Mine in Marion County.     Due to deteriorating roof conditions, certain areason the return aircourse cannot be safely traveled. Thecompany proposes to establish evaluation checkpoints to monitor the methane and quality of air inthe affected area [Docket No. M-93-67-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Target Industries Inc. of Carmichaels, Pa. wantsto modify 30 CFR 75.364 (b) (2) to its Target MineGreene County, Pa.     Due to deteriorating roof conditions, certain areasof the mine cannot be safely traveled. The companyproposes to establish air monitoring stations tomonitor quantity and quality of air in the affectedarea [Docket No. M-93-76-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Jim Walter Resources Inc. wants to modify 30CFR 75.364 (b) (4) to its No. 3 Mine in JeffersonCounty, Ala.     The code requires that at least every seven days,an examination for hazardous conditions at thelocations shall be made by a certified persondesignated by the operator and at each seal alongreturn and bleeder air courses and at each seal alongintake air courses not examined under.     The company proposes to have a certified personcheck for hazardous conditions weekly at each sealalong the return and bleeder aircourses, to monitorair and gas near the roof fall where seals cannot bevisually examined, and to examine the south salesand monitor the pressure differential indicationdevice to determine that the seals are intact [DocketNo. M-93-70-C].     Comments are due July 12.Underground High Voltage Cables Variances Granted     Enlow Fork Mining Co. of Pittsburgh granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.704 (a) to its Enlow ForkMine in Greene County, Pa.     The code requires underground high-voltagecables used in resistance grounded systems shall beequipped with metallic shields around each powerconductor with one or more ground conductorshaving a total cross sectional area of not less thanone-half the power conductor, and with an insulatedexternal conductor not smaller than No. 8 (A.W.G.)or an insulated internal ground check conductor notsmaller than No. 10 (A.W.G.) for the groundcontinuity check circuit.     The company proposed to use a high-voltagecable with an internal ground check conductorsmaller than No. 10 (A.W.G.) as part of its longwallmining system MRR 12/4/92 p. 597 [Docket No. M-92-155-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Escapeways, Bituminous and Lignite Mine Variance Requests     Philippi Development Inc. of Morgantown,W.Va. has requested a variance for 30 CFR 75.380(d) (4) to its Sentinel Mine in Barbour County,W.Va.     The code requires that the escapeway bemaintained at least six feet wide except wherenecessary supplemental roof support is installed, theescapeway shall be not less than four feet wide.     The company proposes to keep the escapewayaround the coal storage bin and along the slope beltconveyor to the surface free from loose rocks,supplies and other material that would causestumbling hazards; to maintain handrail around thebin in good repair; and to maintain and periodicallycheck man doors to assure that they are openingproperly as an alternate to the 4-foot wide clearance[Docket No. M-93-72-C]; [Docket No. M-93-73-C]and [Docket No. M-93-74-C].     Comments are due July 12.Cabs and Canopy Variance Denied     Golden Oak Mining Co. of Whitesburg, Ky. wasdenied a variance for 30 CFR 75.1710-1 to itsGolden Oak No. 2 Mine in Knott's County, Ky.     The code requires that electric face equipment,including shuttle cars, must have substantiallyconstructed canopies or cabs to protect the minersoperating the equipment from roof falls and ribs andface rolls.     The company had proposed that because unsafeconditions would occur by using cabs and canopies,the operation should be exempt from this rule in thiscase MRR 12/4/92 p. 598 [Docket No. M-92-154-C].     Comments are due June 23.Oil and Gal Wells Variance Granted     Usibelli Coal Mine Inc. in Healy, Ala. wasgranted a variance for 30 CFR 77.1605 (k) to itsUsibelli Mine in Yukon River County in Alaska.     The code requires that berms or guardrails shallbe provided on the outer bank of elevated roadways.     The company proposed to use certain safetyprecautions a an alternative to berms and guardrailson haulage roads (MRR 5/7 p. 225) [Docket No. M-93-57-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Oil and Gas Wells Variance Requests     The Pittsburgh and Midway Coal Mining Co.wants to modify 30 CFR 77.1605 (k) to itsKemmerer Mine in Lincoln County, Wyo.     The company proposes to eliminate berms orguardrails and to install and maintain reflectors nearthe outer edge of the roadway in areas where there isa recovery zone between the outer edge of thetraveled roadway and the tangent of thisembankment slope [Docket No M-93-69-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Send comments to: MSHA, Office of Variancesand Standards, 4015 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, Va.22203. Hearing requests should be sent to MSHA'sadministrator for coal mine health and safety or theadministrator for metal/nonmetal at the same streetaddress.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993IRREBUTABLE PRESUMPTION PROVISION OFKY. LAW CONSTRUED BY STATE COURT     The Kentucky Court of Appeals held that a minermust show exposure to coal dust caused his disabilityin order to be entitled to the irrebutable presumptionof total disability set forth in KRS 342.732(1)(c).     The miner argued he submitted the required X-rayevidence and met the necessary spirometric testvalues to trigger the statute's irrebutablepresumption. However, the court read into the statutethe requirement that a claimant must also prove thathe contracted pneumoconiosis from work-relatedexposure to coal dust (MRR Document No. 0527).     The court remanded the case and ordered the ALJto determine whether the claimant's disability wascaused by his cigarette smoking or exposure to coaldust. If his disability was caused by both factors, heis still entitled to an award of benefits if coal dustexposure was a "medically significant cause of therespiratory impairment," the court said.     The court read the necessary causationrequirement into the statute, finding the legislatureleft it out as an "oversight."     The court reversed an ALJ's award of totalpermanent disability benefits that was affirmed bythe Workers' Compensation Board.     Four judges dissented, stating that KRS342.732(1)(c) is "clear upon its face" and should beread "precisely as written." Under the statute, anirrebutable presumption of total disability resultingfrom exposure to coal dust is triggered if the requiredX-ray evidence and respiratory impairment testresults are submitted, the dissenting judges said,finding "nothing absurd or unreasonable in thisresult."     Newberg v. Elswick, Ky CtApp, No. 91-CA-2314-WC, 5/28/93.     Attorney for claimant Willie Elswick: R. RolandCase, Pikeville, Ky.     Attorney for Mine 29 Mining & Processing Inc.:Brett Davis, Prestonsburg, Ky.     Attorney for special fund: Cathy Utley Costelle,Labor Cabinet, Louisville, Ky.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ALABAMA COURT UPHOLDS BENEFITS AWARD TO MINER WHOEARNED MORE AFTER INJURY     A miner who returned to his same position andearned more money after he injured his arm may stillkeep his award of workers' compensation benefitsbased on a finding of 31% loss of earning capacity,an Alabama Appeals court ruled.     The Alabama Court of Civil Appeals said thatwhen a worker's post-injury earnings equal or exceedhis earnings at the time of the injury, there is apresumption of earning capacity commensurate withearnings.     However, the miner rebutted this presumption byintroducing independent evidence that his post-injuryearnings were an unreliable basis for estimating hisearning capacity, the court said (MRR Document No. 0519).     The miner showed his post-injury increase inearnings resulted primarily from collectivebargaining salary increases; his working hoursincreased since his 1986 accident; and he receivedassistance from co-workers, the court noted. Avocational rehabilitation expert also testified that theminer had lost access to a "significant number ofjobs" because of his injury.     U.S. Steel Mining Co. v. Riddle, Ala CtCivApp,No. CV-89-624, 5/21/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Review Commission Decisions     BOSWELL v. NATIONAL CEMENT CO.,6/7/93. Discrimination proceeding: See article p.297; document p. D-71 (decision by Chairman Holenand Commissioners Backley, Doyle and Nelson; No.SE 90-112-DM).Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Judges' Decisions(will become final in 40 days unless orderedreviewed)     MSHA v. ADAMS STONE CORP., 6/9/93. Civilpenalty proceedings: A judge ordered a smallKentucky limestone operator to pay $3,425 inpenalties for six violations of Part 56 standards,discovered during an MSHA investigation of aserious accident at the quarry (MRR Document No. 0534).     An MSHA inspector issued six Sect. 104(d)(1)citations and orders after investigating the accident inwhich the assistant quarry superintendent fell 30 feetfrom the top of a primary crusher and sufferedpermanently disabling injuries.     The judge found that the operator committed anS&S violation of 30 CFR 56.15005 becauseunrebutted evidence established that the assistantsuperintendent was not wearing a safety belt or linewhen he fell. He agreed with MSHA that theoperator was guilty of "unwarrantable failure"because the assistant superintendent was an agent ofmine management and knew his actions were unsafe.He fined the company $1,600 for the violation.     MSHA cited the operator for a second S&Sviolation of 30 CFR 56.15005 after the inspectorobserved two miners working on top of the crusherwithout wearing safety belts or lines the dayfollowing the accident. The judge agreed theviolation was S&S and also caused by the operator'sunwarrantable failure, finding that mine managementhad an obligation to ensure that miners whocontinued to work on the crusher after the accidentwore safety belts and lines to prevent another seriousaccident. He fined the operator $1,000.     The judge ruled the operator also violated 30 CFR56.18009 because the inspector found six minersdismantling the primary crusher for repair without a"competent person" in charge as required by thestandard. He ruled the violation was S&S, but not theresult of unwarrantable failure because one memberof the crew, the crane operator, was an experiencedand trained employee who could take over in theevent of an emergency. He assessed a $225 civilpenalty.     The judge also assessed penalties totaling $600for three violations of explosives standards. He heldthat the company violated 30 CFR 56.6313, becausetwo large limestone boulders had been drilled andcharged with explosives and left unattended andunbarricaded for one week; 30 CFR 56.6320,because the operator exceeded the 72-hour time limitbetween charge and blast times; and 30 CFR56.6305, because unused explosive materials werenot moved to a protected area within a reasonabletime after the boulders were charged.     The operator argued that three separate citationswere not justified because they concerned a singlecondition. However, the judge found the citedstandards impose separate and distinct duties on theoperator and he ruled the three citations were notduplicative. He said the violations of 30 CFR56.6313 and 56.6305 were S&S, citing the hazards ofa premature detonation. However, he said MSHAfailed to prove that the operator was aware that theboulders had been drill and charged, and he ruled theviolations were not the result of its unwarrantablefailure (Koutras, Judge; Nos. KENT 92-604-M and92-770-M).     Attorney for Adams Stone: David Adams, P.O.Box 2853, Pikeville, Ky. 41402.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Joseph Luckett, U.S.Labor Dept., 2002 Richard Jones Rd., Suite B-201,Nashville, Tenn. 37215.     JERRY IKE HARLESS TOWING INC. v.MSHA, 6/2/93. Contest proceeding: A company thatdredges sand from a riverbed is an operator under theMine Act and must file a legal identity report withMSHA as required by 30 CFR 56.1000, a judge ruled(MRR Document No. 0515).     The judge ruled the company violated 30 CFR56.1000 and ordered it to filed the required reportwithin 21 days.     He rejected as "frivolous" the company'sarguments that sand is not a mineral and that itextracted sand in liquid form. The judge noted thatMSHA routinely oversees sand and gravel dredgingoperations and said the company's extraction andpreparation of sand through its filtering process areclearly activities covered by Sect. 3(h)(1) of theMine Act.     However, the found that another corporationowned by the same individual that stores and sellsthe sand is not subject to the Mine Act (Feldman,Judge; No. CENT 92-276-RM).     MSHA v. MULLINS AND SONS COAL CO.,6/3/93. Civil penalty proceeding: A judge agreedwith a coal company that its conceded S&Sviolations of coal dust standards 30 CFR 75.400 and75.402 were not the result of its "unwarrantablefailure" (MRR Document No. 0535).     An MSHA inspector cited the operator after hediscovered loose coal, coal dust and float dustaccumulations ranging from three to six inches deepfor a distance of 180 feet. He described theaccumulations as black and found no evidence ofsignificant rock dust content.     The inspector based his unwarrantable failurecharge on the fact that the accumulations were notedin the pre-shift examiner's book. However, the judgefound that the notation acknowledging theaccumulations was a mitigating factor in assessingthe degree of the company's negligence.     The judge also noted that the accumulations hadexisted for only three hours and that the operator'sscoop was out of service and being charged.     While not guilty of unwarrantable failure, thejudge found the operator was moderately negligentand assessed a total of $1,000 in penalties (Feldman,Judge; No. KENT 92-669).     Representative for Mullins and Sons: DaleMullins, vice president, Mullins and Sons Coal Co.,Box 4028, Upper John's Creek Rd., Kimper, Ky.41539.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Anne Knauff, U.S.Labor Dept., 2002 Richard Jones Rd., Suite B-201,Nashville, Tenn. 37215.     MSHA v. QUARTO MINING CO., 6/7/93. Civilpenalty proceeding: A judge fined a coal mineoperator $800 for an S&S violation of 30 CFR77.1606(c) because of a defective steering wheel ona front-end loader (MRR Document No. 0533).     The inspector discovered the malfunction whenhe asked the equipment operator to demonstrate thesteering on an idling Caterpillar 988 front-end loaderin the mine's supply yard. When the steering wheelwas turned to the right, it locked in position, forcingthe equipment operator to use both hands to breakthe lock. Then the wheel would spin very fast,causing a potential loss of control of the vehicle, thejudge found.     The equipment operator told the inspector thecondition was intermittent and that he had reportedthe malfunction to the shop foreman, who wasunable to correct the problem.     The judge found that the malfunctioning steeringwas an obvious safety defect. He ruled the violationwas S&S because it presented a hazard to theequipment operator, to pedestrians and to othervehicle drivers. He also found the operator guilty of"unwarrantable failure" because the shop foremanknew of the defect for several months and failed tocorrect the defect or remove the loader from service(Fauver, Judge; No. LAKE 92-309).     Attorney for Quarto Mining: Daniel Rogers,Consol Inc., Consol Plaza, 1800 Washington Rd.,Pittsburgh, Pa. 15241.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Kenneth Walton, U.S.Labor Dept., 881 Federal Office Bldg., 1240 E.Ninth St., Cleveland, Ohio 44199.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Judges' Decisions Ordered Reviewed     MSHA v. SPURLOCK MINING CO., 5/12/93.Civil penalty proceedings: The commission willdecide whether the ALJ erred in failing to considerthe impact of the proposed civil penalties on theoperators' ability to continue in business (MRR 4/9,p. 203).     The operators' petition for review was granted byChairman Holen and Commissioners Doyle andNelson (Melick, Judge; Nos. KENT 92-380, 92-419,92-420, 92-306, 92-307, 92-323, 92-324, 92-608, 92-609, 92-701, 92-836, 92-837, 92-838 and 92-889).     Representative for operators: Hobart Anderson,president, Spurlock Mining Co. and Sarah AshleyMining Co., P.O. Box 989 Ashland, Ky. 41105.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Anne Knauff, U.S.Labor Dept., 2002 Richard Jones Rd., Suite B-201,Nashville, Tenn. 37215.     MSHA v. W-P COAL CO., 5/18/93. Civil penaltyproceeding: The commission will decide whether theALJ erred in rejecting MSHA's attempt to cite amine owner that used contract-operators to mine itscoal as a "co-operator" on outstanding citationsissued against a contract operator that went out ofbusiness (MRR 4/9, p. 196).     MSHA's petition for review was granted byChairman Holen and Commissioners Backley, Doyleand Nelson (Melick, Judge; No. WEVA 92-746).     Attorney for W-P Coal: Kurt Miller, Thorp, Reed& Armstrong, One Riverfront Center, Pittsburgh, Pa.15222.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Tana Adde, U.S. LaborDept., 4015 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, Va. 22203.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BONDS FROM TENNESSEE INTERIMPROGRAM MUST BE FORFEITED TO OSM     An insurance company must forfeit tworeclamation bonds to the federal government, eventhough the bonds were issued when the governmentdid not require bonding, a federal court ruled.     U.S. District Court for the Eastern District ofTennessee upheld an IBLA ruling that the bonds were"statutory bonds," and OSM became thesuccessor-in-interest to the bonds when it took overTennessee's program (MRR Document No. 0517). ExchangeInsurance Co. had challenged the IBLA decisionordering the company to forfeit two bonds worth$81,000.     Tennessee had enacted its program in 1980, onlyto kill it on Oct. 1, 1984. Exchange issued twoperformance bonds for two mining permits filedduring the state's interim program. The bonds wereissued when a bond was required by state law, butnot by federal law.     When the federal government was taking over thestate's program, it announced in the Federal Registerthat it would not assume responsibility over interimprogram bonds. In addition, the state's attorneygeneral said that bonds in which no forfeitureproceedings had started before Oct. 1, 1984, werevoided by the legislative repeal of the Tennesseeprogram.     But the attorney general also noted that thefederal government succeeded to any permanentprogram bonds in which forfeiture proceedings hadnot yet started.     Although the bonds were originally issued underthe interim rule, they were used to support secondpermits under the final rule. It was this point whenthe bonds became "statutory bonds."     Exchange tried to argue that when the federalgovernment took over the program it requiredpermittees to change the payee of the bonds toinclude the federal government as "co-payee" within30 days of the effective date of the new program.     Exchange never complied with this order, but itwas also never challenged by the government for notcomplying. Exchange said that this is evidence thatthe government did not consider the original bondspayable to it.     But because the bonds had been transferred tosecond permits, with Exchange's consent, to supportpermanent program permits, this made themstatutory bonds, and OSM the successor in interest.     Exchange Insurance Co. v. IBLA; USDistCt,EDistTenn No. CIV-3-92-683; 4/9/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ANDALEX TRUCK ROUTE TOO DANGEROUSBECAUSE OF SCHOOL, RESIDENTS SAY     Residents are up in arms over Andalex's plan torun double-trailer coal trucks through their townwhich is 100 miles away from the coal-rich Kaiparowitsarea in southern Utah.     Nearly 200 residents of Hurrican, Utah, whichlies on the state route that would be used to reachrail loadout points, turned out for a protest meetinglast week.     Townspeople say the 45-ton trucks would wearout the roads, cause air and noise pollution and addto the congestion already a problem with trafficheading to and from Zion National Park.     But they were particularly upset about the safetyof children at the school, which is at bottom of asteep two-mile long 8% grade hill on the truck route.They say the grade increases the danger of a runawaytruck.     Their concern was backed up by the SouthernUtah Wilderness Alliance (SUWA) who usedInsurance Institute for Highway Safety statisticsshowing double-trailer trucks are two to three timesmore likely to have an accident than single-trailertrucks.     The alliance has been fighting development ofcoal-rich Kaiparowits for decades.     A representative of a trucking firm working withAndalex said the latest trucks are better able tonegotiate the steep inclines because they have morebraking power per ton than those built a few yearsago.     The noisy protest meeting early this month addedto the controversy surrounding Andalex's plan tomine 400 million tons of coal from Smoky Hollowwhich lies between two wilderness areas and next toa national recreation area.     Andalex wants to use the trucks to get the coal torail lines in Utah and Nevada.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993CALIFORNIA DESERT MUST BE PROTECTED FROM MINING,EXPLOITATION, SAYS BABBITT     Land exchanges will be used to preserve areas ofthe Southeast California desert if legislation makes itthrough the House and Senate.     Desert protection legislation would create 74wilderness areas and upgrade Joshua Tree NationalMonument and Death Valley National Monument tonational park status.    The House version would make the East MojaveDesert a national monument and the Senate versionwould make it a national park. The Senate version isthe most restrictive of the two, which theadministration prefers, Interior Secretary BruceBabbitt told the House subcommittee on nationalparks June 15.     Most of the land owned by the government, morethan 7 million acres, would be designated as"wilderness," closing the land to mining. If the landis designated a "national park," then mining may bepermitted.     Babbitt noted that in the California desert, "Youcan still see roads cut through sand by Conestogawagons," and "scars mark the mines that deliveredfortunes to claim settlers who would not be turnedaway."     The interior secretary said the desert is threatenedby "those who would pillage its subtle beauty."Many forms need protection, says Babbitt     Babbitt agrees with environmental groups thatlegislation is needed to protect sand dunes, extinctvolcanos, archaeological sites and rare plant andanimal life, and that protection is needed frommining and grazing.        Babbitt also stressed that the entire "ecosystem"needed protection, and not protecting one area wouldharm an entire region.     Additions proposed for the Joshua Tree NationalPark would include the Coxcombe Mountains, PintoBasin and Pinto Mountains, Little San BernardinoMountains and the Eagle Mountains.     "Resource protection would be greatly enhancedhere with the full ecosystem included under onemanagement entity," Babbitt said.     But Rep. Jerry Lewis, R-Calif., sees taxpayersending up with a huge bill to acquire the land orgiving up valuable federal lands in land exchanges.Company, schools own large parcels     One of the debates centered around land ownedby the Catellus Corp.     Babbitt supports land exchanges for the Catellusland and California school lands, which are the twoentities that own the vast majority of non-federalland in the area.    Lewis said that 355,000 acres owned by Catellusare worth between $750 and $1,500 an acre.     But Babbitt called these figures "absurd," and saidthe department would work out exchanges providingCatellus with federal land that had similarcharacteristics to the Catellus land that would be partof the protected area.     There is another area of the desert, however, thatposes a different problem.     The Lanfair Valley area contains about 1,000small, individually owned private parcels. Babbitt'sconcern is that these will be developed once the parkis established.     Babbitt said the government must think of an"innovative approach" to deal with the private landholdings or purchase the properties throughcondemnation.     Although Babbitt did not directly say that hesupports "zoning" the area, he did say that hesupports a "comprehensive land use plan for thevalley to promote park purposes while affordingprivate landholders the maximum flexibility tocontinue traditional and appropriate uses of theirland."Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993STATEMENTS AVAILABLE ON TWO PROJECTS     BLM in conjunction with the County of SanBernardino, Calif. has issued a draft environmentalimpact statement on a proposed mining project in theCalifornia Desert Conservation Area.     The Ft. Cady mining project will be a boric acidmine and processing facility that will cover 343 acresof land in San Bernardino County.     Copies of this file are available at the BarstowResource Area Office, BLM, 150 Coolwater Lane,Barstow, Calif. 92311-3221. Comments are due byAugust 3.     For more information contact Edy Seehafer at714-387-4099 at the Barstow area office.     The Forest Service's Kootenai National Forestand the Montana Dept. of State Lands have jointlyprepared an environmental impact statement for aproposed copper and silver mine in Noxon, Mont.     The Rock Creek Project will consist of anunderground copper and silver mine with associatedadits, a mill to process ore, a tailings impoundment,water disposal and access roads.     Comments are due by June 30 to Robert Schrenk,Kootenai National Forest, 506 U.S. Highway 2 West,Libby, Mont. 59923.     For more information contact Paul Kaiser at 406-293-62111.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993COURT CONSIDERS AMAX PERMIT     With AMAX having mined out its Skyline GladyFork reserves, resolving the environmental concernsdelaying a new permit at the Tennessee operation hastaken on a new urgency.     While lawyers for AMAX and OSM argue themerits of the company's toxic materials handlingplan in a Knoxville courtroom, Skyline employeesare shipping from coal stockpiles to the TennesseeValley Authority's Widow's Creek.     "Basically, we've finished mining, we're minedout," said AMAX spokesperson Kevin Feeney.Skyline finished work on the Glady Fork section inmid-May. The company has enough stockpiled coalto satisfy the customer for several weeks, Feeneysaid.     Interior Dept. ALJ David Torbett is consideringSkyline's permit request to commence mining on theBig Brush section now that Glady Fork is mined out.Earlier this year AMAX was successful in getting afederal court order which reversed an OSM decisionthat stopped mining at Glady Fork (MRR 2/12, p.70).Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993OSM, MONTANA HOLD ENFORCEMENT MEETING;  MERIDIANSUSPENDS WORK UNTIL SEPTEMBER     Montana regulators and OSM plan an informalconference June 30 in Billings to discuss the state'senforcement of SMCRA.     Earlier this month Northern Plains ResourceCouncil asked OSM to take over that portion of theMontana Dept. of State Lands program, whichoversees Meridian Minerals' plans for a major newlongwall operation (MRR 6/4, p. 285).     OSM Acting Director Hord Tipton found merit inthe environmental group's concerns and instructedthe state to suspend the Bull Mountains No. 1 permitbecause Montana was not effectively enforcing thelaw.     Meridian has "voluntarily entered into a cessationof operations" until Sept. 1, said Bonnie Lovelace,who oversees coal and uranium reclamation for theMontana program. The company wants to commenceroad construction at the coal complex prior toMontana's snowfall season -- which hits high gear inNovember, officials said.     Meanwhile "we'll be making our points" at theconference. The state will try to convince OSM thatTipton's concerns have been addressed. It will alsoquestion the legality of OSM potentially suspendingprimacy in one regard to an individual permit.     Montana officials say any shortcomings onMeridan's Bull Mountains Mine enforcement, suchas failure to file certain public notices, hardly justifypotential suspension of primacy. State officials alsosay the Resource Council has been involved in everystep of the permit process at Bull Mountains.     OSM representatives have said their goal isn'trevoking Montana's primacy but merely ensuringSMCRA is enforced properly.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993EPA PROPOSES OFF-ROAD EQUIPMENT RULE FOR ENGINESBIGGER THAN 50 HORSEPOWER     It's finally come to this: a rule so big thegovernment can't or won't publish it in the FederalRegister.     Twelve hundred pages of an EPA nonroad engineregulation proposal, including uncondensable graphsand diagrams, are available on computer disk. EPAwas kind enough, however, to publish the proposedrule's 36-page preamble.     According to the preamble, nonroad equipmentwith engines more than 50 horsepower, includingconstruction, logging and mining machines, wouldbe regulated for nitrogen oxides (NOX) and smokeemissions.     Engines that would be excluded from regulationinclude those that are regulated by MSHA forunderground use.     Under authority of the 1990 Clean Air Act, whichby the way was just 313 pages long, EPA beganstudying emissions from nonroad engines andvehicles and determined that the equipment kept atleast one area of the U.S. from meeting nationalambient air quality standards for ozone and carbonmonoxide.     A critical part of the problem, the agency said, isthe formation of ozone in and downwind of bigcities. EPA said these emissions can also cause areasoutside big cities to fall below federal standards.     But the American Mining Congress disagreeswith EPA. Mines are located mostly in remote,undeveloped areas and do not cause those regions tofall below the federal ambient area standards, anAMC source said.     While the optimal engine cutoff size has not beendetermined, engine manufacturers and other industrysources have suggested a cutoff in the range of 450to 750 horsepower -- a far cry from the 50-horsepower minimum under the EPA proposal.     Engines used to propel vehicles or powerequipment, such as mobile cranes, or those used asauxiliary engines, such as for refrigerated trailers,would be regulated as well.Emission credit program proposed     EPA has proposed an averaging, banking andtrading program for large nonroad compression-ignition engines in the hopes of providingmanufacturers "flexibility in meeting the proposedNOX standard without reducing environmentalbenefits."     The program would allow manufacturers to earnemission "credits" and bank them for futureaveraging or trading. The credits could then beapplied to engines that are difficult to standardize.     Engines in California would be excluded from thecredit program because the state requires that allengines sold there meet the NOX standard.     If manufacturers use the program, changes inequipment design would be minimal, according toEPA. There would be no effects on 50- to 100-horsepower equipment, while flexibility would beallowed for those engines requiring substantialchanges.     Given that all manufacturers participate in theemission credit program, the average annual cost todevelop and make engines meeting NOX and smokeemissions standards would be $29 million.     EPA assumes that manufacturers will pass anyincreased costs of regulation to the consumer byraising the prices of their engines. EPA's estimatedaverage price increase for 1996 is $110 per engine.     AMC says the mining industry disputes thisfigure and believes that the real cost per engine couldbe much higher.     EPA's Selective Enforcement Auditing programwould require nonroad engine manufacturers to testnewly assembled engines for emissions compliance.This section of the proposed rule was designed toestablish an annually limited number of audits foreach manufacturer.     EPA will hold a hearing on the proposedregulation in Ann Arbor, Mich., on June 25. Writtencomments to EPA are due July 27.     To obtain a copy of the proposal or to order thecomputer disks contact: EPA, Air Docket, Mail CodeLE-131,  401 M St. S.W., Room M-1500,Washington, D.C. 20460, or call 202-260-7548.Refer to Docket No. A-91-24.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ASARCO NAMED PRP AT TRIUMPH     ASARCO Inc., the Idaho Dept. of Lands andTriumph Minerals Inc. have been named as thepotentially responsible parties at the Triumph MineTailings Piles site, which was recently proposed forSuperfund listing.     EPA is continuing a search for PRPs and isplanning an expedited protective action to preventcontinued exposure to residents.     A risk assessment identified arsenic as theprimary contaminant of concern. Several areas,including tailings piles, a mine process foundationarea and several residential yards, pose acute andchronic exposure risks from arsenic levels.     Preliminary bioavailablity study results showarsenic is more readily absorbed than lead. The studywas done by feeding dirt from the site to pigs.     EPA is evaluating results of the risk assessment toidentify the arsenic concentration that should be usedas the action level for expedited response.     For additional information contact: Chris Field,EPA on-scene-coordinator at 206-553-1674.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993GOVERNMENT CLOSES 13,886 ACRES OPENS ONLY 130 ACRES     In land closure action, BLM and the ForestService have closed or proposed to close a total of13,886 acres throughout the West.     BLM proposes to withdraw 820 acres of publicland and federal minerals, 1,800 acres of publicsurface, and 3,200 acres of federal mineralsunderlying private lands in Teton County, Wyo., forup to two years from surface entry and mining.     The land was closed on June 3 for the protectionof recreation, scenic, riparian, and wildlife values. Itwill remain open to mineral leasing.     Comments are due by September 1 at theWyoming State Director's Office, BLM, P.O. Box1828, Cheyenne, Wyo. 82003.     For further information contact Arlan Hiner at307-367-4358.          BLM has proposed to withdraw 290.02 acresin Oregon for up to two years to protect therecreational values along Galic Creek.     The land, which was closed June 3 to surfaceentry and mining, will remain open to mineralleasing.     Comments are due by September 1 to the OregonState Director, BLM, P.O. Box 2965, Portland, Ore.97208-2965.     For further information contact Donna Kaufmanat 503-280-7162-.     BLM proposes to withdraw 7,544 acres in MonoCounty, Calif., to protect the Bodie Bowl Area ofCritical Environmental Concern.     In lieu of aid of legislation currently underconsideration by Congress, BLM has asked for a fiveyear closure. In the meantime, the land, which closedJune 4, will remain closed for up to two years tosurface entry and mining but remain open to mineralleasing.     Comments are due by September 2.     For further information contact Viola Andrade,California State Office, BLM, 2800 Cottage Way,Room E-2845, Sacramento, Calif. 95825; 916-978-4820.     The Forest Service has proposed to withdraw232.50 acres in New Mexico for up to two yearsfrom location and entry under U.S. mining laws.     The proposal was initiated to protect theinvestment the Forest Service made in the CoyoteRanger District facilities.     The land, closed on June 4, will remain open toall other uses which may be made of National Forestland.     Comments are due by September 2.     For further information contact Margie Martinez,Albuquerque District Office, BLM, 435 Montano RdNE, Albuquerque, N.M. 87107; 505-761-8907.     BLM has reopened the 120 acres to surface entryeffective June 4.     The land, closed two years previously to surfacemining due to fish hatchery and recreational useadjacent to Cutter Dam, expired May 8.     For further information contact GeorgianaArmijo, New Mexico State Office, BLM, P.O. Box27115, Santa Fe, N.M. 87502-0115; 505-438-7594.     BLM has reopened 10 acres in Wyoming thatwere originally included in an application forexchange in the Bridger-Teton National Forest.     The lands were opened on June 4 to all lawsunder National Forest System lands which includelocation and entry under U.S. mining laws.     For further information contact Janet Booth,Wyoming State Office, BLM, 2515 Warren Ave.,P.O. Box 1828, Cheyenne, Wyo. 82001; 307-775-6124.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Discovery     UNITED STATES V. MIKE POLESCHOOKAND PETER POLESCHOOK, 4/12/93, CACA29892. OHA declared a placer mining claim voidbecause of lack of valuable discovery of gold,despite the placer holder's willingness to expendmore time and effort to locate valuable mineraldeposits.     The government brought the case before OHA onthe basis of a finding of an inspector from the U.S.Forest Service that the Bend Ten placer mining claimin Butte County, Calif., cannot be mined at profit.This finding was made on the basis of the value ofthe gold so far extracted and despite the fact thatPoleschook testified that he believed the gold couldbe found in a deep hole on the site.     OHA noted Poleschook had not mined in thathole and that the hole is in accessible. This means itwould not be possible to mine it in a manner thatwould be economical according to the standards of"the prudent person." Further, the appeals panelfound, "Mr. Poleschook's willingness to expend hislabor and means is not in itself enough to meet theprudent person test."     U.S. V. JOHN R. PICHOWICZ, 5/12/93, A MC303306-303313. OHA ruled eight mining claims tobe null and void for failure to discover valuablemineral deposits, after rejecting the contestee's claimthat the government should have gone beyond themining work done by the contestee to identify morevaluable samples.     OHA found BLM presented a solid prima faciecase that valuable gold deposits had not beenidentified. BLM's mineral report and cost analysisshowed John Pichowicz would have to expend$3.59/cubic yard to mine the claims, which werelocated within Arizona's Muggins Mining District.That fact was not rebutted by Pichowicz. OHA said,though, the analysis might have underestimated thecost to mine the claims because reclamation,operating dry concentrations and other issues werenot taken into account.     OHA felt BLM also overestimated the value ofthe gold by failing to account for a 5-15% loss ingold recoverability that would result from the dryplacer methods Pichowicz proposed to use. Thehighest gold value BLM identified was $2.44/cubicyear. So, using the best sample, it would be expectedPichowicz would lose $1.15/cubic yard of materialmined, OHA said.     The contestee did not offer any substantialevidence of discovery, but instead criticized BLM'ssampling methods for failing to reach the bedrock.But, OHA held, "a government mineral examiner hasno obligation to explore or sample beyond themining claimant's workings or to perform sufficientwork to reach a definite conclusion as to whether avaluable mineral deposit does or does not exist"within the claim. "If a valuable mineral depositexists, it is incumbent upon the claimant to discoverit" at the time of the hearing, OHA held.     OHA also rejected Pichowicz's request forcompensation for the fair market value of his claims."The federal government may withdraw its land frommineral entry regardless of any right a prospectormay have to exclude others from the claim under thedoctrine of pedis possessio," OHA held.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Jurisdication     CONSOLIDATED COAL CO. V. OSM, CH 91- 9-R,4/12/93. OHA rejected a challenge to a NOV because thechallenge should have been brought not before thehearings division but in a U.S. district court.     OSM issued a NOV charging that ConsolidatedCoal Co. failed to: regrade, protect and stabilize allareas disturbed by coal mining; control discharge tostop erosion; establish sediment control for ahaulroad; establish a permanent vegetative cover ona disturbed area; and compact material used tobackfill and maintain drainage for the northeasternportion of the permit area.     Consolidated did not dispute the facts. Rather, itclaimed that OSM did not have the power to issuethe NOV because SMCRA does not authorize OSMto issue such NOVs in states with approvedregulatory programs, such as Pennsylvania, unlessthere is a finding of widespread enforcementdeficiencies within that program and no such findinghas been made, Consolidated argued.     The ALJ said however, that Consolidated'schallenge must fail because it is well settled that achallenge to SMCRA regulations must be brought inthe U.S. District Court for the District of ColumbiaCircuit within 60 days of promulgation of theregulations (30 U.S.C. Sect. 1276(a)(1)(1982)). "TheDistrict of Columbia circuit has exclusivejurisdiction over such challenges," the judge said.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Placer Mining     U.S. V. JAMES UBERT, RITA AUBERT,RENEE AUBERT AND JASON OTEN, 4/12/93,CA MC 244967-244968. OHA ruled a placer miningoperation should not be allowed when it was foundto be unprofitable, while at the same time it wouldreduce the income from recreational use of a riverwithin the permit area.     BLM's California office transmitted to theHearings Division a dispute involving the Mote A-Band Mote C placer mining claims, which werelocated in a power site withdrawal on theMokelumne River.     Despite adequate notice the contestees (the claimholders) did not appear at the hearing.     At issue was the question whether the miningoperations would substantially interfere with otheruses of the lands covered by the claim. A BLMgeologist testified that the mining operations woulddisturb nearly a mile of the Mokelumne River,interfering with recreational uses of the river. Also,an official with the East Bay Municipal UtilityDistrict said siltation generated by eight suctiondredges to be used in the operation could impact thestorage capacity of the downstream PardeeReservoir.     The OHA administrative law judge looked at therevenues over five years from recreational activities-- $2,000,000 -- that would be substantially reducedby the mining activity. He compared that with the 20people who would be employed by the miningactivity and the $100,000 loss the gold miningoperation would suffer over five years. Based on thiscomparison, OHA found "placer mining wouldsubstantially interfere with other land uses and thatplacer mining should be prohibited" in the areas inquestion.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Reclamation     GATLIFF COAL CO. V. OSM, 5/11/93, NX 92-6-R.     OHA sustained a NOV after ruling thatOSM's prima facia case that permit violations hadoccurred was not refuted by a claim that actionstaken in violation of a permit were just as effectiveas the original requirements in reclaiming the land.     OHA faced review of a NOV for drainageproblems on a permit. OSM cited Gatliff Coal Co.for:     > "Failure to construct and maintain Basin 703 in       accordance with approved plans.     > Failure to construct [diversion ditch] No. 18 in       accordance with approved plans."     An OSM inspector said that Basin 703, whichwas depicted in the permit as a permanentimpoundment, had been mined through. Theinspector further found that the diversion ditchdrained into Basin 704, instead of Basin 703 as thepermit required.     The NOV required reconstruction of Basin 703and a change in drainage from the diversion ditch.Gatliff completed the first remedial measures andfiled for review of the NOV.     OHA noted that in reviewing the NOV, theburden of establishing a prima facia case would beOSM's, while the ultimate burden of persuasionwould rest with the challenger.     OSM "clearly carried its burden of proof," theOHA administrative law judge held, because itprovided unrefuted evidence two aspects of thepermit were violated. Gatliff did not provideevidence rebutting that prima facie case and"attempted to show only that the structures it had inplace were just as effective as those which shouldhave been constructed." Since the rebuttal failed, theNOV was sustained.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993UNUSED FORFEITED BOND COULD BE RETURNED IF SITE ISMINED BY ANOTHER OPERATOR     Kentucky has submitted proposed amendments toOSM on bond forfeitures and general provisions forinspection and enforcement.     Under bond forfeiture, the permittee and\oroperator, not just the operator as it stands now,would be liable for the additional cost necessary toachieve reclamation if the amount of the forfeitedbond is insufficient to pay the full cost of thereclamation.     It would also require that an unused forfeitedbond be returned to its owner if the state has notcompleted the reclamation plan on the forfeited siteand the site is completely over-lapped by anotherpermit and completely disturbed by that over-lappingpermittee.     Under inspections, the federal section of the rulestates that regular monthly partial inspections neednot be continued at minesites that are in temporarycessation, although quarterly complete inspectionsmust continue.     However Kentucky program rules do not providefor a reduced inspection frequency at minesites intemporary cessation. If approved, the newamendment will provide reduced frequency ofinspections at such minesites.     Copies of this file are available at the LexingtonField Office, OSM, 2675 Regency Road, Lexington,Ky. 40503-2922.     Hearing requests are due June 28.     For further information contact William Kovacicat 606-233-2894.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993CIVIL PENALTY MODIFICATION APPROVED     OSM has given Ohio final approval on civilpenalty language.     The rule allows the Ohio Reclamation Board toforward penalties or remaining penalty balances tothe Dept. of Natural Resources for deposit in the coalmining reclamation fund.     Other amendments had called for revisions to 13sections of the Ohio Revised Code which concernsthe retention of State civil penalties; refund of permitfees, confidential information regarding exemptionrequests for incidental coal extraction; and both theReclamation Supplemental Forfeiture Fund and theCoal Mining Performance Bond Fund.     It also concerns the limitations on award of costsand expenses, reclamation contracts with surfacemine operators, reclamation of interim forfeitedareas, and many others.     However, these statutory provisions are to beincorporated into a state bill, which had not yet beendrafted. OSM will make a decision on the languageonce the legislation is introduced and a copy of thebill sent to OSM.     Information on the language can be obtained fromthe Columbus Field Office, OSM, 2242 S. HamiltonRd., Room 202, Columbus, Ohio 43232.     For further information contact Richard Seibel at614-866-0578 at the Columbus Field Office.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993AMENDMENTS FACE COURT CHALLENGE     The Pennsylvania Coal Assn. is challengingOSM-approved provisions of the state's surfacemining program that go by the adage "ignorance isno excuse."     An OSM-approved amendment allows the state toassess individual civil penalties against corporateofficers who do not knowingly and willfullyparticipate in a violation.     Changes also approved by OSM overridePennsylvania's "dual opportunity" appeal process.The state has eliminated an operator's right to appeala violation when a civil penalty is appealed.     Stephen Allen of Buchanan Ingersoll said thisprovision is directly contrary to a 1988 courtdecision, Kent Coal Mining Co., which upheld anoperator's right to appeal both a violation and anexcessive penalty.     The association has asked the court topermanently enjoin the state and OSM fromenforcement of both provisions and is asking forattorney fees.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BONDING LANGUAGE PROPOSED     OSM has received two proposed amendmentsfrom Pennsylvania regarding self-bonding andfinancial instruments permitted for postingperformance bonds.     The new amendment would provide the permitapplicant with the option to use a self-bond as thefinancial tool instead of a surety or collateral bondfor the performance bond. Performance bond's aremust be presented before a coal mine permit may beissued or coal mining activities can begin.     The state also wants to amend what is accepted asa financial instrument for a performance bond.     The state would like to add the options of lifeinsurance policies, annuities or trust funds asacceptable financial instruments for postingperformance bonds.     Comments are due by July 7, hearing requestsJune 22.     For additional information contact Robert Biggi,OSM Harrisburg Field Office at 717-782-4036.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MSHA HEALTH AND SAFETY COURSES AVAILABLE UPON REQUESTThe following courses are available to MSHA andindustry personnel and will be presented uponrequest by an individual or a company.     First Aid Basic or Refresher, John Hymes,National Mine Safety and Health Academy, P.O.Box 1166, Beckley, W.Va. 25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 930-3313.     Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) Training,Basic Instructor, Basic Rescuer and Heart SaverCourses, Kenneth Scott, National Mine Safety andHealth Academy, P.O. Box 1166, Beckley, W.Va.25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 930-3313.     Fundamentals of Human Factors Engineering,Kenneth Scott, National Mine Safety and HealthAcademy, P.O. Box 1166, Beckley, W.Va., 25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 304-930-3313.     Approval Procedures Seminar with Training forElectrical Safety in Hazardous Locations, RobertMarshall, MSHA Approval and Certification Center,R.R. 1, Box 251, Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia,W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-273-1301.     Electrical Safety, William Helffrich, BrucetonSafety Technology Center, Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O.Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15236; 412-892-6959;FTS 412-723-6959.     Industrial Electrical Retraining, DonaldHutchison, Denver Safety and Health TechnologyCenter, P.O. Box 25367, Denver Federal Center,Denver, Colo. 80225; 303-231-5430; FTS 303-554-5430.     Automated Temporary Roof Support Systems orRoof Control Specialists - Coal - Refresher Training,Terry Hoch, Bruceton Safety Technology Center,Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa.15236; 412-892-6904; FTS 412-723-6904.     Surface Mining Seminar on Ground Control,Terry Hoch, Bruceton Safety Technology Center,Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa.15236; 412-892-6904; FTS 412-723-6904.     Bolting Practices for Limestone, Robert Ferriter,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5428; FTS 303-554-5428.     Coal: Its Storage, Handling and Processing, CleteStephan, Bruceton Safety Technology Center,Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa.15236: 412-892-6094; FTS 412-723-6904.     Coal Mine Ventilation, Jerry Herndon, NationalMine Safety and Health Academy, P.O. Box 1166,Beckley, W.Va. 25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS304-930-3313.     Dust Collection Systems, George Dvorznak,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Organic Vapor Monitoring, P.D. Blumenstein,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver FederalCenter, 80225; 303-231-5441; FTS 303-554-5441.     Mine Ventilation for MSHA CMS&H Specialistsof MSHA Supervisors, Edward Miller, PittsburghHealth Technology Center, 4800 Forbes Ave.,Pittsburgh, Pa., 15213; 412-578-3760; FTS 412-721-3760.     Practical Noise Control in Mining, Richard Goff,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5443; FTS 303-554-5443.     Inspection of Mine-Wide Monitoring Systems,Robert Marshall, Approval and Certification Center,R.R. 1, Box 251, Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia,W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Mine-Wide Monitoring Systems-Compliancewith MSHA Requirements,  Robert Marshall,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Inspection of Tailings Embankments, John Odell,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5434; FTS 303-554-5434.     Mine Waste Impoundment for MSHA FieldSpecialists or Industry,  Kevin Wu, Bruceton SafetyTechnology Center, Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box18233, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15236; 412-892-6903; FTS412-723-6903.     Refuse Impoundment: Qualification for IndustryPersonnel, Jerry Herndon, National Mine Safety andHealth Academy, P.O. Box 1166, Beckely, W.Va.25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 304-930-3313.     Load Locking Valves, George Dvorznak,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Permissibility Checklists for Diesel Equipment,George Dvorznak, Approval and CertificationCenter, R.R. 1, Box 251, Industrial Park Rd.,Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Permissibility Training for Metal and Non-MetalMine Safety and Health Personnel, Robert Marshall,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Permissibility for Coal, Donald Hutchison,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5430; FTS 303-554-5430.Radiation Monitoring and Control, Wade Cooper,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 35367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225, 303-231-5434: FTS 303-554-5434.     Wire Rope, Donald Hutchison, Denver Safety andHealth Technology Center, P.O. Box 25367, DenverFederal Center, Denver, Colo. 80225; 303-231-5430; FTS303-554-5430.Meetings Use of AutoCAD for Mining,Geology and Environmental Mapping, Jan. 14-16, Houston(Gibbs Associates, P.O. Box 706, Boulder, Colo. 80306-0706; 303-444-6032).     Drilling and Blasting Techniques forConstruction, Quarrying, Open Pit Mining,Trenching and Pipelines, Jan. 25-29, Seattle, Wash.(Susan Stone, Engineering Continuing Education,University of Washington, College of Engineering,4725 30th Ave. NE, Seattle, Wash. 98105; 206-543-5539 or FTS 206-543-2352).Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MeetingsJune     National Coal Assn. Annual Convention, June 17-20, White Sulphur Springs, W.Va. (Karen Dugan,National Coal Assn., 1130 17th St. N.W.,Washington, D.C. 20036; 202-463-2614).     3rd International GPS/GIS Conference &Training Program, June 21-25, Seattle, (ConferenceCoordinator, C/O GeoResearch Inc., 115 N.Broadway, Billings, Mont. 59101; 406-248-6771).     Rocky Mountain Coal Mining institute, June 27-29, Beaver Creek, Colo. (Doris Finnie, 303-238-9099).     34th U.S. Symposium on Rock Mechanics, June27-30, Madison, Wis. (Bazalel Haimson, Dept. ofMaterials Science and Engineering, University ofWisconsin, 1509 University Ave., Madison, Wis.53706; fax: 608-265-3021).July     Third Annual Mine Waste and RemediationTechnology Conference, July 6-9, Butte, Mont.(Pheobe Boelter, Conference, Coordination Office;312-988-7667).     Oregon State Mining Champsionships, July 14-16, Baker City, Ore. (Lorna Tonack, Oregon StateMining Championships, 3345 Estes St., Baker City,Ore. 97814; 6503-523-2801).     39th Annual Rocky Mountain Mineral LawInstitute, July 17, Vail, Colo. (Rocky MountainMineral Law Foundation, Porter AdministrationBldg., 7039 E. 18th Ave., Denver 80220; 303-327-8100).August     Energy and Mineral Resources of CentralMontana, August 26-28, Billings and Lewistown,Mont. (Roy Boles, Montana Geological Society, Box844, Billings, Mont. 69103; 406-656-0069).September     Conference Mine Subsidence in Urban andDeveloped Areas, September 9-10, Rock Springs,Wyo. (Timothy Richmond, Wyoming Department ofEnvironmental Quality, 122 W. 25th St., Cheyenne,Wyo. 82002; fax:  307-634-0799).     Rocky Mountain Association of EnvironmentalProfessionals Annual Conference, Sept. 15-17,Denver, (Glenn Eurick, RMAEP, P.O. Box 46171,Denver;  801-268-4447).     American Mining Congress Mining Convention,September 19-22, San Francisco, Calif. (AMC, 1920N. St., N.W., Suite 300, Washington, D.C. 20036;202-861-2800 or fax: 202-861-2821)     National Assn. of State Land Reclamationists andInterstate Mining Compact Commission JointMeeting, Sept. 27- 29, Raddision Plaza LordBaltimore Hote, Baltimore, MD (Beth Botis, IMCC,703-709-8654).     Nevada Mining Association, Tahoe, Nev.(Nevada Mining Assn, 5250 S. Virginia, #220, Reno,Nev. 89502; 702-829-2121.     Utah Mining Assn, Park City, Utah (Utah MiningAssn., 825 Kearns Bldg., Salt Lake City, Utah84101; 901-364-1874).     Tenth Annual Pittsburgh Coal Conference,Pittsburgh, Pa. (Ann McDonald, Pittsburgh CoalConference, University of Pittsburgh, 1140 BenedumHall, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15261; 412-624-7440 or fax:412-624-1480).     National Coal Association Coal IssuesConference, Washington, (Gloria Runyon, NCA,1130 17th St., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036; 202-463-2656).     Annual Meeting of the Illinois Mining Institute,Collinsville, Ill. (Phyllis Godwin, IMI, P.O. Box 20,Pesotum, Ill. 61863; phone/fax: 217-867-2791).     22nd Annual Coal Lawyers Conference,St.Petersburg Beach, Fla. (Juanita Dukes, NationalCoal Assn., 1130 17th St., N.W., Washington 20036;202-463-2614).October     Biennial Conference of The Institute forBriquetting and Agglomeration, Seattle (RalphWeggel, IBA, 179 Riverview Acres Road, Hudson,Wis. 54015; 715-549-6342 or fax: 715-549-5678).November     Northwest Mining Association's 99th AnnualConvention, Short Course and Trade Show, Nov. 28- Dec. 3, Spokane, Wash. (NWMA, 10 N. Post, Suite414, Spokane, Wash. 99201; 509-624-1158 or fax:509-623-1241.)     Alaska Miners Association Convention,Anchorage, Ala. (AMA, 501 W. Northern Lights,Suite 203, Anchorage, Ala.  99503; 907-276-0347).     Eastern Oil Shale Symposium, Lexington, Ky.(Geaunita Caylor, University of Kentucky, 643Maxwelton Ct., Lexington, Ky. 40506; 606-257-2820 or fax: 606-258-1049).     Pennsylvania Blasting Conference, UniversityPark, Pa. (Barbara Impellitteri, ConferenceCoordinator, Penn State University, 410 KellerConference Center, University Park, Pa. 16802; 814-863-1738 or fax: 814-865-3749).Call for Papers     Automation in the Stone Industry: The Key toFuture Profitability, Oct. 2-4, Columbus, Ohio (F.A.Renninger, National Stone Assn., 1415 Elliot PlaceN.W., Washington, D.C. 20007; fax: 202-342-0702.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-23IA059-000325-B006-27http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey97.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233406 text/html 75731HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:32:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:34 GMTContent-length: 75544Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey97.html Sample Issue Copyright NORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TESTS CONFIRM SAGA HAS MAJOR GAS FIND IN 6406/2 (321 words) AKER, ABB AND MARITIME TENTECH WIN MAJOR AASGARD SHIP CONTRACT (431 words) ESSO CONTRACTS ABB FOR SUBSEA PART OF BALDER (130 words) ROCKWATER PUTS VALUE ON TELFORD EPIC (135 words) NSL CONSTRUCTION SURVEY - NW EUROPEAN SHELF (209 words) SHELL INITIATES COMPETITION FOR SHEARWATER DESIGN (261 words) STATOIL AWARDS DRESSER RAND TURBO-MACHINERY FRAME CONTRACT (187 words) TEXACO ISSUES NOTICE FOR PIPELINE SYSTEM WORK (147 words) MANNESMANN WINS CONTRACT TO SUPPLY BRITANNIA LINEPIPE (129 words) BARMAC PLANS MAJOR INVESTMENT IN NIGG TO MEET CONSTRUCTION NEEDS (390 words) PHILLIPS TARGETS POSSIBLE JACQUI START-UP AT END-1997 (184 words) NEWS STATOIL ENGINEERS SEEK PATENTS FOR VESSEL AND LIFTING SOLUTIONS (118 words) BHP ACHIEVES FIRST GAS FROM LIVERPOOL BAY HAMILTON NORTH FIELD (118 words) MAERSK BRINGS ROAR ON STREAM (86 words) AMERADA AND DONG ASSESS POTENTIAL OF NEW DANISH GAS SYSTEM (181 words) STUDY SHOWS ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF AASGARD GAS WILL BE LIMITED (164 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW IEA FORECASTS NEW PEAK FOR NORTH SEA OIL PRODUCTION (321 words) NEWS GASUNIE RAISES GAS RESERVES ESTIMATES (34 words) NIGG TERMINAL CARRIES OUT FIRST TRANSFER OF ALBA CRUDE (157 words) CHEVRON WINS APPROVAL TO SWITCH FROM UNST TO SCATSTA (124 words) CONOCO UPS MURDOCH RESERVES ON BACK OF NEW WELL (334 words) JOHN SHAW BACK IN MARKET AFTER SHELL DEFERS KINGFISHER START (178 words) TOTAL TAKING SOVEREIGN EXPLORER FOR UK AND EIRE DEEPWATER PROGRAMME (146 words) ELF INVITES BIDS FOR ELGIN/FRANKLIN DRILLING (317 words) BP RENEWS BENREOCH FOR A FURTHER 12 MONTHS TO MAY 1997 (225 words) BP TENDERS FOR WELL AND EXTENDED TEST ON ROSS (116 words) ROWAN SECURES DUTCH FIXTURES FOR JACK-UP RIGS (209 words) MAERSK OIL CHECKS MARKET AGAINST EXPIRY OF DANISH JACK-UP CONTRACTS (134 words) BHP ISSUES INQUIRY FOR UK JACK-UP PROGRAMMES (199 words) NORSK HYDRO REMAINS OPEN FOR EXPLORATION SEMI FOR 1997 (281 words) WEST ALPHA EN ROUTE FROM CHINA TO NORTH SEA (296 words) SIRI DISCOVERY COULD BE FAST-TRACKED FOR 1998 START (226 words) AMOCO ABANDONS NOEKKEN DUSTER (73 words) HYDRO PREPARES TO RUN ONE TEST ON OSEBERG AREA DISCOVERY (145 words) VESLEFRIKK WILDCAT TURNS UP SMALL FIND (88 words) DRILLING ACTIVITY UPDATE, NEW SPUDS AND COMPLETIONS (724 words) ENTERPRISE BOOSTS NELSON AREA ACREAGE IN FARM-IN DEAL WITH BP (284 words) NESTE OFFLOADS 50% STAKE IN SOVEREIGN EXPLORATION (79 words) HITEC ACQUIRING MARINE CONSULTING GROUP (78 words) ABBOT LAUNCHES #7.8M BID FOR OIS (102 words) CAIRN ARRANGES SHARE PLACING TO HELP FUND ACTIVITIES (73 words) HSE INVESTIGATES UK YARD BLAST THAT CLAIMED THREE LIVES (173 words) ENSCO 92 ACCIDENT VICTIM DIES (140 words) OIL INDUSTRY PEOPLE (165 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (74 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (87 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (88 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (63 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (87 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (87 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (72 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (26 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (53 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (65 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (47 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (64 words) CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TESTS CONFIRM SAGA HAS MAJOR GAS FIND IN 6406/2Saga Petroleum, operator of last year's most significant Norwegiandiscovery - 6406/2-1, southwest of Smoerbukk - is believed to be takinga more sober view of likely recoverable reserves after an extensivetest programme confirmed reservoir variability.  According to the NPD,a seven-DST test programme proved that reservoir quality varies greatlyover the thick gross pay section with some zones very dense whileothers exhibit good production qualities.Nevertheless, preliminary estimates confirm the find to be of majorimportance containing recoverable reserves in the order of 50-100 MMcmof oil equivalents, reports the NPD.  Informed sources suggest thisrange is too conservative and 100 MMcm may be a more realisticestimate.  Most of the reserves are in the form of gas, but largequantities of condensate are also present.  The results of the wellcurrently being drilled into the southern part of the structure -6406/2-2 - will allow the find's size to be estimated with morecertainty, according to the NPD.The test programme is said to have yielded maximum gas flowrates of27.534 MMcfd and 1,572 b/d of condensate through a 28.58-millimetrechoke.  It is believed the water contact proved to be higher than firstthought and the Tilje formation was a disappointment.  As expectedbefore testing the Ile proved to be the best zone and contains themajority of the reserves.Exploration well 6406/2-1 first discovered gas last Spring, but wassuspended short of TD in March due to fisheries and environmentalrestrictions (NSL 1000/13).  The well was re-entered late in Augustwith the semisub Ross Isle and deepened to a TD of 5,766 metres, makingit the deepest exploration well ever drilled on the Norwegian Shelf.More core material was recovered than on any other Norwegian well -over 600 metres.  The well was finally suspended on January 7 and theRoss Isle is preparing to spud Smoerbukk prospect appraisal well6506/11-4S for Statoil.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AKER, ABB AND MARITIME TENTECH WIN MAJOR AASGARD SHIP CONTRACTA consortium comprising Aker, ABB and Maritime Tentech has won theprestigious contract to build the world's largest monohull productionvessel for Statoil's Aasgard oilfield development.  The contractorswill form an alliance with Statoil to implement the project, sharingprofits above a target price for the facilities as well as the risk ofcost overruns.  Maritime Tentech has been given responsibility fordelivering the hull, which will be built by Hitachi in Japan.  Thiscontract is valued at Kr 1.52bn ($239m).  Aker Engineering and ABB willhave responsibility for engineering and purchase of the plant to beinstalled on the deck of the vessel, a contract which amounts to aroundKr 140m.  Aker Stord will assemble and hook-up the vessel - work valuedat Kr 300m.The contracts with ABB, Aker and Tentech, which are subject togovernment approval of the field development plan, include options ofaround Kr 450m for further fabrication and marine installation.  Thevessel's deck plant, due to be purchased this Spring, is not includedin the contracts awarded to date.The oil production vessel for Aasgard is due for delivery from Stord atend-May 1998 for first oil in August 1998.  The ship will have aproduction capacity of around 200,000 b/d of oil and gas processingcapability of up to 16 MMcmd.  Storage will be provided for 150,000 cmof oil.  The vessel will measure 276 metres long by 45.4 metres acrossthe beam with a draught of 26.6 metres.Aker also announced the Kr 380m contract for electrical work on theAasgard Field had been awarded to Aker Elektro.  The company willsupply systems for the production vessel and the gas platform with thecontract encompassing engineering, follow-up work at the shipyards,hook-up, testing and commissioning plus an option for operatingmaintenance and the supply of spare parts during the operational phase. Preparatory work will begin at once and the project is planned tostart in March 1996.  The gas platform is due for completion in October2000.  Aker Engineering and Cegelec UK will be Aker Elektro's mainsubcontractors.At the same time Aker said Statoil had awarded Aker Engineering a Kr30m contract to design the production systems for the Aasgard Field gasplatform.  Design work will get under way immediately and continueuntil April 1997.  The scope of Aker Engineering's contract may beexpanded, depending on how the project is implemented.  A decision onwhether detailed engineering and construction will be separatecontracts will be made later this year.  If they are, Aker will carryout detailed engineering.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ESSO CONTRACTS ABB FOR SUBSEA PART OF BALDEREsso Norway has awarded an ABB/Coflexip Stena partnership a Kr 650-700m($102.3-110.2m) contract to design, procure and install all the subseaequipment for the Balder Field development.  ABB will be responsiblefor the wellhead equipment and controls, while Coflexip Stena will beresponsible for the risers and flowlines.  The contract was signed justbefore Christmas and engineering work has already started.  The initialphase of the work, comprising 15 wells, is to be completed by 1998,with equipment for the first well to be delivered by October this year. There is an option for a second phase involving an additional 10-12wells.*  Amerada Hess is thought to be close to a contract award for thesubsea part of Durward/Dauntless, with Stolt Comex Seaway believed tobe well placed.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ROCKWATER PUTS VALUE ON TELFORD EPICThe EPIC contract for the Telford development, awarded recently byoperator Amerada Hess to Rockwater, is worth #40m ($62m), thecontractor reports (NSL 1028/3).  The work includes the fabrication andinstallation of two, 180-tonne manifolds, a 100-tonne shutdown valvestructure and a 150-metre, 220-tonne riser caisson which will beinstalled on the Scott production platform.  Also included in theworkscope is the provision of flowlines, services lines, controlequipment and umbilicals and the supply of tie-in spools and jumpers.Brown & Root will handle the initial design engineering phase of theproject which is worth #1.3m, while Barmac will undertake a #3mcontract for the fabrication of the structures and riser caisson.Pipelay and trenching will be carried out by Coflexip Stena under a#12m sub-contract.  Installation will be carried out using the Regalia.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NSL CONSTRUCTION SURVEY - NW EUROPEAN SHELFPipelay/Underwater Contracting January 1996Current biddingOperator       Sector  Field        Type of WorkAmerada        UK      Durward etc  Subsea installationClyde          NL      P2/P6        PipelayElf Enterprise UK      15/17 etc    PipelayEsso           Nor     Balder       EPCI subsea tiebackInterconnector UK/Bel  UK/Bel       PipelayMaersk         DK      Dan FF       PipelayMaersk         DK      Various      ROV pipeline inspectionMarathon       ER      Kinsale etc  EPIC subseaMarathon       UK      West Brae    EPIC subsea tiebackPhillips       Nor     Ekofisk II   Subsea workSaga           Nor     Varg         Subsea installationShell          UK      Tern/Eider   Replacement water injection lineShell          UK      Gannet       PipelaySLP            UK      MacCulloch   SubseaStatoil        Nor     Aasgard etc  Framework pipelayBids expectedOperator       Sector  Field     Type of Work      Bids OutArco           UK      Blenheim  Subsea tieback    Pre-qualificationBG             UK      Various   Air/mixed gas     Pre-qualification                                 diving supportLasmo          UK      Various   1996 diving       Pre-qualification                                 support vesselMaersk         DK      Various   1996 IRM          Pre-qualificationMarathon       UK      Various   Long-term IRM     Pre-qualificationNAM            NL      Various   Pipeline work     Pre-qualificationOccidental     NL      Various   Air diving/ROV    Pre-qualification                                 servicesOccidental     NL      Various   Diving support    Pre-qualification                                 vesselShell          UK      Curlew    Subsea            ShortlyTexaco         UK      Unnamed   Subsea            Pre-qualificationTexaco         UK      Galley    Pipelay           Pre-qualificationWintershall    UK      Windermere Pipelay          Pre-qualificationRecent awardsOperator       Sector  Field     Type of work      ContractorAmoco          UK      Arkwright Pipelay           AllseasNorsk Hydro    Nor     Njord     Risers/service    Coflexip Stena                                 lines             OffshoreShell          UK      Fulmar    Pipelay/diving    Allseas/CSOBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SHELL INITIATES COMPETITION FOR SHEARWATER DESIGNShell is proposing that the main development contract(s) for theShearwater Field in the Central North Sea will be awarded following adesign competition.  The scope of work will include detailed design,fabrication, installation, hook-up and commissioning of topsides for upto two lightweight wellhead structures bridge-linked to a PUQ platform,topsides for which will weigh about 15,000 tonnes, plus the supportingstructure for the PUQ only.  The value of the work is put at #450m($697m).  Written applications to participate in the designcompetition, requests for copies of the pre-qualification andcontractor screening questionnaires need to be received by January 12(10.00 hrs).*  Shell, Aberdeen, is pre-qualifying companies for a variety ofcontracts, in relation to the development of its North Sea fields.  Thelist includes: engineering design, project support and procurement;pipelines, flowlines and umbilicals; pipeline tie-ins; fabricationincluding topsides facilities modules of up to 2,000 tonnes, 5,000t and10,000t and accommodation modules up to 2,500t, substructure and subseamanifolds and structures; installation; hook-up and commissioning.Written applications for documents must be received by January 12.In a separate entry, Shell is pre-qualifying contractors for the supplyof a subsea pipe-in-pipe thermal insulation system for Etap.  This willconsist of a carbon steel carrier sleeve around a carbon steel productlinepipe, about 47 kms in length with an outside diameter in the sizerange of 16-24 inches, carrying hydrocarbon product at temperatures inexcess of 160 deg C.  The estimated contract value is #17m.  Thenotices cover the period until the OSCAR scheme is fully operational.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STATOIL AWARDS DRESSER RAND TURBO-MACHINERY FRAME CONTRACTStatoil has awarded Dresser Rand a frame contract worth some Kr 1.5bn($236m) for delivery of turbo-machinery.  The five-year contract,including options for extensions by three and two years, is forexisting and new projects, such as Aasgard and the Gullfaks satellites,and covers complete gas-turbine-driven compressor trains andintegration of electrically-powered compressor trains with gas-turbine-driven generators.  The work also includes the purchase of technicalsupport and spare parts, with options for service and maintenance.Equipment supplied will be used to export and reinject gas and forpower generation on installations.  Statoil expects the deal to achievecost savings of about 10% compared with earlier purchases in the samearea.*  Bids close with Statoil early next month for a long-term frameworkagreement involving a number of pipelay projects, including Aasgard.Statoil has also advertised in the Official Journal requirements for awide range of products and services, including equipment and servicesrelating to the Heidrun, NorFra, Aasgard and Europipe II projects.  Thelists cover equipment and services for new pipelines, platforms, FPSOsand terminals, plus ongoing maintenance and modifications, officeequipment and computer supplies.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TEXACO ISSUES NOTICE FOR PIPELINE SYSTEM WORKTexaco, London, has advertised a requirement for the detailedengineering, procurement, installation, testing and pre-commissioningof oil and gas pipeline systems in the UK Central North Sea.  The entryis thought to refer to the proposed Galley development in block 15/23.The pipelines are expected to be between six inches and 12 inches indiameter and are required for the export of processed oil and processedor unprocessed gas.  The water depth is up to 150 metres.  Pipelinelength will be between seven kms and 30 kms. The workscope may includethe design and installation of spool connections, SSIVs and platformriser installation.Pipelay and pre-commissioning of tie-ins is to be completed by thethird quarter of 1997.  The pipeline will link a new installation to anexisting host platform.  Replies are due back by January 18 and ITTsare expected to be dispatched in February.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MANNESMANN WINS CONTRACT TO SUPPLY BRITANNIA LINEPIPEBritannia Operator has awarded Mannesmann Handel a contract for thesupply of 185 kms of 27-inch OD linepipe for the export trunkline fromthe platform to Mobil's SAGE terminal.  A total of 50,000-55,000 tonneswill be supplied by Mannesmann's Europipe mill in Mulheim, Germany.First deliveries to a North Sea coating site will be made in June andshould be completed in mid-August.  The pipe coating contract is duefor award in April.  A pipelay contract was awarded to EMC last Autumn.BOL said that careful timing of procurement and more functionalspecifications had saved several million pounds on the contract.  Thechoice of an outer diameter of 27 inches on its own had saved some #2m($3.1m) compared with opting for the larger standard 28-inch diameterlinepipe.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BARMAC PLANS MAJOR INVESTMENT IN NIGG TO MEET CONSTRUCTION NEEDSBarmac is planning a multi-million investment programme to upgradefacilities at its Nigg yard in the north of Scotland.  The initiativeforms part of the company's strategic plan to address the needs of thechanging offshore construction market, which has seen the decline oftraditional fabrication markets due to depressed oil and gas prices,new technologies and the maturity of the North Sea.  At the same timethis is being offset by a growing requirement for floating productionsystems, decommissioning of redundant offshore structures, productionjack-ups, concrete structures and other dry-docking work.  The newbusiness could become equal in size to the old within the next fiveyears, it says.The Ardersier yard will continue to concentrate on servicing thereduced requirement for traditional structures, while Nigg and itsgraving dock will form the focus for the new business areas.  "Althoughthe traditional market is in decline, we believe it will stabilise ataround 10m manhours a year to the year 2000.  With this volume of workavailable and the continuous improvement in competitiveness we can winenough work to sustain a viable and profitable business concentrated inthe Ardersier facility," says Barmac.Up to #8m ($12.4m) is being targeted for modifications to the existinggraving dock at Nigg and for the creation of a custom-builtdecommissioning facility.  It is expected that the funding will comefrom Barmac's parent companies and the public sector.  Barmac aims toobtain planning permission and a waste disposal licence for the Niggsite, with a capital investment of around #0.5m envisaged to establisha custom-built facility capable of the containment and collection ofwaste materials for subsequent treatment and disposal.Other opportunities for business in an upgraded dock include buildinglarge production jack-ups similar to that used by BP for the HardingField.  Possible collaboration with civil contractors to build offshoreconcrete structures is also being investigated, as are thepossibilities of drydocking large semi-submersible and jack-up rigs forinspection and modification.  "This potential major infrastructureinvestment is a clear indication of the confidence our parent companieshave in our ability to win a significant share of growing new markets,of our employees' ability to adapt in order to capitalise on thesemarkets and of our determination to build a sustainable future for theyards," says Barmac general manager Don Wright.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PHILLIPS TARGETS POSSIBLE JACQUI START-UP AT END-1997Phillips' Jacqui prospect, in UK block 30/13, could be on stream by theend of 1997 if reserves are firmed up by two back-to-back appraisalwells to be drilled by the Galaxy 1, according to quadrant 30development director Pat Dinan, in a house paper.  The drilling of thesecond well is contingent on what is found with the first.  Of the twowells drilled so far on Jacqui, one indicated a gas condensatereservoir, while the other produced gas, he said.  A high pressure/hightemperature exploration well is being drilled by the Monitor on theJade prospect in block 30/2C.  If it is successful, two appraisal wellswill be drilled on Jade in 1997, with first production planned for latein 1998.Trafalgar John Brown and Kvaerner Engineering have recently completedsome conceptual engineering studies for Phillips to help identify thebest way of developing some of the remaining quadrant 30 prospects,confirming Phillips' view that they would benefit from a shareddevelopment plan.  Added impetus is given by the fact that theJudy/Joanne processing and transport system is now in place.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STATOIL ENGINEERS SEEK PATENTS FOR VESSEL AND LIFTING SOLUTIONSPatents are being sought by Brian Stead and Ove Gudmestad of Statoilfor vessel and lifting solutions which are claimed to offer cheaperremoval and transport of topsides and jackets to land.  For the largestplatforms a U-shaped main hull is proposed with a smaller removablehull inside.  For topsides weighing less than 1,500 tonnes asubmersible barge or ship with eight-metre steel shafts, plus a shearleg, is proposed.  Stead, in a recent house paper, says dayrates for abarge/ship and a shear leg would be only 10-15% of the daily cost ofthe large semi-submersibles.  For jacket and subsea template removalthe suggestion is a supply vessel with winches or wire jacks attachedto its sides.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BHP ACHIEVES FIRST GAS FROM LIVERPOOL BAY HAMILTON NORTH FIELDBHP Petroleum achieved first gas from the Liverpool Bay Hamilton NorthField on December 20.  The initial output is being used to commissionsystems and pipelines offshore and onshore and subsequently PowerGen'snew power station at Connah's Quay before full contract deliveriesbegin in mid-1996 (NSL  1033/5).  Oil from Douglas and Lennox isexpected to flow in the next few weeks marking the start-up of firstoil production off Britain's west coast.  Gas production from theHamilton Field is scheduled for early this year and from Lennox inseveral years' time.  Recoverable gas reserves from the development areestimated at 1.2 Tcf.  Peak gas capacity of the offshore developmentand Point of Ayr terminal is currently 300 MMcfd.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MAERSK BRINGS ROAR ON STREAMMaersk Oil and Gas's Roar Field came on stream on January 7, around 10months ahead of project schedule.  The small field will produce oil andgas from two horizontal development wells.  Roar has been developed asan unmanned satellite of the Tyra Field using a slimline STAR designwellhead platform.  Oil and gas are separated and sent via twopipelines 11 kms to Tyra East.  Initial production rates were notavailable.  Total recoverable gas reserves are estimated at 14 Bcm with12-18m barrels of liquids.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AMERADA AND DONG ASSESS POTENTIAL OF NEW DANISH GAS SYSTEMAmerada Hess and DONG have agreed to investigate jointly the technicaland economic feasibility of building a new natural gas transport systemin the Danish sector of the North Sea.  Depending on which technicalsolution is the most attractive, the system could require an investmentof some DKr 1.5-2.5bn ($269-449m).  A new transport system would beable to gather gas from Amerada's South Arne Field, on which apromising production test was run last year, as well as other smallerfields and could also be linked to the Norwegian system.  There may bea further possibility to transport gas to Denmark from the UK, Germanand Norwegian sectors.The existing Danish system has an annual transport capacity of about7.5 Bcm of gas, which corresponds to the total amount of gas which DUC(until now DONG's sole supplier) is able to deliver to DONG from 1997.With these deliveries the existing system will be nearing its capacity. From the turn of the century, DONG expects to be able to selladditional gas in the region of 2 Bcm a year.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STUDY SHOWS ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF AASGARD GAS WILL BE LIMITEDThe environmental impact of processing gas from the Aasgard Field willbe limited regardless of whether it takes place at Kaarstoe, north ofStavanger, or Kollsnes, near Bergen.  This is the conclusion of theimpact assessment submitted by Statoil and Saga Petroleum to theenergy/industry ministry in December.  The study covered expandingexisting gas processing facilities at the two sites as well as exportsand onshore pipelines.  Aasgard gas is relatively high in carbondioxide and because Kaarstoe has limited opportunities for dilutingthis content by mixing in other export gas, the carbon dioxide may haveto be removed after 2005.  This does not pose a problem at Kollsnes,which would be able to add Troll gas low in carbon dioxide beforeonward transmission to Continental Europe.The possible cost of a new fractionating plant at Kollsnes is put at Kr4.3bn ($677m), including the landfall.  Taking the gas to Kaarstoewould cost Kr 3bn, involving new construction and modifications toexisting facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996IEA FORECASTS NEW PEAK FOR NORTH SEA OIL PRODUCTIONNorth Sea oil output is set to reach new heights by the end of thedecade, according to the International Energy Agency.  In a newforecast, the Paris-based agency says production will peak in 1999 atthe earliest, at around 7m b/d, or some 1.6m b/d higher than lastyear's level.  Just under half of this - 3.2m b/d - will come from theUK sector and the rest from Norway, with small amounts from minorproducers such as Denmark and the Netherlands.  The IEA believes thisyear's increase will amount to 740,000 b/d, "split almost equallybetween the two sectors".The agency says the common view has long been that North Sea productionwould reach its peak in the mid-1990s and fall away quite sharply afterthat.  But the new peak "is substantially higher and later than recentconventional wisdom would have suggested, with consequent repercussionsfor the medium-term oil market".  The IEA also expects that thesubsequent decline will be more gentle than forecast as more largefields are brought on stream and smaller satellite fields are developedalongside existing ones.The IEA says earlier estimates suggested the decline rate for the NorthSea would be more than three times as large as that now predicted.  Itattributes the surge in North Sea oil production to improvements inrecovery technology, a highly skilled local workforce and heightenedfiscal incentives for offshore oil companies.  The growing role of gasalso enables more mixed oil and gasfields to be developed.The study also shows that original reserve estimates have tended to betoo conservative.  Technology-induced cost reductions have enabledcompanies to re-classify as economically recoverable oil that was onceconsidered to be uneconomic to produce.  The agency notes that of the400 oil and gas prospects identified in the UK sector during the past30 years, only 143 had been brought into production by the end of 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996GASUNIE RAISES GAS RESERVES ESTIMATESDutch gas monopoly Gasunie has raised its natural gas reservesestimates by 150 Bcm to around 2.5 Tcm.  The increase will pave the wayfor additional exports to existing and new customers, it says.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NIGG TERMINAL CARRIES OUT FIRST TRANSFER OF ALBA CRUDEThe first Alba ship-to-ship crude oil transfer to use the Nigg terminalin northeast Scotland took place last December, Chevron reports.  Usinga berth at the terminal, 510,000 barrels were transferred from theshuttle tanker Tove Knudsen to the 97,000-tonne Vesta for onwardshipment to a Chevron refinery in the Gulf of Mexico.  Previously, Albacargoes destined for buyers outside Europe were transhipped through theNorwegian port of Mongstad.  But with new Norwegian fields coming onstream the Alba asset team had to look elsewhere for a transhipmentfacility.  Alba's current average production of 86,000 b/d requiresoffloading from the FSU to the shuttle tanker every seven days.*  A further #0.5m has been shaved from Britannia drilling costsfollowing the elimination of the entire 133/8-inch casing string fromwell M4, drilled by the Sovereign Explorer at the subsea centrelocation.  The drilling programme, which also involves the Sedco 711,is already 11% ahead of schedule.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996CHEVRON WINS APPROVAL TO SWITCH FROM UNST TO SCATSTAThe Shetland Islands Council has agreed to Chevron's proposal to usethe airfield at Scatsta for transfers of flights between Aberdeen andNorthern North Sea oilfields.  As a result, from April 1 this year thecompany together with joint venture partners Unocal and Oryx will ceaseusing Unst.  Chevron procurement and logistics services manager BrianMountain said the decision had been based on economic factors.  The SICalso granted outline planning permission for a hangar for twohelicopters which will be erected after flights begin.  The contractsfor airline services on the new route have yet to be awarded.  The useof Scatsta allows the joint venture to be expanded by the inclusion ofBP, which further enhances the economics of the new routing.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996CONOCO UPS MURDOCH RESERVES ON BACK OF NEW WELLConoco has increased its estimate of gas reserves in the Murdoch Fieldfrom a 1994 figure of 222.5 Bcf to 351 Bcf following results from a newproduction well and better-than-expected reservoir performance.  WellD6 was drilled in an area initially thought to be unpromising after anearly discovery well performed poorly and the area had been avoidedwhen the field's five original producers were drilled.  However,analysis of the geology and the results of a major 3D seismic surveysuggested the initial well had intersected a badly-faulted area,missing the high permeability sweet spots in the reservoir.D6 was drilled horizontally and has become the best performing well inthe field, and possibly even the best producing Carboniferous well inthe Southern North Sea, says Conoco in a house paper.  With ahorizontal section of 1,635 ft, it is also the longest horizontal welldrilled in the formation, it adds.  Existing production wells have alsoperformed better than expected and it is estimated they will ultimatelyrecover more than 90% of the gas to which they are connected.Murdoch's field life is also likely to be extended by a number of yearsfollowing the installation of a compression platform this year andcommercial agreements with other operators to use the facilities as ahub for developments in the area.  Agreements are being finalised forMurdoch facilities to handle production from Shell's Schooner Field andthere are several other potential tie-in prospects in the area, none ofwhich would be economic on a stand-alone basis.  Further 3D seismicwill shortly be evaluated and three more exploration wells are likelyto be drilled over this year, with perhaps two more in 1997.*  The decision to pipe excess associated gas in MacCulloch rather thanflaring it put the cost of development above Conoco's #6 ($9.3) abarrel development target, the company says.  However, during thedesign and construction phase the project will be fine-tuned to reducecosts to meet the #6 target.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996JOHN SHAW BACK IN MARKET AFTER SHELL DEFERS KINGFISHER STARTThe Sonat Offshore semi-submersible John Shaw is back in the marketfrom November 1996 as a result of Shell deferring plans to develop theKingfisher Field in the UK sector.  Drilling of an initial sixdevelopment wells was scheduled to begin in the fourth quarter of 1996and a provisional letter of intent had been issued to Sonat for theJohn Shaw subject to the project go-ahead (NSL 1037/10).  It isunderstood that Shell deferred the project after the failure to find asatisfactory export solution and concerns over prevailing low gasprices.  No details are known of any revised schedule for thedevelopment.  The John Shaw is currently on contract with Amerada Hessin the UK until the end of October 1996.Shell still has potential requirements for semi-submersibles for CurlewField drilling from the fourth quarter of 1996 and a possibleexploration programme starting in the second half of the year.  TheJohn Shaw together with the Sedco 711 are likely to be a candidates forboth these programmes should they be progressed by Shell.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TOTAL TAKING SOVEREIGN EXPLORER FOR UK AND EIRE DEEPWATER PROGRAMMETotal Oil Marine is finalising the fixture of the Sedco Forex semiSovereign Explorer for a five-well deepwater drilling programme in theUK and Eire starting around August 1996.  The contract is expected tolast around a year and includes three deepwater wells in the UK sectorwest of Shetland plus a well in the Porcupine Trough west of Eire.  Theprogramme is also understood to include a high pressure well in thenorthern UK sector of the North Sea.  It is possible that one of thewest of Shetland slots could be assigned to another operator and it isunderstood that Conoco could be one prospect.The Sovereign Explorer is currently drilling development wells forChevron on the Britannia Field together with the Sedco 711.  Based oncurrent progress both rigs are expected to complete the Britannia workin the third quarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ELF INVITES BIDS FOR ELGIN/FRANKLIN DRILLINGElf has issued tender invitations for two heavy-duty jack-uprequirements for Phase II development drilling on its Elgin/Franklinproject starting in 1997 and 1998.  Water depth at the central UKsector location is 92 metres and the programme involves drilling ofdeep high pressure, high temperature wells lasting about six monthsapiece.  Rig 1 is planned to start in mid-1997 and Rig 2 in mid-1998.Both units are being offered a firm contract of 30 months plus four,one-well options plus a further six, one-month completion options.  Theclosing date for the submission of bids is February 19.Elf has already fixed the jack-up Galaxy I for Phase I developmentdrilling starting in October 1996.  The Santa Fe unit has beencontracted for a firm period of 18 months but this could be extended tosix years.  It appears that, depending on the approach adopted, one ofthe Phase II requirements could be against the extension of the GalaxyI.  However, it is also possible that Elf could opt to use three rigson the project by drilling simultaneously on Elgin with two jack-ups.Availability of suitable existing rigs for Elf's requirement is fairlylimited.  Another Santa Fe jack-up, the Magellan, should be free in thethird quarter of 1997, while the Rowan Gorilla II and Rowan Gorilla IVare both currently available in North America and Trinidad from thethird quarter of 1996.  The Rowan newbuilding Rowan Gorilla V is duefor delivery in 1998.The Maersk Guardian is expected to complete the firm phase of itscurrent contract with Amoco Norway in March 1998, while the MaerskGallant is firm with Phillips Petroleum Norway until October 1997.However, both rigs have extension options outstanding.  A number ofcontractors are planning to offer newbuilding units to Elf, but thesewould only be an option for the mid-1998 programme given the lead timesinvolved.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BP RENEWS BENREOCH FOR A FURTHER 12 MONTHS TO MAY 1997BP has negotiated a new fixture of the semi Benreoch for 12 months fromMay 1996.  The rig was bought recently from Ben Line by Stena Offshore,which has negotiated the new deal with BP.  The Benreoch is currentlyon contract with BP until April.  It has completed a one-wellassignment to Texaco and is waiting on weather to return to BP to drillwell 9/9C-16, which is expected to last about 90 days.  The rig is thendue to undergo inspection and survey before beginning the new BPcontract.BP still has gaps in its drilling sequence with the Benreoch but isexamining the requirements of its internal asset groups before makingany firm moves to assign slots externally.  However, it is understoodthat both Conoco and Shell could be interested in taking sublets of therig in 1996 should the opportunity arise.  In addition to the Benreochfixture, BP still has a requirement for a semi to drill an HPHT well incentral UK sector block 22/25 spudding around September 1996.*  BP has confirmed a one-well extension of the jack-up F G McClintockretaining the rig in the southern UK sector until May 1996.  ThereafterBP's plans are not yet firm, but it is thought likely the operator willretain the Neddrill 7 through the year while releasing the McClintock.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BP TENDERS FOR WELL AND EXTENDED TEST ON ROSSBP has tendered for the provision of a semi-submersible, well testspread, flowlines and tanker to drill a 90-day well on the Ross Fieldand undertake a 30-day extended well test.  The programme is scheduledto start around June 1996.  The closing date for bids is January 15.The extended test programme will be the final stage in the evaluationof the field before proceeding in 1997 with a floating productiondevelopment.BP is currently carrying out an early production programme on theMachar Field with the TAPS group and the Sedco 707.  TAPS is alsoslated to carry out an extended test programme on the Clair Field fromApril 1996 using the Sedco Explorer.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ROWAN SECURES DUTCH FIXTURES FOR JACK-UP RIGSRowan Drilling has secured fixtures for two of its jack-ups in theNetherlands.  The Cecil Provine has been contracted by Elf Petroland todrill two wells starting early in March plus an option for a thirdwell.  The Rowan California has been fixed by Wintershall, also for atwo-well programme, but starting at the end of January and with optionsfor up to three additional wells.  The firm wells are in blocks K/10and L/8 and are expected to last a total of 160 days.Both jack-ups are currently in the UK but their transfer to Holland isindicative of increasing demand in the Dutch market taking up the slackin the UK being created partly by concerns about the gas price.  TheRowan California is currently stacked off Great Yarmouth after beingreleased by Phillips Petroleum.  The Cecil Provine is drilling itsfinal well for Amoco after the operator chose not to exercise its lastone-well option.Elf Petroland in turn has chosen not to exercise its final one-welloption with the jack-up Ensco 85, which it will now release early inMarch.  The rig will then enter the yard a modification programme,expected to last 10-20 days, prior to beginning a one-year contractwith NAM.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MAERSK OIL CHECKS MARKET AGAINST EXPIRY OF DANISH JACK-UP CONTRACTSMaersk Oil & Gas has circulated a check of jack-up drilling rigavailability for potential one to three-year contracts beginning during1996.  It is interested in rigs able to drill year-round in the Danishsector in up to 200 ft of water.  The firm contracts of all four jack-ups working for Maersk Oil in Denmark are due to expire during 1996.The Shelf Explorer contract runs out in April but still has two, one-year options available.  The Maersk Endeavour has a one-year optionleft to run from June, while the Neddrill 10 has two, one-year optionsfrom October and the Maersk Exerter a one-year option from November.*  Conoco is still seeking partner approval to drill a wildcat in itsremaining Dutch sector acreage, probably now spudding in the secondquarter.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BHP ISSUES INQUIRY FOR UK JACK-UP PROGRAMMESBHP Petroleum has issued a market inquiry for two UK sector jack-uprequirements.  It is interested in rig availability for one well inIrish Sea block 110/13 spudding in April 1996 and for a four to six-month programme in the Southern North Sea starting in June 1996.Replies including indicative dayrates are requested by January 12.BHP's rig options for the Irish Sea well appear to be limited.  TheGlomar Adriatic XI is already committed for much of 1996 and ispencilled in for BHP in the fourth quarter of the year.  There appearsto be little prospect of a slot opening up for BHP in the secondquarter.  BHP already has the Trident XIV on contract through 1996 onLiverpool Bay development work and there are currently no other jack-ups in the Irish Sea.A number of jack-ups are due to come available in the North Seaincluding the Maersk Enhancer in February/March and the F G McClintockin May.  However, contractors may be unlikely to make a competitiveoffer to mobilise a rig from the North Sea for just one well unless itcan be pegged back-to-back with BHP's Southern North Sea programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NORSK HYDRO REMAINS OPEN FOR EXPLORATION SEMI FOR 1997Although it has not made any formal moves in the market, Norsk Hydro islooking for a semi for general exploration work in Norway in 1997 for aperiod of up to one year.  The programme is not yet firmed up andultimately the duration of the contract is also likely to depend tosome extent on the rig selected.  With Norwegian rig availability verytight, Hydro is keeping a close watch on the market and is maintainingongoing discussions with contractors to enable it to make a quickdecision when the right rig becomes available at the right price.Norsk Hydro is also part of a consortium with Statoil and Saga awaitingfor the announcement of Norwegian 15th round licence awards beforeproceeding with the fixture of a rig for a shared deepwater drillingprogramme on the Voering Plateau starting end-1996 or early in 1997.*  Amerada, Conoco, Deminex, Mobil and Shell continue to discuss theprospects for sharing the term fixture of a semi-submersible to drillone or two wells apiece in the Norwegian sector from around the secondquarter of 1996.  Rigs which could be available include the ByfordDolphin or at a later date the Nanhai VI, which is in China.  However,it remains to be seen whether rates sought by contractors to cover thecost of the significant upgrading required for Norway will be withinthe limits set by the likes of Conoco and Shell which have alreadyabandoned one tender round late last year as rates bid were consideredto be too high.  While examining the options for rig sharing, all fiveoperators also remain open to sublet opportunities on an individualbasis.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996WEST ALPHA EN ROUTE FROM CHINA TO NORTH SEAThe semi West Alpha has left China and is en route to Singapore to pickup a wet tow back to the North Sea.  The journey is scheduled to lastabout 90 days.  The rig is committed to Esso Norge for a two-yeardevelopment drilling programme on the Balder Field starting in mid-April.  Ahead of the West Alpha, the Byford Dolphin is due in the UK orNorway between January 17 and 27 subject to weather after mobilisingfrom the Far East.  Dolphin is due to receive bids from seven yards forupgrading work including installation of additional columns and aderrick extension.  The rig is planned to be available in the North Seafrom March 1996.  The Transocean Seeker is due in the North Sea at thebeginning of February at the end of its journey from the Far East.  Ittoo is still available and is expected to enter the market in April.Elsewhere in the market, the Ocean Alliance is due out of the CromartyFirth at the weekend to return to work for BP, while the Sedco 704 isdue in the Firth for survey work before resuming operations for Shellon the Gannet Field as a drilling tender.Northwest European jack-up drilling rig utilisation dipped slightly atthe end of 1995 with the release of the Rowan California by PhillipsPetroleum in the UK and the entry of the Ensco 70 to the Verolme yardin Holland for upgrading.  The Ensco jack-up is due to return to workfor NAM at the end of February equipped with a new 15,000 psi BOP stackamong other improvements.  The California is stacked off Great Yarmouthuntil the end of January when it is due to mobilise for Wintershall inHolland.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SIRI DISCOVERY COULD BE FAST-TRACKED FOR 1998 STARTSiri-1 is a "substantial" discovery, which "appears commercial" andcould be on stream by 1998, according to operator Statoil Denmark.  Thefind, which late last year tested at rates of 5,988 b/d of oil (NSL1037/20), is estimated by the operator to contain 150m barrels ofrecoverable oil.  The discovery well is understood to have intercepteda thick section of sands in a well defined but are really limitedstructure.  Reservoir permeability is reported as very good.   The findhas been made in Palaeocene sandstones, outside the Central Grabenarea, generating considerable excitement in the Danish Energy Ministry. Most Danish fields produce from chalk.Statoil is already looking at a floating production project for Siri.Svein Larsen, head of operations in Denmark, said:  "We will beestablishing a core team soon to get Siri quickly on stream and ourambition is to begin production by 1998."  At the moment the favouredconcept for the field, which lies in around 60 metres of water, is anFPSO.  This Spring Statoil will shoot 3D seismic and is planning anappraisal in the Autumn.The semisub Deepsea Bergen abandoned Siri-1 on December 24 and is nowback with Statoil in the Norwegian sector, where it spudded explorationwell 25/10-6S on December 26.  The  well was abandoned because the holewas too small in dimensions for production purposes.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AMOCO ABANDONS NOEKKEN DUSTERAmoco is in the process of abandoning Noekken prospect exploration well2/8-15 as a dry hole, the NPD confirmed this week.  The semisub VildkatExplorer has been delayed by weather but is due off location later thisweek when it will head to exploration well 34/11-2S for Statoil.  Well2/8-15 was drilled to a TD of 3,725 metres and completed in rocks ofUpper Cretaceous age, said the NPD.  There was no test.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HYDRO PREPARES TO RUN ONE TEST ON OSEBERG AREA DISCOVERYNorsk Hydro is preparing to run a single test on exploration well 30/8-1Sre, having reached a TVD of 4,767 metres with the semisub TreasureSaga.  The well encountered gas in Brent formations before beingdeepened to examine the Statfjord beneath (NSL 1031/9).  Given that theBrent shows were described as a significant discovery, it is likelythis horizon is being tested, which could imply the Statfjord provedbarren.  The operator would not confirm the interval which it wasintending to test.Meanwhile, on the western side of block 30/8, Hydro has abandonedwildcat 30/8-2 with the semisub West Vanguard, having drilled down to aTD of 2,405 metres.  The well is untested and understood to be adisappointment.  The West Vanguard was earlier this week waiting onweather to get off location.  It goes next to the Oseberg Field fordevelopment drilling duties.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996VESLEFRIKK WILDCAT TURNS UP SMALL FINDAn exploration well drilled from the Veslefrikk platform to examine aseparate structure to the west, has turned up a small find, accordingto the NPD.  Well 30/3-7S encountered hydrocarbons in Mid-Jurassicsandstones before being suspended (NSL 1036/12).  The NPD said the findwas probably small, but a planned production test will establish thetype of hydrocarbons present and reservoir characteristics.  Positivetest results would lead to the well being tied back to the Veslefrikkplatform for production.  The well was drilled to a TVD of 3,994metres.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996DRILLING ACTIVITY UPDATE, NEW SPUDS AND COMPLETIONSIn the UK sector Amerada has spudded Fife development well 31/26A-A7with the semisub High Seas Driller having completed development re-entry 31/26A-A4 on December 28.  The semisub Kan Tan IV on December 30spudded exploration well 21/16-4, south of the Durward prospect, forAmerada.  The rig had previously abandoned Chevron's Irish sectorwildcat 56/15-1 after disappointing results (NSL 1037/14).  Amocoreports the jack-up Cecil Provine completed Bessemer development well49/23-E2 as a gas producer on December 23 and the same day spuddedBeaufort development well 49/23-E3.Arco is waiting on weather to move off tight exploration well 50/26A-7,which is now complete.  It is thought the well, which is believed to beuntested, will be abandoned.  The rig goes next to spud explorationwell 49/28-17 for Arco.  BP reports it is expecting the semisub OceanAlliance out of Cromarty by next week to spud west of Shetlandappraisal 204/25B-6.  It is not clear at this stage what prospect thiswell is appraising.  It lies to the east of last year's tightexploration well 204/25B-5, southeast of Foinaven.  Elsewhere, BP isexpecting the semisub Benreoch shortly from Texaco to spud explorationwell 9/9C-16.  The rig is carrying out some construction work in theErskine area, having completed development well 23/26B-20.  BP alsoreports the semisub Transocean 8 has completed Andrew development well16/28-A3 and on January 1 spudded 16/28-A4.British Gas spudded Crosby prospect exploration well 110/14-5, with thejack-up Glomar Adriatic XI, on December 26.  The rig abandonedLaggantulloch prospect exploration well 111/15-1 as a tight hole onDecember 23.  The well is understood to be dry (NSL 1037/14).  Over theChristmas period Chevron has completed two more Britannia Fielddevelopment wells - 15/30-M4, with the semisub Sovereign Explorer, and16/26-B5, with the semisub Sedco 711.  The former spudded 15/30-M5 onDecember 26, while the latter spudded 16/26-B6 on December 28.Conoco has reached TD on exploration well 15/19-7, to the north of theMacCulloch Field.  The semisub Sedco Explorer is operating.  This wellis understood to be targeting a Piper prospect.  There has been no newsyet of any planned test programme.  On exploration well 22/19B-5,Conoco kicked off a mechanical sidetrack with the semisub Drill Star onJanuary 2.  The rig is now drilling ahead.  Kerr-McGee spudded thesecond back-to-back Janice prospect appraisal 30/17A-12, with thesemisub Transocean 9, on December 30.  Appraisal 30/17A-11 wassuspended after a successful test programme (NSL 1036/12).Phillips completed Deborah development well 48/30-14, with the jack-upRowan California, on December 21, releasing the rig to stack.  Oryx hasbeen delayed completing Lyell workover 3/2-A08z, with the semisubNeddrill 6.  This well is being converted from a producer to aninjector.  Depending on the weather the operator now expects to be ableto finish operations next week.  Shell has run into mechanical problemson both of its current Central North Sea E&A wells.  Shearwaterappraisal 22/30B-15 has still not managed to get started on a testprogramme.  The jack-up Galaxy 1 has been operating at TD since mid-November.  NSL now estimates this well is likely to be operationaluntil late-February, unless Shell postpones the testing programme.  Ondeep exploration well 22/29-6 the semisub Henry Goodrich is pluggingback and preparing to kick off a second mechanical sidetrack having runinto problems downhole.In the southern basin, Shell may soon have better news to report.  Thejack-up Britannia is reported to be operating at a TD of 10,768 ft onHamlet prospect exploration well 49/24-20 having run 7-inch liner,which could imply a test programme.  In the Northern North Sea Shellreports the semisub Sedco 712 has spudded Osprey development well211/23A-P7, having completed P4.  Texaco is understood to be close tocompleting exploration well 15/29A-11, with the semisub Glomar ArcticIII.In the Norwegian sector Amoco is drilling the first new well from theValhall WP platform - 2/8-F1.  The jack-up Maersk Guardian completedbatch setting casing early in December.  In the Dutch sector Amocoreports the jack-up Arch Rowan spudded exploration well P/11-2 onDecember 29.  Occidental spudded exploration well L/11-A2 on December23, with the jack-up Neddrill 3 and NAM reports the jack-up Ensco 70suspended exploration well L/13-17re as a gas well, following a test,on December 21.  The rig is in port undergoing an upgrade.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ENTERPRISE BOOSTS NELSON AREA ACREAGE IN FARM-IN DEAL WITH BPEnterprise Oil is acquiring licence interests in four blocks close toits Central North Sea Nelson Field.  Under a farm-in agreement with BP,Enterprise is acquiring significant equity stakes in blocks 21/9 (30%),21/15A (30%), 21/15B (35%) and 22/12A (40%).  In return, the company ispaying BP's share of the costs of a major 3D seismic survey coveringthe three blocks (NSL 1023/10).  The survey, which got under way inOctober but was suspended the following month due to poor weather, isscheduled to be re-started early this year.In a separate deal, Enterprise is acquiring Kerr-McGee's equity inblock 21/15A, bringing its stake in the acreage to about 36.25%.  Inaddition, the company has secured a 45% holding in block 22/7,immediately northeast of Nelson.  The interest was acquired through anacreage swap with Elf in 1994 and a cash purchase from Total in 1995.Following the deals, Enterprise will have equity interests in 14 blocksin the Nelson area."These deals provide an excellent opportunity to capitalise on ourknowledge of the Nelson area where we will now have the leading acreageposition," says Mark Hope, Enterprise's UK general manager.  "Webelieve interpretation of the new seismic, together with a thoroughreview of all existing data, will provide new drilling opportunities inan area where existing infrastructure would allow small discoveries tobe developed profitably," he adds.The Nelson Field, discovered in 1988, has been producing oil at ratesof up to 190,000 b/d since coming on stream in February 1994.  Twoexisting oil finds - 21/15-2, drilled in 1981, and 22/12-1, drilled in1988 - are to be evaluated with a view to further appraisal in thefuture.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NESTE OFFLOADS 50% STAKE IN SOVEREIGN EXPLORATIONFollowing the completion of the sale of its UK oil assets to SandsPetroleum, Neste has agreed to sell its 50% share in SovereignExploration to Northgas, a subsidiary of Northern Electric.  Early in1994 Neste and Northern Electric formed an upstream gas company basedon Neste's southern basin interests including the Victor Field.  Inaddition to Victor, Sovereign currently has holdings in the SchoonerField, due on stream at the end of this year, and the Windermeredevelopment.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HITEC ACQUIRING MARINE CONSULTING GROUPHitec AS has made an offer for all outstanding shares of MarineConsulting Group AS valuing the company at Kr 257m ($40.5m).  The MSGboard has recommended the offer and the four major shareholders havesold a total of 50.3% of the company to Hitec.  MSG is a supplier ofoffshore loading systems.  Together with its other subsidiaries, Multi-Fluid and UDS (which it is acquiring), Hitec expects to develop newproducts with MCG, both jointly and separately.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ABBOT LAUNCHES #7.8M BID FOR OISAbbot Group, the oil and gas services group, late last month launchedan all-share offer for OIS International which values the technicalinspection concern at #7.8m ($24.5m).  Abbot is offering one share forevery two OIS shares, with a cash alternative of 24.5p.  Abbot chairmanAlasdair Locke urged OIS shareholders to accept the offer.  "Thefundamental problems of OIS under its present management run so deepthat there can be little foreseeable chance of a significantimprovement in levels of profits," he said.  OIS shareholders shouldbenefit from improved performance of the company as part of the widerAbbot group, he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996CAIRN ARRANGES SHARE PLACING TO HELP FUND ACTIVITIESCairn Energy late last month undertook a placing for cash of 4,377,703new ordinary shares.  The shares, placed by Societe Generale StraussTurnball Securities, represent 5% of the issued share capital of Cairnprior to the placing.  The proceeds of the placing will be used toprovide additional flexibility for Cairn's ongoing operations and inparticular, following recent acquisition successes, its activeexploration, appraisal and development programme, said Cairn chiefexecutive Bill Gammell.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HSE INVESTIGATES UK YARD BLAST THAT CLAIMED THREE LIVESThe Health and Safety Executive is investigating the death of threeworkers at Amec Process and Energy's Howdon yard, Tyneside, on December21, following a catastrophic pressure release.  The men were carryingout pressure tests on the pipework of a new module for Maersk Oil andGas's Tyra West project, when it is understood high-pressure nitrogenescaped into the atmosphere at high velocity.  Four other men sufferedminor injuries and shock.  The HSE said:  "Our investigation willcontinue until we have found the reason for the accident.  Theinvestigation will not only look at the physical evidence, but thoseworking at the site will be interviewed.  We will also examine whetherthere have been any breaches of health and safety law."The yard remained closed over Christmas and New Year, following thetragedy, but re-opened on January 3.  However, work on the Tyra moduleinvolved remained suspended until the end of last week while the HSEcontinued its investigations.  The HSE is expected to publish a reporton its preliminary findings shortly.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ENSCO 92 ACCIDENT VICTIM DIESThe crewman injured on board the jack-up Ensco 92 late last year (NSL1037/18), died in hospital shortly afterwards, Arco British hasconfirmed.  The rig was working for Arco on exploration well 50/26A-7,which has now been completed.  The rig is waiting on weather to moveoff location to exploration well 49/28-17.  The HSE continues toinvestigate the circumstances of the accident.The crewman is believed to have suffered serious head and neck injurieswhen he was hit by a high-pressure release of nitrogen gas from acylinder during a lifting operation.  Initial reports suggest a"nitrogen quad" (a rack of 48 bottles of nitrogen) was being lifted bya crane when one of the slings caught under a valve releasing gas at anestimated pressure of 4,400 psi.  The casualty was knocked back againstthe engine room bulkhead.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY PEOPLECanadian Petroleum UK (formerly CanadianOxy):  Jim Stretch and GordonMarriott have been appointed non-executive directors.  Stretch recentlyretired as deputy managing director of Agip (UK), where he had beensince 1987; Marriott was head of facilities engineering at the DTI'soil and gas division from 1980 until his retirement in 1995.Rockwater:  Abdul Kassam, previously general manager, takes overresponsibility for opportunities in West Africa for Brown & Root.  Theresponsibility for the management of Rockwater in the UK will now beundertaken jointly by Paul Alexander, operations manager, and MarkDuncan, commercial manager.  Alexander will have overall responsibilityfor project execution, personnel issues, the company's ROV alliance,safety management and liaison between the UK and Rockwater's otheroffices worldwide.  Duncan will be in charge of business development,acquisition, client liaison and general business and contract support.Both will continue to report to managing director Chas Charles.Weir Group:  Paul Capell, previously with John Brown, has beenappointed managing director of Weir Westgarth.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFAgip has awarded SBM Inc (a 100% subsidiary of IHC Caland), in jointventure with Saipem, an operational lease for a floating production andstorage system for a five-and-a-half-year period for the Aquila Fieldin the Southern Aegean.  The Agip Firenze will be converted for thepurpose.  The FPSO will be installed in mid-1997 in a water depth of850 metres.  The total investment will be $105m, of which IHC Calandwill provide 50%.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFAmerada Hess, Aberdeen, has a requirement, in advance of the OSCARsystem, for oilfield equipment, sand control systems and screenscomplete with associated offshore service support for downholecompletion activities.  Replies are due back by January 19.  AquaticEngineering and Noble Denton Europe have reached agreement to providean integrated subsea marine and engineering support service to selectedclients in Aberdeen.  Aquatic will provide flexible pipeline andumbilical installation services, subsea engineering and technicalmanpower services and Noble Denton will provide supporting marine andnaval architectural services.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFBP Norge has confirmed an award to Brown & Root Energy Services worthan estimated Kr 400m ($63m) for the provision of integrated maintenanceand technical support services both on and offshore.  It has alsoconfirmed an award, worth an estimated Kr 12m, to Dril-Quip, for theprovision of wellhead and conductor services.  CanadianOxy North SeaPetroleum has changed its name to Canadian Petroleum UK and hasrelocated to Mallard Court, Mallard Square, Staines, Middlesex TW184RH, phone +44 (0)1784 429500, fax +44 (0)1784 429550 (see alsoPeople).Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFClyde Petroleum has issued $50m Senior Loan Notes which have beenplaced with four leading US insurance companies which all participatedin Clyde's first placement of $100m Senior Notes in 1990.  The newNotes have an average interest rate of 7.8% and are repayable from 2001to 2007, with an average life of 9.3 years.  The issue was arranged forClyde by BZW.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFDana Petroleum, the independent oil production company, plans to seek aLondon listing and raise about #16m from a placing, open offer andintermediaries offer.  The company, which produces oil in westernSiberia in partnership with some of Russia's largest energy concerns,plans to use the proceeds to develop the South Vat-Yoganskoye Field.Guinness Mahon has placed 145m new ordinary shares at 7p, while 57.7mnew shares are being offered to shareholders on a 3-for-10 basis.  Afurther 28.6m are being offered to intermediaries, also at 7p.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFDrexel Oilfield Services has acquired Sweco Oilfield Services, adivision of Environmental Procedures.  Sweco will be merged withDrexel's Brandt division for the design, manufacture and marketing ofsolids control equipment.  Industrial Control Systems has won acontract to supply a control system for an oil treatment unit inRussia's Aksakov oilfield in the Southern Urals.  Lasmo North Sea,Aberdeen, is pre-qualifying suppliers of diving support vessels tocarry out subsea activities on an ad hoc basis during 1996.  LerwickHarbour Trust has achieved ISO 9002 accreditation.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFMaersk has advertised requirements for the repair and service ofturbines, pumps, compressors, metering equipment, SCADA and ESDsystems, reverse osmosis water machines and a turbo expander.  Maerskis also in search of uninterruptible power supplies.  The contract willinvolve design, fabrication and testing of units to be located in apressurised unclassified area on an offshore platform.  Delivery isrequired by July 1995.  Replies are due back by February 5, 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFMelrose Energy, which made a recommended offer for Pentex Oil, reportedacceptances in respect of 19.4m shares, or 96.59%, when the offerclosed on January 2.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFNAM, Assen, has issued a general pre-qualification to establish andmanage a list of contractors for the independent execution of work inrelation to offshore production facilities to be installed in the Dutchsector.  The work categories include construction, transport andinstallation, hook-up and commissioning.  Completed questionnaires aredue back by February 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFPhillips Petroleum has a requirement for the development of a newproduction reporting system for the oilfields in the Greater Ekofiskarea.  The contract, with an estimated value of Kr 4m, will be for a 12-month period from February 1, 1996.  The operator has also published aseparate periodic information notice covering a wide range of equipmentand services for the Greater Ekofisk area.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFMeanwhile, Sabre Instrument Valves, of Altrincham in Cheshire, has beenawarded a contract by Phillips covering all surface instrument valves,manifolds and enclosures for the Ekofisk II project.  The order is tobe phased over the next three years, covering the duration of theEkofisk re-development programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFTexaco North Sea, Aberdeen, has advertised requirements for valvemanagement services for fixed and floating production systems and re-settable packers and bypass tubing systems for use with electricalsubmersible pumps.  It is also in search of marine drilling servicesfor its drilling operations throughout Europe.  Vector Internationalhas opened its first overseas operation, in Dubai, as part of its plansto expand internationally.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-24IA059-000325-B006-62http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey98.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233504 text/html 38126HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:32:55 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:34 GMTContent-length: 37939Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey98.html Sample Issue Copyright NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet January 9, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CONTRACTORS AIM TO TRANSFER SHARE OF RISK BACK TO OPERATORS (351 words) 1995 IS YEAR OF NORTHWEST EUROPEAN MARKET RECOVERY (332 words) 1995 NORTH SEA SEMI-SUBMERSIBLE MARKET (1668 words) INCREASE IN DEMAND IN HOLLAND AND NORWAY OFFSETS UK REDUCTION (1779 words) NORWEGIAN SEMI SUPPLY COULD INCREASE FURTHER (863 words) TRENT CUTBACK ILLUSTRATES UK JACK-UP MARKET FRAGILITY (820 words) STATOIL SENDS MARKET SIGNAL WITH DEEPSEA TRYM FIXTURE (293 words) CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996CONTRACTORS AIM TO TRANSFER SHARE OF RISK BACK TO OPERATORSContractors who have shouldered an increased burden of the contractualand insurance risks involved in the process of offshore drilling arenow seeking to take advantage of improving market conditions to reducetheir risk profile.At the beginning of the 1980s contractors enjoyed a period of highdayrates and were required to carry minimal risks under typicaldrilling contracts with oil companies.  With the collapse of the rigmarket from the mid-1980s, contractors were forced to accept lowerrates and then increasingly onerous contractual liabilities.Responsibility for insurance and legal requirements such as third partyrisk and pollution were passed to the contractor who also had to accept"catch-all" cancellation clauses which would allow early contracttermination under virtually any eventuality and in any event at aslittle as 30 days notice.Since the beginning of 1995, led by the North Sea, the worldwidedrilling rig market, particularly for semi-submersibles, has swungheavily in favour of the contractor.  Rising demand, notably for deepwater operations, and tightening supply as worldwide activity picks uphave transformed the market fundamentals.Firstly dayrates began to rise and then as availability becameincreasingly perceived to be a problem, contractors have been able tonegotiate long-term contracts to replace the well-to-well fixtureswhich have been the standard fare for the past 10 years.With profitable operations and a degree of employment security ensuredfor the immediate foreseeable future, contractors are now turning theirattention to off-loading some of the contractual risk as contracts comeup for renewal.  While this is being resisted by some operators, thereare contractors who consider the changes are no more than ofair andequitable.However, contractors may find it harder to win back the contractualground ceded in the 1980s than to secure higher dayrates and longercontracts.  Oil company contracts managers are familiar with the marketand accept that circumstances have changed.  However, insurance andlegal managers are perhaps less influenced by commercial factors andmay never have known a time when oil companies shouldered most of therisk burden in a drilling contract.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 19961995 IS YEAR OF NORTHWEST EUROPEAN MARKET RECOVERYThe past 12 months have been marked by a major recovery in theNorthwest European mobile drilling rig market.  This was mostpronounced in the semi-submersible sector where fleet contraction inrecent years left supply unable to cope with the increase in demand,driving up dayrates and drawing in equipment from around the world.  Inthe jack-up market the improvement was more modest and indeed it took arecovery in Dutch and Norwegian activity to sustain the market in theface of a fall in UK activity.During 1995 NW European semi-submersible drilling rig demand totalled34.6 rig years, up 23% on the 1994 total of 28.1.  In spite of thisrecovery NW European semi demand is still at a relatively low levelhistorically.  Since 1981, annual demand has only been lower in 1987and 1994 but activity over the past year should be viewed in thecontext of a continuing recovery in demand which began towards the endof 1994.Further evidence of the turnaround in the NW European semi market issignalled by a semi mobilising into the region for the first time since1992 and 1995 was the first year since 1992 that there was a net growthin the semi fleet which increased from 44 to 45 units.  The increase inthe number of rigs being actively marketed increased more substantiallyas two cold stacked semis rejoined the active fleet during the year andtwo others are being reactivated at year-end.  In addition, at the endof the year no less than three semis are en route to the North sea andtwo others are committed to follow.Semi departures in 1995, in spite of the tightening North Sea market,were a reflection of the growing worldwide demand for highspecification units.  Increasing deep water drilling activity in theUS, West Africa and South America created competition for rigs whichdrove up rates and severely limited opportunities to mobilise rigs backinto the North Sea.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 19961995 NORTH SEA SEMI-SUBMERSIBLE MARKETWhile semi demand rose substantially in the UK in 1995, this was partlyoffset by a fall in Norwegian demand.  However, this at least ensuredthat surplus Norwegian units were able to provide some relief in anover-heating UK market.  In the UK semi demand totalled just over 26rig years in 1995, up 42% from the 1994 total of 18.3.  In Norway, areduction in development drilling cut semi demand from 9.01 rig yearsin 1994 to 7.91 in 1995, a fall of over 12%.The marked increase in UK semi activity in 1995 was entirely due anincrease in demand for development drilling.  In 1994, 9.95 rig yearsof UK semi demand was absorbed by exploration and appraisal activity,while development and re-entry requirements accounted for 8.36 rigyears.  In 1995, the exploration total was almost unchanged at 9.94 rigyears while development demand increased by 93% to 16.1.Big increases in development drilling were posted by Agip, Amerada,British Gas, BP, Chevron, Shell and Texaco.  It is likely thatexploration demand would have also increased in 1995 but the heavyfleet commitment to long-term development work meant there was ashortage of equipment for short-term exploration drilling so thatpostponements were not uncommon.In Norway, there was actually a slight increase in exploration drillingwith semis in 1995 to 4.13 rig years compared with 3.73 the previousyear.  However, reductions in development operations by Conoco, Elf,Shell and Statoil cut demand from 5.3 to 3.8 rig years.The reduction in domestic demand and rise in UK activity and ratesencouraged Norwegian contractors to move rigs to the UK.  WestVanguard, Maersk Jutlander and Transocean 8 moved to the UK early in1995 on the heals of the Sovereign Explorer and Ross Isle which madethe switch in 1994.  Having faced the mobilisation of the West Alphaand West Delta to the Far East in 1994, Norwegian operators made earlymoves in 1995 to secure rig availability for a planned increase indevelopment drilling activity from 1996 to the end of the decade.Statoil negotiated an historic 10-year co-operation deal withTransocean initially signing up four semis for long-term periodsincluding the return of the Ross Isle from the UK.  Norsk Hydro and BPfollowed with fixtures to bring the West Vanguard and Maersk Jutlanderback from the UK.  Later in the year Esso booked the return of the WestAlpha from China in 1996 for development drilling on its Balder Fieldwhile Statoil further imposed itself on the market by fixing theDeepsea Trym for three years.  The rig is due back in the North Seafrom Mexico in April 1996.The return of the Ocean Alliance, Kingsnorth Explorer, Ocean Nomad andOcean Princess to the UK was secured on the basis of confirmedcontracts but by the end of the year the owners of the Byford Dolphinand Transocean Seeker were prepared to take the speculative risk ofbeginning to mobilise from the Far East to the North Sea without acontract.  This was as much a reflection of the weak floater market inthe Asia/Pacific region as the drawing power of the North Sea.The great importance of a relatively small number of operators inunderwriting the bulk of UK demand was again emphasised in 1995.  Thetop three operators of semis, Amerada, BP and Shell accounted for 55.1%of total UK semi demand in 1995.  This was slightly down on theirmarket share in 1994 of 56.8% but in absolute terms these `Group 1'operators clocked up a total of 14.34 rig years of semi demand in thepast 12 months compared with 10.4 rig years in 1994.The next tranche of UK operators generating more than one rig year ofdemand have been classed above as `Group 2'.  In 1995, there were fouroperators in this group, Chevron, Mobil, Texaco and Total amassing atotal of 5.62 rig years of semi activity.  In 1994, only two operators,Kerr-McGee and Texaco accounted for 2.45 rig years in this intermediatecategory.The remaining operators with less than one rig year of activity apieceare classed as `Group 3'.  In 1995 there were 12 companies in thiscategory accounting for a total of 6.08 rig years of demand comparedwith 17 companies and 5.46 rig years of demand in 1994.  The reductionin the number of smaller operators and the below average increase inactivity by Group 3 operators is believed to be a consequence of thetight semi market in the UK in 1995 which prevented a number of smalleroperators proceeding with short-term exploration programmes.The forecast of UK activity split in 1996 is based on current drillingintentions with an adjustment to allow for the postponement of someplanned work due to high rig rates, lack of availability and failure tosecure partner approval.  Any curtailment in activity resulting fromtight availability is expected to impact particularly on Group 3 plans.An analysis of Norwegian operator activity reveals that the big threeof Statoil, Norsk Hydro and Saga actually sustained semi activity in1995 at 6.43 rig years compared with 6.39 the previous year.  Thereduction in Norwegian activity was in fact due to a drop in demandfrom other operators from 2.62 to 1.48 rig years.Dayrates surge in 1995 on back of semi shortageWhile it was November 1995 before every marketed semi in the region wason contract and working, it was as early as February 1995 that 100% ofmarketed semis had a contractual commitment.  Apart from a slight blipat the end of the year when Rig 42 re-entered the market (although itis not operational until April 1996) the `contracted utilisation' hasremained at 100% ever since.  Since March 1995, the North Sea RigForecast Availability Index which measures rig availability in theupcoming three month period has remained almost continually at zero.With `contracted utilisation' at 100% and availability at zero, theinevitable consequence was strong upward pressure on dayrates whicheffectively doubled during the course of the year.  At the beginning ofthe year the dayrate range for a standard short-term fixture of a thirdgeneration rig in the UK was #20,000 ($31,200) to #36,000 ($56,000).The fixture which set the top of the range was scheduled for an Auguststart while the bottom the range was fixed by a one-well fixture of asecond generation unit.  A third generation semi was fixed in Januaryfor a 12-month period at $40,000 a day, while a similar unit was fixedto drill a high pressure, high temperature well at #28,000 ($43,680).As operators scrambled to secure availability for 1995 and beyond ratesrose rapidly.  As early as March a second generation semi was fixed forthree months from mid-year at $70,000 a day.  A number of operatorsattempted to resist the dayrate tide, setting negotiating limits at$60,000 and then $70,000 only to see these swept aside.  Towards theend of the year the acceleration in rates inevitably levelled out sothat the range for short-term, standard fixtures finished the year at#44,500 ($69,000) to #48,500 ($75,000).  The range for term fixturesfor this class of rig at the end of 1995 was #48,500 ($75,000) to#54,800 ($85,000).While activity in Norway fell in 1995, dayrates were buoyed by UKdemand and the rise in UK rates.  However, taking account of higheroperating costs, Norwegian sector rates generally lagged UK rates formuch of 1995, a reversal of the historical norm.  The squeeze on rigavailability in the region did ensure that at least some Norwegiancontractors were able to secure contributions from operators towardsthe mandatory pipe-handling upgrades which came into force in 1995.In January 1995, the dayrate range for a short-term fixture of a thirdgeneration semi in Norway was $55,000 to $60,000.  By the end of theyear the range is considered to be $85,000 to $91,000.  Term fixturesof third generation units began the year in the range $65,000 to$72,000 and ended the year in the range $75,000 to $95,000.While Statoil agreed standard term fixtures with Transocean for foursemis starting in 1996 at rates between $75,000 and $85,000, late inthe year an operator grouping of Conoco, Shell and Elf dropped plans tofix a semi for two years because they were not prepared to pay inexcess of $85,000 and in some cases over $100,000 for an upgradedsecond generation semi.  Shortly after,  Statoil stunned contractors byfixing a 20-year old semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla) for three yearsat $75,000 but it remains to be seen whether Statoil's message to themarket has the salutary impact that may have been intended.No Norwegian semi fixtures broached the $100,000 barrier in 1996,partly due to operator resistance and partly the lack of pure fourthgeneration demand.  However, in the UK a number of semi fixtures wereconcluded at dayrates above $100,000.  The contract which led the waywas for deepwater drilling in 1997 and 1998.  Mobil fixed the JackBates for five wells in water depths up to 4,500ft west of Shetland ata dayrate of $118,000 plus a lump sum of $12.5m to cover mobilisationand upgrading.  A slot was assigned to Marathon for a deep water welloff Eire at a rate believed to be in the region of $144,000 including apro rata apportionment of the lump sum costs.At the beginning of 1995 rates for short-term, high specificationfixtures in the UK were in the range #28,000 ($43,000)to #43,500($68,000).  By the end of the year the range was #52,000 ($80,000) to#71,000 ($110,000) for fixtures starting in 1996, a virtual doublingover the course of the year.  At the end of 1995 deep water demandremained high worldwide maintaining upward pressure on rates at the topof the market.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996INCREASE IN DEMAND IN HOLLAND AND NORWAY OFFSETS UK REDUCTIONIn spite of an 8.6% fall in UK activity, demand for jack-ups offshoreNorthwest Europe grew in 1995 by 8.4% compared with the previous year.Rising demand in Holland and Norway compensated for the UK slippage.There was also a slight reduction in Danish demand while the first wellwas drilled offshore France for 10 years.In 1995 jack-up demand in the region totalled 31.79 rig years, comparedwith 29.33 the previous year.  UK activity slipped back from 17.86 to16.33 rig years with one factor being the initial impact of thereduction in UK gas prices arising from the continuing privatisation ofthe gas supply industry.  In Holland, there was a recovery from thevery low level of activity in 1994 when there was concern about thefiscal regime and prospectivity.  As a result demand rose in 1995 to atotal of 7.06 rig years compared with 4.88 the previous year, anincrease of almost 45%.Norway also posted an increase in jack-up activity in 1995 as long-termdevelopment drilling operations got underway on a number of fields inthe Southern Norwegian sector of the North Sea.  Demand totalled 4.74rig years including time spent in the yard by two rigs which wereupgraded on contract.  This compared with a total of 2.67 rig years in1994.Danish activity slipped back slightly in 1995 to 3.46 rig yearscompared with 3.92 the previous year but after a cutback to threedrilling units in 1994, Maersk Oil & Gas resumed a four-rig operationin the fourth quarter of 1995.  Amerada Hess was the only otheroperator to drill offshore Denmark with a jack-up in 1995 althoughStatoil drilled a well at the end of the year with the semi DeepseaBergen.In the UK, British Gas has lost two-thirds of its market share in theindustrial gas supply sector and now faces the loss of its domesticmonopoly from 1997, some five years earlier than previously expected.As a result the former state utility has over-contracted and is facedwith managing a growing surplus of gas.  While the problem is atemporary feature of the liberalisation of the supply industry it isexpected to take some years to work through the system.As a consequence of the fall in gas prices Conoco deferred plans todevelop the Viking Fs field, where two development wells were planned,and suspended its contract with the Neddrill 4.  Gaps opened in Shell'sdrilling sequence with the jack-up Britannia as drilling to sustaincontract deliveries to British Gas was deferred.  In the second half ofthe year some operators experienced problems securing partner approvalfor planned exploration wells due to the weak medium term outlook forUK gas prices.  Other early consequences such as Phillips postponementof additional drilling on the Judy Field and Shell's delay in the startof its planned Shearwater development had no impact on the 1995 jack-upmarket.The NW European jack-up fleet was relatively stable in 1995, startingthe year totalling 34 units and ending the year at 35.  Early in 1995the Neddrill Trigon left for Argentina and a contract with Total.Effectively this was the only departure of a North Sea rig during theyear although the Perro Negro 5 arrived from Italy to drill a well forElf in the Bay of Biscay offshore France and then left again.  Apartfrom the brief visit of the Saipem jack-up there were two otheradditions to the jack-up fleet.  Global Marine completed the extensiveupgrading of the former British Gas accommodation/slant drilling unitBay Driller which entered competitive operations as the Glomar AdriaticXI.  Santa Fe brought its heavy-duty jack-up Monitor back fromAustralia where it had been mobilised by Esso in 1994.Looking at UK jack-up demand in terms of operator activity, just threecompanies, Mobil, Phillips and Shell maintained more than two rig yearsof activity during 1995.  In total these three `Group 1' companiesaccounted for 7.05 rig years of activity.  There were five companies,Amoco, Arco, BHP, BP and Conoco in the `Group 2' middle range whicheach clocked-up between one and two rig years with jack-ups in the UKaccounting for a total of 6.83 rig years of demand.  The remainingeight `Group 3' operators which generated less than one rig year ofactivity apiece accounted for a total of just 2.3 rig years of activityin 1995.This profile of operator activity is somewhat different from 1994 whenoverall UK activity was slightly higher.  Group 1 activity was less in1994 with just two operators, Phillips and Shell amassing a total of5.7 rig years between them.  There was more Group 2 activity with sixcompanies, Amoco, Arco, BP, Conoco, Elf and Mobil maintaining a totalof eight rig years of jack-up activity.  Group 3 comprised a total of13 companies which generated a total of 4 rig years of demand.Like the semi market the UK jack-up market in 1995 was reliant on asmaller number of operators.  There were fewer operators drilling justone or two wells in 1995 than in 1994.  This was a consequence of adrop in UK jack-up exploration activity (see below) which may have beenpartly due to smaller operators dropping planned wells due to reducedgas price expectations and partly due to the generally tight North Seajack-up market which left few opportunities to secure a rig at shortnotice.The outlook suggests no individual operator will sustain more than tworig years of demand during 1996, increasing the proportion of Group 2and Group 3 operators in the market.UK jack-up development drilling up, but exploration downDevelopment drilling and production related operations using jack-upunits increased in the UK in 1995 by almost 27% in spite of the slightoverall drop in UK demand.  The converse is that jack-up explorationoperations measured in terms of rig demand dropped by 47% compared with1994.Increases in development drilling and re-entry operations by Amoco,Arco, Conoco, Lasmo, Mobil and Phillips lifted activity to a total of11.9 rig years in 1995.  However, an across the board fall inexploration drilling resulted in jack-up demand for e&a work fallingfrom 8.5 rig years in 1994 to 4.5 in 1995.Partly exploration fell in 1995 because the UK upstream activity cyclehad moved into a development drilling phase, but in the second half ofthe year fears about weak gas prices in the medium term had an impacton exploration.  The tight rig market in the region also left fewopportunities for smaller operators to pick up a rig at short notice.It is evident from the analysis above that fewer small UK operatorsdrilled with jack-ups in 1995.Development drilling and production-related activity with jack-ups alsoincreased in the Netherlands in 1995.  In 1994, there was just 2.37 rigyears of jack-up demand on development operations but in 1995 thisincreased to 4.33 as a result of additional activity by Unocal,Wintershall, Occidental and NAM with only Elf Petroland bucking thetrend by increasing its commitment to exploration in 1995.  There wasalso a slight increase in jack-up demand for exploration drilling inHolland in 1995 with 2.67 rig years of demand generated compared with2.52 in 1994.Jack-up rates rise on balanced marketThe Northwest European jack-up market maintained a fairly closesupply/demand balance in 1995 and while rates rose significantly at thebeginning of the year they quickly reached a plateau.  Althoughutilisation levels were broadly similar to the semi market, the jack-upmarket lacked both the severity of the short-term semi shortage and thefears about medium term availability which sustained the semi raterise.In 1995, utilisation of jack-ups averaged 87.2% calculated on the basisof rigs in employment and 98.8% based on the percentage of marketedrigs with current or future contract commitments.  This compared with83.8% and 92.5% respectively for the same measures in 1994.After being weak for much of 1994, jack-up availability began totighten at the end of the year and then all but disappeared by March1995, at least on a short-term basis.  The North Sea Rig ForecastAvailability Index which remained in the range of 20-40% throughout1994, fell to 18% at the end of 1994 and then quickly to zero by theend of March 1995.At the beginning of 1995 the dayrate range for short-term jack-upfixtures for standard UK sector operations was $26,000 to $29,000.  ByMarch 1995 the range was $35,000 to $45,000 and changed relativelylittle the rest of the year apart from some firming of the bottom endof the range to a maximum of $41,000 in the fourth quarter.In spite of the rising rates and tight short-term availability therewas no switch in the UK from short-term to long-term fixing and throughmuch of the year fixture volume remained low so that there was littleupward pressure on dayrates after the initial hike in the firstquarter.  The term fixtures that did take place mirrored or slightlylagged the short-term range indicating contractors shared operatorsviews that medium and long-term availability was not a concern.  At thevery end of the year there were indications of the bottom-end of therange falling away slightly due to rising first quarter availabilitybut this was based on evidence from the Dutch sector.The market for heavy-duty jack-ups in the UK in 1995 was influencedmore by semi rates than the jack-up market.  Short-term rates began theyear in the range $55,000 to $65,000 and ended the year between $80,000and $90,000.  The peak rate for this class of rig during the year wasfor a long-term contract starting in the fourth quarter of 1996 whichwas fixed in October 1995 at $105,000.  In the first half of the year aterm fixture was concluded for Central UK sector operations in 1996 at$75,000.In Norway, rates for heavy-duty jack-up fixtures ranged from a low of$72,000 for a one-well in-fill fixture, to a high of around $106,000for one-year plus options starting in the fourth quarter of 1996.However, two other term fixtures in Norway were closer to the bottomend of this range at initial rates of $75,000 and $82,000.Dayrates in the Netherlands in 1995 were similar to those in the UKranging from just over $30,000 at the beginning of the year to a peakof just under $42,000.  Two term contracts were agreed under floatingrate mechanisms linked to the market.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996NORWEGIAN SEMI SUPPLY COULD INCREASE FURTHERStatoil's fixture of the semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla) for a three-year period from May 1995 ensures the return of yet another semi to theNorwegian sector in 1996 although it will be nine years since theOdfjell purchase last worked in the North Sea as the Nortrym.  TheDeepsea Trym is due to leave Mexico in February to mobilise to theNorth Sea.The Norwegian sector semi fleet currently totals nine units but  withthe confirmation of the mobilisation of the Deepsea Trym is on courseto increase to at least 12 by May.  The West Alpha left China in thefirst week of 1996 to begin a three month tow back to the Norway whereit will begin a two-year contract with Esso in April.  The MaerskJutlander has for some time been committed to return from the UK toNorway in May 1996 to begin a 27-month contract with BP.While the current forecast for Norwegian activity in 1996 is based on12 rigs in operation from May, it remains possible that the total couldbe 13.  Without a 13th semi moving into Norway it will be difficult forAmerada, Conoco, Deminex, Mobil and Shell to drill planned explorationwells in 1996.  However, Conoco, Shell and Elf earlier abandoned atender to fix a semi for two years from 1996 due to high dayrates andthe low technical merit so of the rigs offered.Now Conoco and Shell are considering the options again with a view to apotential co-operation with Amerada, Deminex and Mobil.  Drilling rigsunder consideration are believed to include the Byford Dolphin,currently en route speculatively from the Far East, and the Nanhai VI,currently in China but being marketed by Stena Drilling against apotential purchase.  Whether a contract is agreed is very muchdependent on the commercial aspects of the deal.  All the operatorsalso remain interested in sublet opportunities with other Norwegianoperators.  For example, it may be that Statoil could have some slotsavailable in its schedule with the Deepsea Trym but this is not yetclear.A number of other issues remain outstanding before the 1996 Norwegiansector semi picture is finalised.  Statoil has still to fix a secondadditional exploration semi contract to start during 1996.  The fourthgeneration Transocean semi Ross Rig remains available from the thirdquarter of 1996 and would appear to be the most flexible solution forStatoil if commercial terms can be agreed.  Norsk Hydro, Saga andStatoil await the outcome of the 15th Licence Round awards beforeselecting a rig for anticipation deep water operations from the end of1996 or early in 1997.  While Saga remains a proponent of the EfExapproach of using a converted second generation unit, it is thoughtStatoil may prefer a more conventional fourth generation unit.  Thismight be another reason for fixing the Ross Rig for 1996 explorationslot.Statoil is also considering bids from Halliburton, Smedvig andTransocean for construction and operation of a novel Swath catamaranvessel for completion and workover operations on the Aasgard Field.However, it is understood that tender prices are well above the levelthat Statoil envisaged in its initial evaluation of the concept and itremains to be seen whether the project can survive a higher capitalcost.In the UK, some of Shell's plans for the latter part of 1996 remainunclear.  The company has deferred its planned Kingfisher developmenton which pre-drilling was scheduled to start in the fourth quarter of1996.  A letter of intent had been awarded to Sonat Offshore for thesemi John Shaw to drill at least six wells.  The John Shaw is now backin the market but Shell could still take the rig for one of twopotential outstanding requirements.It needs a semi for four to seven wells on the Curlew development,again from the fourth quarter of 1996 but it is not yet clear whetherShell will operate the semi itself or will leave that to the leadcontractor for the project development as a whole.  Shell also has arequirement for an additional semi for an exploration programme in theUK from sometime in the second half of 1996.  If no suitable rigs areavailable from Shell's Win 90s lead drilling contractors then thisprogramme could be deferred.  However, as well as the John Shaw fromSonat, the Sedco Forex semi Sedco 711 is also available from the thirdquarter.Shell is also understood to have indicated an interest in taking anassignment of the Benreoch from BP but it is not yet clear whether anyslots will be available.  BP has extended the Benreoch for 12 monthsfrom May 1996 but as yet does not have a full programme for the rig.Vacant slots could still be filled internally by BP but it isunderstood that both Conoco and Shell have been approached as potentialsub-lessors should BP fail to fill the schedule.  Elsewhere BPcontinues to await development approval for the Schiehallion Fieldbefore making rig commitments for the drilling programme from late 1996and early 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996TRENT CUTBACK ILLUSTRATES UK JACK-UP MARKET FRAGILITYThe vulnerability of UK jack-up demand in 1996 to cutbacks wasillustrated in December by Arco's decision to terminate its contractwith the Maersk Enhancer.  Arco has decided to drill one less well onthe Trent platform so that the rig is available from early Februaryalthough the notice period for contract termination is not up until mid-March.  Previously Arco had planned to drill on Trent until Junefollowed by some exploration drilling during platform installationbefore returning, potentially with the Enhancer to undertake completiontiebacks until late in the year.Ranger's Southern UK drilling plans for 1996 have been blowing hot andcold as the implications of the gas price outlook are digested by theoperator and its partners.  Until late in 1995, Ranger was planningmore than one well in the third quarter of 1996.  Then the wholeprogramme appeared in danger but now it seems to be back on the railsthough with perhaps just one well surviving.Uncertainty also surrounds Wintershall's Windermere development inblocks 49/9B and 49/4B.  Project go-ahead is still outstanding and thelonger it is delayed the more difficult it will be for Wintershall tostart development drilling in 1996.In November, BP cutback its southern UK sector drilling plans andtrimmed the F G McClintock contract back from one year from November1995 to just one well.  Now BP has firmed-up a second well for the rigand will keep it until May 1996.  BP's Southern UK jack-up programmestill remains somewhat uncertain thereafter.  It is expected that itwill retain the Neddrill 7 in the second half of the year but isthought likely to release the McClintock.While some southern UK gas exploration and development drilling plansfor 1996 continue to be fragile, increasing Dutch activity continues totake up the slack.  Allowances made for anticipated UK cutbacks andassumptions made about Dutch activity mean that there is no net changein the 1996 forecast of jack-up demand which remains at 34 rig years.As expected Occidental has extended the Neddrill 3 in Holland from Juneuntil February 1997 and is shortly due to take delivery of the Neddrill4 for a one-year programme.  Elf Petroland has fixed the Cecil Provinefor two wells plus an option from March 1996 when the rig is due to bereleased by Amoco in the UK.  However, the Arch Rowan, which inDecember moved from the UK to Holland to drill a well for Amoco, islikely to return to the UK for Amoco in the first quarter beforecrossing back to Amoco in Holland in the second half of the year.Wintershall is close to fixing a jack-up for a Netherlands programme oftwo firm wells plus three optional wells from March 1996, an earlierstart than previously expected.  The Rowan California is believed to beemerging as a front-runner for the contract.  The rig was stacked offGreat Yarmouth in the UK at the end of 1995 after being released byPhillips Petroleum.  Conoco Netherlands is still waiting for partnerapproval to drill a 21-day exploration well which is unlikely nowbefore the second quarter at the earliest.The Neddrill 9 still has a two to three-month gap in its schedule fromApril ahead of a well for RWE-DEA and a 300-day contract with ClydeNetherlands which is due to start in August although a start as late asOctober is still possible.In the UK, Elf has issued tender invitations for the provision of twojack-ups for the second phase of development drilling on theElgin/Franklin project, each for a firm period of 30 months plusoptions for four six-month wells and six one-month completions.  Onerig is for delivery mid-1997 and the other mid-1998.  It is believedthat one of the requirements is effectively a market check against theGalaxy I which Elf has already fixed for a minimum of 18 months fromOctober 1996 but this has not yet been confirmed.  Newbuildings areexpected to be bid to Elf for the 1998 commencement but this couldprove to be in competition with the Galaxy.  The earlier start datecould suit the Magellan or the Rowan Gorilla II and Gorilla IV (both inthe US) while the Rowan newbuild Rowan Gorilla V is not due to bedelivered before 1998.It is now clear the jack-up Neddrill Trigon, currently in Argentina,will return to the North Sea in 1996 although the arrival date is stillsubject to Total options.  The earliest arrival is May and the latestis September.  The rig is believed to be in line for a two-yearcontract with Saga in Norway for a development drilling programme onthe Varg Field, although possibly not starting until late 1997.However, Saga has yet to confirm the fixture although it is expected todo so later in January.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996STATOIL SENDS MARKET SIGNAL WITH DEEPSEA TRYM FIXTUREStatoil sent a strong signal on rates to Norwegian drilling contractorswhen it fixed the second generation semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla)for a firm three year period from May 1996 at a fixed dayrate of$75,000.  The rig is currently in Mexico and it appears that Statoilwill not directly compensate mobilisation and upgrading costs likely tobe well in excess of $10m.  Odfjell Drilling purchased La Murallaagainst the Statoil contract for a price believed to be in the regionof $27m.Other Norwegian contractors have recently been bidding secondgeneration rigs into Norway at rates in excess of $100,000 a day.Apart from making a significant saving over a three-year contractStatoil may also be hoping that it can use its dominant market positionin controlling half the Norwegian sector semi fleet to put a cap onrapidly rising rates.  It would appear to be signalling to contractorsthat it is not prepared to accept any rate even if it might be dictatedby the market at large.In the UK a term fixture of a third generation semi confirmed thecurrent market range at up to $85,000 while a fourth generation semiwas fixed for a deep water well west of Shetland in 1996 at a rate of$110,000.Rates for jack-up fixtures in Holland in December are thought to havebeen coloured by the anticipation of increasing rig availability in thefirst quarter of 1996.  As a result fixtures were agreed at ratesbelieved to be around $38,500 and $39,000 a day.  In the UK a short-term fixture was agreed at a rate believed to be in the region of$41,000 based on a tender round which closed at the end of October.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-25IA059-000325-B006-121http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey88.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233632 text/html 100984HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:34:35 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:25 GMTContent-length: 100796Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey88.html Sample Issue Copyright NORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES N.Y. RESTRUCTURING RECOMMENDATION: ISO TO OVERSEE MOVE TO RETAIL ACCESS (625 words) PSNH, CONNECTICUT VALLEY ELECTRIC SLAM N.H. PUC RULING ON UTILITY FRANCHISES (576 words) GM PLANS 25-MW COGENERATION PROJECT AT N.J. PLANT, OWNED, OPERATED BY QUIXX (393 words) FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE NORTHEAST IN JUNE 1995 -- FROM REPORTS TO FERC (37 words) RESTRUCTURING MMWEC SEES TRANSMISSION, MARKET POWER ISSUES AS IMPEDIMENT TO NEPOOL REFORM (486 words) NUG/MARKETER GROUP WANTS INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR TO REPLACE NEPOOL (556 words) D.C. PSC OPENS COMPETITION PROCEEDING; SEEKS WRITTEN COMMENTS BY END OF MARCH (389 words) GREEN MOUNTAIN POWER RESTRUCTURING PLAN WOULD PUT GENERATION UP FOR BID (471 words) GENERATION, TRANSMISSION, DISTRIBUTION TO BE SPLIT WHEN BGE AND PEPCO COMBINE (261 words) HOLYOKE MUNI WANTS TO TAKE OVER DAM FROM NORTHEAST UTILITIES SUBSIDIARY (374 words) MOODY'S SEES FALLING UTILITY RATINGS RESULTING FROM INDUSTRY DEREGULATION (443 words) INDEPENDENT POWER INDEPENDENT POWER PROJECT BUYOUTS IN NEW ENGLAND (1025 words) CALPINE SEEKS EWG STATUS FOR PLANTS IN N.J. IT WOULD ACQUIRE FROM O'BRIEN (572 words) JCP&L SEEKS $18-MILLION RATE RECOVERY FOR BUYOUT OF CROWN/VISTA CONTRACTS (340 words) N.Y. PSC CONSIDERS RECOMMENDATION TO REVISE AVOIDED-COST CALCULATIONS (293 words) TRANSMISSION NEES CANNOT CHARGE FIRM TRANSMISSION RATE FOR PART NON-FIRM SERVICE: FERC (429 words) HOULTON, ME., WATER CO. GAINS NEPOOL MEMBERSHIP; BUYS FROM BOUGHT-OUT NUG (448 words) NUCLEAR POWER MAINE YANKEE OUTPUT TO BE LIMITED TO 90% DUE TO COOLING PUMP CONCERNS (429 words) 1,100-MW SALEM NUCLEAR UNITS TO RETURN TO SERVICE IN SECOND AND THIRD QUARTERS (198 words) DSM PSE&G OPENS 150-MW CAPACITY BLOCK IN ITS DSM `STANDARD OFFER' PROGRAM (495 words) MONITOR: CON ED IS SLOW ON CLEAN-UP, AND CRACKS DOWN ON WHISTLE BLOWERS (476 words) DOCKET WATCH CONNECTICUT (120 words) DELAWARE (29 words) MAINE (498 words) MARYLAND (74 words) MASSACHUSETTS (519 words) NEW HAMPSHIRE (232 words) NEW JERSEY (293 words) NEW YORK (944 words) PENNSYLVANIA (258 words) RHODE ISLAND (57 words) VERMONT (19 words) FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION (1270 words) CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   N.Y. RESTRUCTURING RECOMMENDATION: ISO TO OVERSEE MOVE TO RETAIL ACCESSEstablishing an independent system operator to formalize wholesalecompetition in New York and ensure transition to retail access is a keypart of restructuring the state's electric industry, according to a statejudge and a state regulator.   The recommended decision in the state's Competitive Opportunitiesproceeding also calls for separating transmission and distribution fromgeneration and for recovering stranded costs with an access charge imposedby a distribution company (Doc. No. 95-E-0952).   The recommendation was filed Dec. 22 by the state's Dept. of PublicService Administrative Law Judge Judith Lee and Ronald Liberty, deputydirector for the Energy and Water Division. Subject to review by the PublicService Commission, it aims to lower New York's high electricity rates andkeep industry in the state.   No timetable for the ``as soon as possible'' transition to retail accesshas been established, however, a PSC spokesperson told Northeast PowerReport.   Key parts of the more than 200-page review are:   -- Strandable costs ``may be made unrecoverable by the transition fromregulation to a competitive market for electricity.'' These costs could berecovered by a separate mechanism outside the market, such as anon-bypassable access charge or wires charge imposed by a distributioncompany.   -- Transmission and distribution should be separate from generation ``inorder to limit the exercise of market power,'' and T&D companies will needto serve all would-be buyers in the short term.   Lee said she saw as ``critical'' the reliability of the bulk powersystem, noting that it should not be sacrificed in any way in order toachieve the potential price reduction that may be associated with a systemof retail access. Therefore, ``effective competition at the wholesale levelshould be established first, with an eye toward adding retail access asrapidly as possible once a market is established and reliability isensured.''   Lee's recommendation was a ``tremendous disappointment'' to New Yorkindustrials ``and to any advocate of full and open retail competition,''said Barbara Brenner, counsel to Multiple Intervenors, the industrial userstrade group. ``It delays, without schedule, retail competition and, infact, appears to delay even the implementation of wholesale competition fortwo years,'' she said.   Utilities, on the other hand, like the proposal. Their trade group, theEnergy Association of New York State, applauded the law judge'srecommendation as ``a thoughtful approach to what is clearly an incrediblycomplex series of issues.''   ``Wholesale competition to the extent that the Energy Association hasbeen talking about is far more significant than what might exist today inNew York--and in most other places,'' said Howard Shapiro, theassociation's president.   On the legislative front, New York Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver(D-Manhattan) unveiled a proposal calling for an immediate freeze ofelectric rates and setting a goal of cutting them by 25%.   Further, under Silver's plan, utilities would be required to buy powerin a competitive wholesale market by September 1997. By September 2000,``if conditions ensuring safety, reliability...and access to a reasonablypriced power are met,'' customers would be able to choose their own powersuppliers.   Industrials reacted in similar fashion to Silver's proposal. ``We'restudying [it] carefully. We don't think it moves fast enough. We would liketo see retail competition by Jan. 1, 1997,'' Brenner said.   The Energy Association's Shapiro said he was pleased that at leastSilver recognized that ``competition alone doesn't produce a dramaticshort-term reduction of rates and that other issues must be addressed.''   Gov. George Pataki also weighed in on the issue in his Jan. 3 State ofthe State address, calling restructuring ``a major sea change facing ourstate and our nation,'' and citing the Long Island Power Authority's planto take over Long Island Lighting (NPR, 22 Dec '95, 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PSNH, CONNECTICUT VALLEY ELECTRIC SLAM N.H. PUC RULING ON UTILITYFRANCHISES   In a closely watched case, Public Service of New Hampshire andConnecticut Valley Electric have filed detailed arguments to the NewHampshire Supreme Court against a June 1995 Public Utilities Commissiondetermination that electric utilities in the state do not have exclusivefranchises.   In a Dec. 18 filing in a case involving Freedom Energy's request tocompete against PSNH for retail customers (Doc. No. 95-610), PSNH chargedthat a series of major state court opinions and legislative actions since1911 had created a legal pattern ``incorporating the economic model of aregulated monopoly in which service by a single provider was the essentialprinciple.''   PSNH listed a long series of instances in which the state acted on theassumption that exclusive utility franchises existed and said that the 1995PUC decision against exclusive franchises ``in effect overlooked the forestfor the trees.''   ``By insisting on a specific `tree' explicitly providing for exclusivityin electric utility franchises,'' PSNH said, ``the PUC majority missed theforest of authority'' that created an economic model based on exclusivefranchises.   PSNH also said the court should dismiss PUC claims that the stateconstitution guaranteed open competition in the electric utility sector.   It said previous court decisions had recognized the unique nature ofelectric service and the practical need for monopolies in the sector. Thecreation of the PUC in 1911 to oversee such ``sanctioned monopolies'' wasin harmony with the other constitutional safeguards against monopolies.   PSNH also invoked the state's ``administrative gloss'' doctrine, sayingthat the PUC's consistent rulings in the past in favor of exclusivefranchises plus the legislature's failure to interfere with theinterpretation created a ``binding gloss'' which deprived the PUC of theright to unilaterally change its policy now.   It said this administrative gloss approach was needed because nothing instate law explicitly authorized either competing franchises or exclusivefranchises. This ambiguity made the long-standing PUC interpretation of thelaw the crucial element in determining current law.   In a third major argument, PSNH said that the fact that the NewHampshire legislature passed a detailed bill in June 1995 creating aprocess to study ways to increase electric industry competition showed thatthe PUC did not have authority to make decisions on the issue.   It said that the authority given to the PUC in the bill to carry out aretail wheeling pilot was restrictive and fell ``far short'' of the powersclaimed by the PUC to set policy.   Instead, PSNH said, the message from the 1995 law was that ``thelegislature would set policy while the PUC would assault the legislature bygathering relevant information through the pilot program.''   In its filing to the state Supreme Court, CVE said that the PUC decisionon the franchise issue ``created an imbalance in the regulatory equation''in the state. ``The PUC order revokes the utility's right to be theexclusive supplier within its service territory, but does not relieve theutility's corresponding obligation to serve all customers regardless ofeconomics.''   CVE also noted that the legislature had a record of involvement in thepolicy issues of utility franchise exclusivity and that unless it delegatedauthority in this field to the PUC, the court should assume the poweritself.   Representatives of the PUC and Freedom Energy are expected to file theircomments to the court in mid-January. The court will hear oral arguments inthe case in February (NPR, 10 Nov '95, 10).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   GM PLANS 25-MW COGENERATION PROJECT AT N.J. PLANT, OWNED, OPERATED BYQUIXX   General Motors wants an outside party to install and operate a 25-MWcogeneration system at its Linden, N.J., truck plant so it can cut costsand focus on its manufacturing business.   The project would be developed by Quixx Corp., a subsidiary ofSouthwestern Public Service. Based in Amarillo, Tex., Quixx would own andoperate the plant, although GM said it may take an ownership stake. Mostpower would be used in house, though some excess would occasionally be soldto Public Service Electric & Gas, which now supplies the plant. PSE&Gcharges industrials about 7.5 cents/kWh.   GM has asked the N.J. Board of Public Utilities for an order declaringthat the project would not be regulated as a utility (Docket No.EE95100486). This is a technicality that non-utility generators usuallyseek in New Jersey, and GM pointed out that the plant would not supplypower or steam to other end users. However, the company is asking the BPUfor expedited treatment of the declaration, ``due to intense economicpressures and the planning needs of GM Linden for a prompt go/no goruling.'' According to GM, the factory serves as its export plant for smalltrucks and sport vehicles, a market ``which seems to gain new competitiveentrants each year.'' It expects that the cogeneration plant could bebrought on-line in 18-24 months.   The factory was built in 1936, and it still uses the original thermalplant to provide steam, heat and compressed air for vehicle production. GMattorneys Potter & Dickson, Princeton, N.J., pointed out that the plantemploys 2,700 workers, and said, ``Without the [project], the long-termviability of the Linden assembly plant remains jeopardized by competitioninternal to General Motors and from competition by other producers of smalltrucks and sport utility vehicles.'' Aside from the energy savings--whichwere not disclosed--shutting down the old oil-fired boilers would reduceemissions and compliance costs.   Thomas Noble, manufacturing engineering manager, told the BPU that theold energy plant will have to be replaced in the near future, and that suchan investment would detract from the plant's manufacturing business.Instead, he said, ``installation of a new, state-of-the-art, on-site totalenergy system, operated by a third party of experts, will enable GM Lindenplant managers and personnel to concentrate their time, attention andinvestment decisions on GM's core business...''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE NORTHEAST IN JUNE 1995 -- FROM REPORTSTO FERCIllustration(s):Table: FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE NORTHEAST IN JUNE 1995 -- FROMREPORTS TO FERC (This table is not available electronically. Please seethe January 5, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MMWEC SEES TRANSMISSION, MARKET POWER ISSUES AS IMPEDIMENT TO NEPOOLREFORM   Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric, saying it was speaking forconsumer-owned utilities in New England, has warned the investor-ownedutilities in the region that no reform of the New England Power Pool systemwill be possible without resolution of outstanding transmission and marketpower issues.   In comments presented to the NEPOOL executive committee, MMWEC said thatthe ``NEPOOL Plus'' plan for revising pool operations proposed by NortheastUtilities veered from the group's basic purpose of assuring reliability atthe lowest possible cost for all consumers (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 3).   It said that while NU's ``piecemeal'' plan would introduce bidding fordispatch, it would also ignore other key issues.   MMWEC predicted the NU plan would ``ultimately fail'' unless it includeda comprehensive solution to all pool issues. It said that the NEPOOLmanagement committee, where all members were directly represented, shoulddebate the proposed changes, rather than the executive committee.   MMWEC said the bid-based pooling system would not work unless there wasregional network service, under which all participants had equal access andequal pricing.   It said this could be done through contractual arrangements such asthose discussed in previous regional transmission group negotiations. Sucha system, run by a neutral entity, should eliminate unequal contract pathand pancake pricing problems while still compensating owners oftransmission for their investments, MMWEC said.   A bid-based system, as proposed by NU, would not work well in a trulycompetitive market, MMWEC said, because larger NEPOOL members would havethe ability to manipulate the system by controlling either a significantamount of generation or specific functional resources, such as 10-minute,non-spinning reserves.   MMWEC said manipulative actions or improper responses to market signalsby large members ought to be prohibited. It said that this rule could bepoliced by a neutral body which would hear complaints and levy sanctions.   The muni group said that pool rules should be made in the interest ofthe end user and that voting representation should remain limited tomembers which serve retail load. This would avoid giving power inside thegroup to players in the market which did not have a direct responsibilitytoward retail customers.   MMWEC said that any plan for bid-based dispatching must requiredisclosure of spot market and bilateral deals, including price informationand availability of bids.   It noted that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has alreadyraised questions about NEPOOL transmission rules, most recently rejecting aplan to allow increased bilateral energy sales in the region because thetransmission implications had not been addressed.   While the MMWEC proposals present a challenge to the large New Englandutilities, they also contradict many points contained in the NEPOOL reformplan proposed by the Competitive Power Coalition of New England which callsfor more rights in NEPOOL for non-utility members, the formation of anindependent system operator for transmission and a totally free marketapproach to the pool.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NUG/MARKETER GROUP WANTS INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR TO REPLACE NEPOOL   The debate over the future of the New England Power Pool heightened lastweek when the Competitive Power Coalition of New England circulated a draftproposal calling for replacing NEPOOL with an independent system operator(ISO).   Titled ``A Blueprint for a Competitive Electricity Supply System in NewEngland,'' the report said it offers ``an alternative to mere incrementaladjustments currently being proposed by NEPOOL incumbents.''   The Boston-based advocacy group for independents and power marketersdropped out of NEPOOL reform talks in October to pursue its own planbecause it believed the group was moving too slowly, according to JohnHowat, CPC executive director. Northeast Utilities recently proposed a moremodest reform that introduces bidding for NEPOOL dispatch in a two-phaseprocess. Called ``NEPOOL Plus,'' that plan has won widespread support amongNEPOOL members, according to NU (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 3).   CPC planned to meet this week with utilities to discuss its blueprint,which it describes as ``evolutionary not revolutionary,'' keeping thestrong elements of NEPOOL and transforming them into an independent systemoperator. For example, the ISO would probably maintain the same personnelthat are now employed by NEPOOL and use the same facilities.   However, the ISO would coordinate transmission delivery based oncontracts between buyers and sellers, rather than NEPOOL's current economicdispatch. A FERC-regulated network, it would have no corporate or businesslink with utilities or other market participants and no members, governanceboard or voting rules.   To maintain system reliability, the ISO would control some generation,procured through competitively secured contracts, or calls on generationassets.   The blueprint envisions an electric power system with six components:supply, supply aggregation, system operation, load aggregation,distribution and consumers.   While delivery would be provided at regulated prices, supply would befully competitive, with energy service providers serving as the chiefinterface with customers. The report envisioned many entities filing theenergy service provider role, including marketers, aggregators and utilityspin-offs.   The energy service providers would contract with generating companies,transmission companies and distribution companies to buy power and deliveryservices that could then be packaged and resold to retail customers. Energyservice providers might also provide additional services, such as bundlinga power sale with metering and associated equipment services.   The blueprint also gives customers the option of bypassing the energyservice provider and buying power directly from the wholesale market, anapproach more likely to be pursued by large customers than smallcustomers.   CPC recommended that utilities unbundle generation, transmission anddistribution assets through divesture, a concept that some major NewEngland utilities have already rejected. CPC said it supports strandedinvestment recovery and opposes forced contract re-negotiation betweenindependents and utilities, an approach pushed by some utilities to lowerstranded costs.   ``Our members are willing to look at renegotiations where arenegotiation would result in a mutually beneficial position,'' Howat said.``A pressure for forced renegotiation is really not a good way to movetoward a system that is based on contracts. What does that say to thefinancial community?''   ``Clearly had prices gone up dramatically, instead of gone down, and haddemand for power risen dramatically, I don't think the entities that areclamoring now for renegotiations of contracts would be singing that tune,''he said.   CPC expects to issue a final report in early January.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   D.C. PSC OPENS COMPETITION PROCEEDING; SEEKS WRITTEN COMMENTS BY END OFMARCH   The District of Columbia Public Service Commission has opened a formalproceeding on electric competition and is seeking written comments frominterested parties (Case No.945). Those will be due 90 days after the PSCissues its order on the Dec. 15 pre-hearing conference, which is expectedearly in the new year.   In launching the case, the PSC cites open-access rules proposed by theFederal Energy Regulatory Commission last spring. Although these only applyto wholesale transactions, ``the impact that the adoption of the ruleswould have on retail electric sales should not be overlooked,'' the PSCstated. Although electric rates from Potomac Electric Power are low for theregion--averaging 7.2 cents/kWh--the PSC ``recognizes that, if this fact isto remain true, the commission must be prepared to take steps to allow agreater reliance on competition and customer choice.''   Further, ``increasing competition among sellers of electricity willresult in increasing choices for buyers,'' the PSC said. However, it couldalso affect reliability, planning, economic development and theenvironment. Allowing retail competition could also allow new suppliers tolure away PEPCO's larger commercial customers, stranding fixed costs thatwould fall on remaining ratepayers. Therefore, the PSC wants to explorethese issues before taking any steps to open the system.   Among the questions that the PSC would like to address are: whether thePSC should refrain from instituting retail wheeling until wholesale marketsdevelop; what impact retail wheeling would have on various classes ofratepayers; what specific steps the PSC could take to encourage wholesaleand retail wheeling; and whether the commission should order PEPCO todisaggregate generation, transmission and distribution.   In addition, the PSC would like estimates on how much capacity would bestranded, and how those costs should be allocated. It also seeks commentson whether demand-side management and environmental programs should becontinued under competition, and how they would be funded. PEPCO said itwelcomes the investigation, though it noted that questions regarding therole of the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland Interconnection (PJM) must beaddressed by FERC.   Comments should be addressed to the Commission Secretary at the Districtof Columbia Public Service Commission, 450 Fifth St., N.W., Washington,D.C., 20001. Correspondence should reference Case No. 945 and the title``In the Matter of the Investigation into Electric Services, MarketCompetition and Regulatory Policies.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   GREEN MOUNTAIN POWER RESTRUCTURING PLAN WOULD PUT GENERATION UP FOR BID   Green Mountain Power has filed a restructuring plan with Vermontregulators which proposes to use an auction system to determine the valueof stranded generation investments and power purchase commitments.   The auction would not be a forced asset divestiture and the owner of thegeneration assets being sold could bid against other groups to retainthem.   The plan, filed with the Vermont Public Service Board Jan. 2 (Doc. No.5854), would deregulate generation and the sale of electricity whilekeeping transmission and distribution service under state regulation.   Retail customers would be offered competitive options for powersupplies, one of which would be a ``basic electric service package,''including regulated services from the franchise distribution company and``lowest cost available'' power supplies.   GMP said the division between regulated and competitive sectors wouldlet the marketplace establish pricing for those parts of electric servicewhich would benefit from competition while preserving a single providersystem where that would be more efficient.   In a statement, GMP said the auction approach is intended to avoid amajor hang up over the issue of how to determine stranded costs andrevenues. Instead, it said, the market would take care of thatdetermination.   GMP said its plan was based on 14 principles for restructuring reachedlast July by a Vermont state roundtable on electric industry restructuring.This included utility recovery of ``reasonable'' stranded costs and the useof a monthly wires charge to fund conservation, renewables and low incomesupport programs.   GMP said that under its plan, the distribution companies would havedirect responsibility for carrying out such service programs.   The Conservation Law Foundation, which consulted with GMP on therestructuring plan, immediately issued a statement supporting the GMPproposal, saying it would continue GMP's demand-side management effort atabout its current $4 million/year level.   CLF said that by supporting a committed stream of stable funding forconservation and renewables, GMP was taking a position already supported byNew England Electric System in its restructuring model for New England,issued in October, 1995.   The PSB proposed in December that utilities in the state submitrestructuring plans by mid-May 1996. It also proposed a series ofroundtable discussions early in the year after which it will issuerecommendations for specific restructuring plans (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 8).   GMP is the first utility in the state to submit a full plan and clearlyhopes to get an edge in guiding the upcoming discussions and PBS decisionsover the next six months. It said it hoped to work with other groups in thestate to turn the Green Mountain plan into the ``Vermont Plan.''   While Vermont Gov. Howard Dean (D) had proposed going to retail choiceby the end of 1997, the PSB has not yet proposed a date for actualrestructuring to begin.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   GENERATION, TRANSMISSION, DISTRIBUTION TO BE SPLIT WHEN BGE AND PEPCOCOMBINE   Baltimore Gas & Electric and Potomac Electric Power will splitgeneration, transmission and distribution into distinct units when thecompanies merge, which is expected in 1997 (NPR, 29 Sept '95, 1).   They said this separation will ``position the company to better servespecific customer needs and to be prepared for potential changes in theutility industry as competition increases.'' The gas business will also beoperated separately, and there will be a distinct District of Columbia unitto focus on the district's ``unique'' regulatory, legislative and communityrelations needs.   The utilities have also announced that the merged company will be calledConstellation Energy Corp. That is now the name used by BGE's independentpower subsidiary, which has 276 MW of equity in 27 operating plants and 10more projects under development. The utilities did not say how that unit'sname will be affected.   After the merger, BGE chairman Christian Poindexter will serve as chiefexecutive officer of Constellation and PEPCO chairman Edward Mitchell willbe chairman of the board. John Derrick, PEPCO's president and chiefoperating officer, will fill those same offices with Constellation, whileEdward Crooke, BGE's president and COO, will become vice chairman ofConstellation, overseeing strategic planning and subsidiaries.   In the separation of electric functions, the following appointments weremade: Robert Denton, senior vice president for generation; Ronald Lowman,vice president, fossil; Charles Cruse, vice president, nuclear; WilliamSim, vice president, generation support; Thomas Brady, group vicepresident, distribution; Andrew Williams, group vice president,transmission; and Sharon Hostetter, vice president for marketing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   HOLYOKE MUNI WANTS TO TAKE OVER DAM FROM NORTHEAST UTILITIES SUBSIDIARY   The city of Holyoke, Mass., has begun an effort to take control of the30.8-MW Hadley Falls hydroelectric station on the Connecticut River whichis now owned by Northeast Utilities subsidiary Holyoke Water Power.   The 50-year federal license for the dam expires in 1999 and Holyoke saidit plans to ask the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to award the newoperating license to municipal utility Holyoke Gas & Electric.   Under the plan, the Holyoke muni would add 33 MW of new capacity to thedam and use the power both to lower costs for its own customers by 17% andattract new power users to the area based on the low-cost supplies.   At the same time, NU officials said that Holyoke Water Power intends toapply to FERC to renew its license to operate the dam. Applications must befiled to FERC by June 30, 1997.   The city of Holyoke's plan won support from local voters by a 4 to 1margin in a non-binding referendum in November 1995. During the campaign,the city claimed the project would provide benefits to the city of between$160 million and $250 million over the first 25 years through a combinationof lower cost power, job creation and improved property values.   It also stressed that the benefits of the dam should go to the cityresidents, a clear dig at NU, HWP's out-of-state corporate ownership.   The city has begun a process to get input from public groups andagencies and prepare a plan for presentation to FERC. It has asked forcomments by Jan. 28.   In initial discussions, an intervenor committee for the city of SouthHadley, Mass., which is across the river from Holyoke, has said it willemphasize in its comments the need for the eventual licensee to remainfinancially viable during power industry restructuring in Massachusetts.   South Hadley also said it wants a full exploration of the environmentalissues involved in expanding the capacity of the dam and whether it wouldbe environmentally preferable to end all power production at the site.   Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric has assisted the city withdeveloping plans for financing the takeover and may possibly providefinancial assistance if the project went ahead.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MOODY'S SEES FALLING UTILITY RATINGS RESULTING FROM INDUSTRY DEREGULATION   Credit ratings of utilities in the Northeast are particularly vulnerableto electric industry restructuring, according to a new Moody's InvestorsService report.   Compared to those in neighboring regions, investor-owned, municipal andstate electric utilities in the Northeast ``with above-average costs arelikely to experience a deterioration in credit quality as some investmentsare unrecoverable from customers through rates,'' the agency said in aprepared statement announcing publication of its report, ``NortheastBreak-Even Analysis,'' authored by vice president and senior analyst JulieDoetsch, and Tim Fremont.   Contributing to this deterioration are expensive nuclear and fossil fuelassets and power purchase contracts with independent producers, much ofwhich may end up as stranded following deregulation, Moody's said. Itestimated that stranded costs in the Northeast total $43 billion, or 145%of the combined equity of the utilities in the region. This represents aquarter of all stranded costs of all U.S. investor-owned utilities.   ``Moody's does not believe that the Northeast utilities can be shieldedfrom the negative impact of price competition,'' the agency said. It addedthat it expects ``that many of these utilities...will be forced to bearsome of the financial pain associated with the transition. This scenario inturn may result in a diminished equity cushion available to debtholders,thus pressuring ratings.'' It said the weighted average rating forutilities in the region is ``Baa1,'' below the industry average of ``A3.''   In analyzing the Northeast, Moody's examined ``all major rated utilitieswithin two transmission interconnnects of Consolidated Edison of NewYork,'' including 25 investor-owned utilities in Connecticut, Maine,Massachusetts, New York, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, RhodeIsland and Vermont, plus two public power and two Canadian utilities. Theutilities represent over $153 billion in assets, $29.7 billion in equityand $48 billion in annual revenues.   Moody's looked at each utility's cost structure to find what price itmust charge for electric power to ``break even'' and cover its variable andfixed costs. Hydro-Quebec and the New York Power Authority, relyingprimarily on relatively cheap hydropower, fared best cost-wise in thisanalysis, while United Illuminating and Long Island Lighting, both at$105/kW, and Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric, at $99/kW, had thehighest break-even costs.   Moody's also found that power purchase contracts with NUGs affect thecost structures of two out of three utilities in the region. ``The mostseverely impacted are the small northern New England utilities. Whenpurchased power is included,'' Moody's said, ``the break-even prices forCentral Vermont Public Service, Central Maine Power, and BangorHydro-Electric each increase over 400%.''   For a copy of the report, contact Deborah Primiano in New York at (212)553-0383.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   INDEPENDENT POWER PROJECT BUYOUTS IN NEW ENGLAND   During 1995, utilities in New England picked up their efforts to buyoutcontracts with non-utility generators or win major concessions on powerprice and delivery dates. As a result several NUG projects have shut downor not completed. Several others have agreed to contract changes. Thefollowing is a state by state list of such actions involving major plants.The order of data in the following listing is: project name, size, fuel,location, on-line date, owners, contract status, plant status, and buydownsavings if available.CONNECTICUT1992   -- Killingly, 32.2 MW, wood waste, Killingly, under development by ARSand Hydra-Co Enterprises. Contract bought out by Connecticut Light & Powerin August, 1992 for $11 million. Plant construction canceled. CL&P to saveabout $100 million.   -- Torrington, 13 MW, wood waste, Torrington, under development byKenetech Energy Systems. Contract bought out by CL&P in August 1992 for$6.9 million. Plant construction canceled. CL&P to save about $50 million.1995   -- O'Brien Cogeneration, 54 MW, gas, Hartford, 1991, purchased byChrysler Capital Corp. Contract bought out in June, 1995 by CL&P with helpof marketer Citizens Lehman Power. Plant closed down September 1995. CL&Pto save $60 million through 2015.MAINE1992   -- Lewiston, 11.8 MW, wood waste, Lewiston, 1985, LFC Energy Corp.Central Maine Power paid $18.5 million to buy out contract. Plant stoppedproducing power September 1992. CMP to save $60 million through 2008.1993   -- Fort Kent, 31 MW, wood waste, Fort Kent, 1994, Alternative EnergyInc. CMP bought out contract in March, 1993 for $11 million. Projectconstruction canceled, CMP to save $131 million through 2024.   -- Houlton, 31 MW, wood waste, Houlton, 1996, Alternative Energy Inc.CMP bought out contract for $11 million in September 1993. Constructioncanceled. CMP to save $131 million through 2024.   -- Topsham, 80 MW, coal, Topsham, 1996, Caithness King. CMP canceledpower contract with project in March 1993, claiming failure to meetfinancial requirements. Project construction canceled. CMP to save $85million.   -- Beaver Ashland, 34 MW, wood waste, Ashland, in operation sincemid-1993, Alternative Energy Inc. CMP arranged to cover fixed costs and AEIsuspended plant operations starting in mid-1993 for between 16 and 64months. Plant not operating as of Jan. 1, 1996.1994   -- Fort Fairfield, 33 MW, wood waste, Fort Fairfield, in operation since1987. Developed by Hydra-Co Enterprises, U.S. Energy. Central Maine Powerbought out power contract and plant assets from owners for $78 million. Ittook over plant in October 1994 and now operates it as CMP subsidiary. CMPwill save $35 million.1995   -- Jonesboro, 27.5 MW, wood waste, Jonesboro, in operation since 1986,developed by Babcock & Wilcox 50%, ESI Energy 33%, LG&E Power 17%. In June1995 Bangor Hydro-Electric bought out the contract in Jonesboro and WestEnfield plants for $162 million. Plant shut June 30, 1995. Future status isunclear. BHE will save $62 million in two years.   -- West Enfield, 27.5 MW, wood waste, West Enfield, in operation since1986, developed by Babcock & Wilcox 50%, ESI Energy 33%, LG&E Power 17%.BHE bought out contract in June 1995 (see above). Plant shut June 30,future unclear.   -- Maine Energy Recovery, 22 MW, waste-to energy, Biddeford, inoperation since 1988. Developed by KTI 51%, Pacific Generation 16%, CNARealty 30.6%. In November 1995, CMP arranged with marketer Citizens LehmanPower to buy down contract costs. Financial details not disclosed. Plantcontinues to operate. CMP savings will be $23 million through 2007.MASSACHUSETTS1994   -- Energy New Bedford, 300 MW, coal, in development by U.S. Generating70%, Eastern Energy 30%. In May 1994, Commonwealth Electric canceled 83-MWpurchase contract, saying the project had failed to meet initial powerdelivery deadline. Project has received state approvals and is still beingdeveloped, although without power contracts.NEW HAMPSHIRE1994   -- Timco, 4.8 MW, wood waste, Barnested, in operation since 1987,developed by Timco Inc. Public Service of New Hamshire reached contractbuyout deal in March 1994, agreeing to make $41 million payment to coverplants in both Timco and Bristol. Plant closed October 1994. PSNH to save$60 million in Timco and Briston plant closures.   -- Bristol, 15 MW, wood waste, Alexandria, in operation since 1988,Alexandria Power Associates. PSNH reach contract buyout agreement in March1994 (see above). Plant closed October 1994.1995   -- Whitefield, 14.6, wood waste, Whitefield, in operation since 1988,Developed by Thermo Ecotek. In September 1994, PSNH reached tentativecontract buydown deals with plants in Whitefield, Hemphill, Bethlehem,Tamworth, West Hopkington and Bridgewater based on payments to the sixprojects of ``in excess of $240 million.'' Plants will remain in operationat lower power sales price. Total savings to PSNH from the six deals to be$375 million through 2007.   -- Hemphill, 13.8 MW, wood waste, Springfield, in operation since 1987,Thermo Ecotek. PSNH reached tentative contract buydown deal with the plantin September, 1994 (see above). Plant to stay open with lower power salesprice.   -- Pinetree Bethlehem, 15 MW, wood waste, Bethlehem, in operation since1986. Developed by American Tractebel. PSNH reached tentative buydown dealwith the plant in September 1994 (see above) Plant to stay open with lowerpower sales price.   -- Pinetree Tamworth, 20 MW, wood waste, Tamworth, 1987, AmericanTractebel. PSNH reached tentative buydown deal with the plant in September1994 (see above). Plant to stay open with lower power sales price.   -- Bio-Energy Corp., 12.5 MW, wood waste, West Hopkington, in operationsince 1984. PSNH reached tentative buydown deal with the plant in September1994 (see above). Plant to remain open with lower power sales price.   -- Bridgewater, 16.3 MW, wood waste, Bridgewater, in operation since1987. PSNH reached tentative buydown deal with the plant in September 1994(see above). Plant will remain open with lower power price.RHODE ISLAND1994   -- Newbay, 72.5 MW, coal, East Providence, Rhode Island CogenerationAssociates. New England Electric Systems (40 MW) and 11 Massachusettsmunicipals (32 MW) bought out contracts with project in February 1994 for$22 million. Plant canceled.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALPINE SEEKS EWG STATUS FOR PLANTS IN N.J. IT WOULD ACQUIRE FROM O'BRIEN   Calpine Corp. has asked the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission toclassify two New Jersey projects as exempt wholesale generators. However,it plans to sell all capacity from the projects to Jersey Central Power &Light under renegotiated contracts that cut rates, but obligate JCP&L topay all gas costs.   The 122-MW project at DuPont's Parlin facility and the 52-MW NewarkBoxboard plant would be acquired from O'Brien Environmental Energy, whichis under Chapter 11 protection of the federal bankruptcy code.   Last summer, Philadelphia-based O'Brien agreed to sell all of its assetsto Calpine for $107 million and the assumption of $90 million in debt (NPR,21 July '95, 13). However, NRG Energy, the affiliate of Northern StatesPower, later challenged the sale and the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Newark,N.J., agreed to hold an auction, where other firms could bid for O'Brien.The court was scheduled to begin hearings on Jan. 3 to consider the offers.Calpine general counsel Joseph Ronan said he is optimistic, since O'Brienhad rejected an NRG offer before the original takeover deal was struck.   Although EWG status allows power producers to operate ``merchant''plants, selling to various buyers, that is not Calpine's intention,according to Ronan. He said the San Jose, Calif., firm plans to sell allelectric output from the plants to the current buyer, JCP&L. However, itwants to avoid disputes over qualifying facility status under the PublicUtility Regulatory Policies Act (PURPA).   That law requires certain efficiency standards for both electric andthermal output, and JCP&L challenged the QF status of both O'Brien plantsafter prolonged outages due to a fire in Newark and technical problems atParlin. If a project loses its QF status, the utility can revoke contractterms and pay only its avoided cost--as Rochester Gas & Electric recentlysought to do to a Kamine/Besicorp project, before a federal court granted atemporary QF waiver (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 11). Calpine had already faced theproblem when its Watsonville, Calif., plant lost its steam host, Ronannoted.   Before applying for EWG status for the New Jersey plants, Calpinerenegotiated the power sales contracts with JCP&L, Ronan said. The newterms provide JCP&L with more dispatching at Parlin and rate changes atboth facilities. Under the new Parlin contract, only 41 MW of the 122-MWplant will be considered ``base capacity (though that can rise as high as50 MW under certain conditions), while the balance is divided into severallevels of dispatch capacity.   For the Parlin base load, JCP&L will make capacity payments of 5.97cents/kWh during the on-peak period, and no payments off-peak. For thedispatchable capacity, the utility will make fixed capital payments of$9.90/kW/month through 2003, and $6.40 afterwards, though Calpine may electto levelize all payments at $9.02. In addition, JCP&L will pay $3.50 in1995 for operations and maintenance, adjusted annually.   At the Newark plant, JCP&L will pay a base rate of 4.325 cents/kWh,adjusted according to various indices. In the original O'Brien contract,JCP&L was paying 6.17 cents.   In both cases, JCP&L would pay for all costs of natural gas, supplyingthe projects from the gas pool that parent company General Public Utilitieshas set up (NPR, 15 Sept '95, 14). Although it started that pool to cutcosts for its own peakers, GPU said it would also allow non-utilitygenerators to participate if they agreed to renegotiate contracts.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   JCP&L SEEKS $18-MILLION RATE RECOVERY FOR BUYOUT OF CROWN/VISTA CONTRACTS   Jersey Central Power & Light has asked the New Jersey Board of PublicUtilities to let it collect $18 million in rates to cover the buyout of two100-MW contracts with an independent power producer.   JCP&L reached a settlement with the developers of the Crown/Vista coalproject after a long dispute that wound through the BPU, state courts andthe state legislature (NPR, 15 Sept '95, 9). The 362-MW coal project wasoriginally proposed by Mission Energy and Fluor Daniel in 1989, but FluorDaniel later sold its stake to Ahlstrom Development and Entergy PowerDevelopment. When the partners concluded they could not bring the twin coalplants on-line by the 1997 ``sunset dates,'' they were granted an extensionby the BPU.   The utility--which chose 200 MW of the project in a 1989solicitation--said it no longer needed the capacity and successfullychallenged the extension in state court (NPR, 26 May '95, 6). Thedevelopers then got the backing of some state lawmakers to force theextension, but the buyout was announced before their bill cleared thelegislature.   To terminate the contracts, JCP&L agreed to pay $17 million, but it isasking to collect $18 million in rates, to cover all of its costs. Thatwould be recovered in blocks of $6-million over each of the next threeyears. The utility defended the request, saying purchases from theCrown/Vista project would have cost $700 million above market prices overthe lives of the contracts.   JCP&L is looking to collect the funds through the Levelized EnergyAdjustment Clause (LEAC), which passes along energy costs and otherexpenses without profit. In its $37.7 million request, the utility is alsolooking to recover $19 million in demand-side management costs.   Metropolitan Edison, another unit of General Public Utilities, alsoterminated its 100-MW contract with the Crown/Vista developers, and hasasked the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for rate recovery. Thatbuyout cost $30 million because of the different timing of the contractsand the costs incurred by the developers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   N.Y. PSC CONSIDERS RECOMMENDATION TO REVISE AVOIDED-COST CALCULATIONS   An administrative law judge in New York's Public Service Department isrecommending new long-run avoided cost calculation methods that would moreaccurately reflect industry costs. Adoption by the Public ServiceCommission of the new method could result in an increase in the costsincurred by utilities and ratepayers in doing business with independentpower producers, according to the recommendation.   The recommendation, issued Dec. 19 by administrative law judge RafaelEpstein, is part of another recommendation to establish a process forsetting fuel targets and buyback rates. Both cases (93-E-0912; 93-E-1075)were combined in January 1995. Briefs opposing the recommendations are dueJan. 8, 1996; final briefs are due Jan. 25.   The recommendation to revise calculation methodology endorses inprinciple independent power producer Sithe Energies' proposal to adopt the`firm method' for estimating avoided energy costs, not the `non-firmmethod' now employed by the PSC and favored by the utilities and staff.Epstein recommends exploring the firm method's application before usingit.   The recommendation calls for a generic annual proceeding based on aunified data base, a conclusion supported by staff and Sithe, but opposedby the utilities. As it is now, fuel targets and buyback rates aredetermined in utility-specific rate proceedings. Epstein recommends thatthe commission should narrowly limit the permissible scope ofcompany-specific adjustments prompted by individual utility's objectionsprovided in the computer model's data base produced in the generic case.   Epstein also recommends that the commission adopt four previous rulingsas the basis for determining which computer model inputs should be deemedtrade secrets. He urged that data ought to be considered a trade secretonly if the information is competitively useful and would not be readilyascertainable by competitors in an unregulated market.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEES CANNOT CHARGE FIRM TRANSMISSION RATE FOR PART NON-FIRM SERVICE: FERC   The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has told New England ElectricSystem that it cannot charge a full firm transmission rate for service to agroup of Massachusetts municipals unless it actually provides them withfirm service.   In a Dec. 29 order, FERC said that NEES could not charge the firmservice rate to carry 35.4 MW of preference power to the munis from the NewYork Power Authority since it was providing firm service for only 17.7 MWof the load (Doc. No. ER96-200-000).   It approved for filing a firm service charge for the 17.7 MW andrequired NEES to file within 30 days a new, lower cost rate for theless-than-firm service it was offering for the rest of the load.   NEES originally filed the transmission rate proposal on Oct. 31, 1995,saying that it was the result of negotiations with Massachusetts MunicipalWholesale Electric.   According to NEES, it was not obliged to offer any firm service to themunicipals and as part of the negotiations it had voluntarily agreed toprovide the 17.7 MW of firm capacity at MMWEC's request. In return, MMWECagreed to pay the firm rate for the entire 35.4-MW load.   The group was under pressure to secure the capacity to bring in thelow-cost power from NYPA's Niagara Falls and St. Lawrence projects.However, the town of Norwood questioned the arrangement and said that inthe past FERC had always required NEES to provide lower rates to the groupfor non-firm service.   In its order, FERC agreed with this argument, saying that the mere factMMWEC agreed to pay the high rate did not make it legally acceptable. Also,the fact that NEES was voluntarily offering 17.7 MW of firm service as partof the deal ``was not a sufficient justification for charging a firm ratefor transmission that is less than firm,'' FERC said.   According to FERC, NEES could collect the full rate for the firmservice, but it had no right to charge ``excessive'' rates for the non-firmservice.   FERC also granted a waiver of the normal 60-day notice period to allowthe rate to take effect at once. The parties had originally aimed atbeginning service by Nov. 1, 1995.   Currently, the NEES firm transmission tariff is about $16/kW/year. TheFERC order said that NEES did not have to offer the municipals its standardnon-firm rate but instead could propose a rate reflecting the fact that thenon-firm service agreed to in the negotiations with MMWEC would providesome advantages over normal non-firm service.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   HOULTON, ME., WATER CO. GAINS NEPOOL MEMBERSHIP; BUYS FROM BOUGHT-OUT NUG   The New England Power Pool has agreed to allow the Houlton Water Co. inHoulton, Me., to become a member, although it is not located within theNEPOOL control area.   The publicly owned utility in northern Maine is connected to the rest ofNew England through New Brunswick Power and was asked to make specificpromises to NEPOOL on meeting capacity responsibility requirements in orderto join the group.   In 1994, Houlton decided to drop wholesale purchases from Maine PublicService, which is located in the same area. Instead, it decided to take12.5 MW of supplies from a biomass power plant in Fort Fairfield, Me.,taken over by Central Maine Power through an earlier buyout deal.   Houlton switched to the CMP supplies effective Jan. 1, 1996, and under aproposal filed with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission on Dec. 11,1995, it will become a NEPOOL member Feb. 1.   NEPOOL said in its FERC filing that because of the link through Canada,Houlton would require scheduling arrangements inside the NEPOOL dispatchingsystem different than those used by other members. These were being workedout with Houlton.   Also, NEPOOL said, Houlton would not have to include in its adjustedload 3.4 MW from the Maine Yankee plant which is backed up by New BrunswickPower resources.   Separately, Houlton and MPS are continuing a dispute before FERC overthe level of transmission costs MPS will be able to charge Houlton for useof its system to wheel power from the Fort Fairfield plant (Doc. No.ER95-836-000).   MPS proposed a general transmission tariff in April, 1995, based on alevelized rate calculation system which would result in a $35/kW/yearcharge (NPR, 14 April '95, 5).   Houlton claims this rate is exorbitant and called it a ``back doorattempt'' by MPS to cover stranded investment costs.   With the case still before the judge, no FERC decision on thetransmission rate is likely for several months. Under the currentarrangement, Houlton begins accepting service from MPS on Jan. 1 at theproposed MPS rate. But it will be entitled to a rebate if FERC laterdecides to lower that rate.   In its arguments to FERC, MPS stressed that its proposal was based onnew FERC guidelines for transmission ratemaking. Also, it said that formerwholesale customers such as Houlton were not entitled to special low ratesfrom MPS and should pay the same generic rate offered to other customers.   Houlton argued that because MPS' transmission plant is old and heavilydepreciated the levelized system did not apply. But MPS said that itplanned major new improvements to its transmission system and a levelizedapproach was appropriate.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MAINE YANKEE OUTPUT TO BE LIMITED TO 90% DUE TO COOLING PUMP CONCERNS   The Maine Yankee nuclear plant will only be allowed to operate at 90% offull capacity, or 820 MW, when it returns to service early in 1996 after a12-month outage to repair cracked tubes in the plant's steam generator.   The derating is being imposed on the plant by the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission based on claims by an anonymous whistleblower that the plant'semergency core cooling pumps could not handle the reactor if it wasoperating at full power.   The claims, received by the NRC in early December, said that plantoperators knew about the problem in the late 1980s but nevertheless askedNRC to upgrade the plant capacity to 910 MW. The derating will effectivelyput the plant back to its original rating.   The derating will be in effect until the NRC does a thorough review ofthe situation, including the computer modeling techniques used to determineproper safety levels. It is not clear how long the review will take.   In the meantime, Maine Yankee officials were awaiting a memo from theNRC detailing the exact operating conditions for the plant. Once theyreceive it they expect to restart the reactor immediately.   Maine Yankee has just completed a major project to sleeve the tubes inits two steam generators to prevent cracking (NPR, 26 May '95, 10). Theproject cost plant owners, including Central Maine Power, NortheastUtilities and New England Electric System, $30 million in repair costs and$60 million in replacement power costs.   The loss of the 90 MW of capacity due to the derating will create a newfinancial burden although plant officials could not predict the cost atthis time. A spokesman for CMP said that the actual cost will depend onwhether the winter is colder than usual and more peaking power is neededand also on the availability of extra hydro capacity in the region based onhigher than usual water levels.   The claims about the coolant system have no connection to the steamgenerator repairs which plant officials said went well and came in only afew days late and under budget.   Maine Yankee president Charles Frizzle said that with the sleeving donethere was no reason to think that the plant would not be able to functionnormally for the rest of its license period, which ends in 2008.   Anti-nuclear groups have questioned this. Also, Standard & Poor's hasraised concerns about Maine Yankee's ability to maintain plant performanceover the long term, issuing a downgrade of Maine Yankee's corporate creditrating in December.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   1,100-MW SALEM NUCLEAR UNITS TO RETURN TO SERVICE IN SECOND AND THIRDQUARTERS   Public Service Electric & Gas expects to bring the Salem nuclear unitsback into service in the second and third quarters of 1996. Each unitgenerates 1,100 MW for a consortium of utilities that includes PSE&G (43%ownership), PECO Energy (43%), Atlantic Electric (7%) and Delmarva Power(7%).   The plants were shut down in May and June for unrelated problems withheat removal equipment and switch gear cooling fans (NPR, 23 June '95, 7).Although these were not major flaws, station operator PSE&G came to anagreement with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to keep the plants downfor extended outages in order to thoroughly inspect the problems and takepreventive steps (NPR, 4 Aug '95, 10).   The Salem station has been plagued by recurring shutdowns, and therestart plans call for improving human performance, operations,maintenance, equipment reliability and other areas.   PSE&G originally expected Unit 1 to be operating by the first quarter of1996 and Unit 2 by the second quarter, but those schedules have now beenpushed back. The utility has been purchasing power in the wholesale marketto make up the shortfall, while PECO already has excess generatingcapacity.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PSE&G OPENS 150-MW CAPACITY BLOCK IN ITS DSM `STANDARD OFFER' PROGRAM   Public Service Electric & Gas will be seeking 150 MW of capacity fromenergy efficiency projects over the next two years.   That block was set by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities in arecent ruling on the utility's demand-side management program for 1996-97(Docket No. EE95090415). PSE&G had originally requested a one-year, 75-MWstandard offer, but DSM advocates pushed to expand the plan and the BPUagreed.   Under the standard offer program, PSE&G makes blocks of capacityavailable and pays its avoided cost to energy efficiency projects. Since1993, the utility has been accepting bids for a 150-MW block, and in therecent case the BPU expanded that Standard Offer No. 1 to 185 MW forproposals submitted by Jan. 2, 1996.   The new 150-MW solicitation is designated Standard Offer No. 2, and willbe broken into three 50-MW blocks. These will provide declining payments,since additional capacity will reduce the value of savings to the company,and thereby, its avoided cost. That figure now stands at $5.45/kW/month forcapacity and about 2.6 cents/kWh for energy. However, the first 50-MW blockof the new standard offer will set prices 27% lower, while the second blockwill be priced 33% below Standard Offer No. 1 and the third block will beset 38% below it.   The BPU made allowance for a fourth block with no defined size at pricesthat would be 44% lower than Standard Offer No. 1. There will also be a15-MW residential ``carve-out,'' with at least half of that reserved forlow-income residences. For those projects, prices will be set 14% higherthan Standard Offer No. 1 for the first half of the contract period and 33%lower for the second half.   In addition, PSE&G will accept up to 10 MW of fuel-switching projects,but only at government-owned facilities. It will also accept up to 1 MW ofprojects that displace electric air conditioning in summer with chillerspowered by waste heat from cogeneration plants. These must involve existingcogeneration facilities that exceed 50% efficiency, and they must notresult in incremental fuel use or emissions.   If New Jersey opens up retail competition, PSE&G will continue to makestandard offer payments to projects whose hosts choose an electric supplierother than the utility. However, that pledge would only apply if PSE&G isstill allowed to recover its standard offer payments through some type ofsystem benefits charge. DSM proponents in many states are lobbying for suchcharges on distribution services to maintain efficiency programs in theface of retail access.   PSE&G accepts standard offer projects on a first-come, first-servedbasis, though they must be qualified by PSE&G for technical merit andsavings potential. They may be installed by users themselves or by energyservice companies. One ESCO that is active in the program is PSE&G's ownsubsidiary, Public Service Conservation Resources Corp. (PSCRC), whichworks with customers on standard offer projects and provides financing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MONITOR: CON ED IS SLOW ON CLEAN-UP, AND CRACKS DOWN ON WHISTLE BLOWERS   A court-appointed environmental monitor has found that ConsolidatedEdison's environmental programs still have significant shortcomings andthat the utility has discouraged proper reporting of environmentalmishaps.   ``In at least one instance,'' the monitor states in his first reportsince being named last spring, ``there has been direct retaliation againstan employee who reported information to me.''   Appointment of the monitor, Mitchell Bernard, came as part of thesentence handed down after Con Ed pleaded guilty to having conspired tocover up the release of asbestos in a 1989 steam pipe explosion. Theutility was also fined $2 million. U.S. District Court Judge John Martin,who sentenced Con Ed, received the monitor's report Dec. 18.   The monitor writes that Con Ed generally cooperated with hisinvestigations, as required by the court. But he cites some notableexceptions: a few employees were ``less than open'' in answering questions;and Con Ed ``failed to comply'' with the court's direction that it notpenalize an employee in any way for providing information to the monitor.   Con Ed ``has taken a number of commendable steps to promoteenvironmental compliance,'' the monitor notes. He recognizes the creationof an internal mechanism for investigating reports of environmentalmisconduct and the hiring of a new vice president for environmentalaffairs, among other actions.   ``At this point, however, Con Edison is without many of the basicelements of an effective program to prevent and detect violations ofenvironmental laws,'' the monitor concludes. Key problems include:ineffectiveness in the company's new Compliance Administrators Program;indications of ``an ongoing destructive corporate culture''; and problemshandling asbestos.   ``We take this report very seriously,'' said a Con Ed spokesman. Thereport ``acknowledges that we have improved our environmental awareness butthat we have a lot more to do,'' he added.   Episodes of improper treatment of employees who reported possibleenvironmental hazards, brought to the company's attention by the monitor'sreport, have resulted in a number of specific disciplinary actions. Con Edexplained, in a response that was also filed with the court, that twosupervisors have been suspended without pay, and that other individualshave been disciplined.   ``These were isolated instances,'' the spokesman said. However, anysimilar incidents in the future in which an employee is punished orintimidated will result in dismissal of the supervisor. ``We will nottolerate intimidation of employees who bring forward environmentalcomplaints.'' The spokesman acknowledged that ``we have to educate ouremployees about our company's environmental policies.''   The most serious of the incidents of intimidation involved spilled oiland water that leaked down a drain at a Con Ed service center and a problemin the company's asbestos abatement program.   Overall, the monitor writes that he ``uncovered significant problems.''The most common, he concludes, were related to the cleanup ofpolychlorinated biphenyls and to asbestos abatement projects.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CONNECTICUTDept. of Public Utility Control   95-12-09; Connecticut Light & Power buyout of 54-MW NUG owned byChrysler Corp. in Hartford   95-10-15; Proposal by United Illuminating to cut back DSM budget by 45%over the next two years   95-08-OP; Complaint by CL&P against Texas-Ohio Power Inc., which isselling power from a 1.8-MW plant to CL&P customers   95-01-01; Acquisition by Groton Dept. of Utilities of Bozrah Light &Power   94-12-13; DPUC investigation into electric industry restructuring; DPUCrecommends gradual deregulation once industry is restructured an dstrandedinvestment issues are resolved   94-04-01; Connecticut Light & Power integrated resource plan; DPUC rulesthat it may streamline IRP process in other pending cases (Doc. Nos.94-11-09 and 94-12-13)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   DELAWAREPublic Service Commission(302) 739-4247   92-103; Request by Delmarva Power & Light to approve contracts with twonon-utility generators totaling nearly 200 MWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MAINEPublic Utilities Commission(207) 289-3831   95-702; Bangor Hydro-Electric proposal to offer residentials marketrates during the winter; approved by the PUC   95-606; Central Maine Power wins approval for new economic developmentincentives that will be offerred to its manufacturing customers; companieswill be able to get a 1.5-cents/kWh reduction in energy costs for new andexpanding loads over a three year period   95-598; Proposal by Central Maine Power that it reduce its DSM target toabout 4 MW of additional savings in 1996 and eliminate all new DSM programswhich require subsidies to participants   95-462; Industry restructuring initiative   95-429; Central Maine Power plan to reduce costs of power from awaste-to-energy plant in Biddeford, with the help of Citizens Lehman Power   95-148; Request by Kennebunkport Light & Power District to sell power tothe Kennebunk, Kennebunkport and Wells Water District, formerly a CentralMaine Power customer   95-129; Bangor Hydro-Electric plan to acquire Union River ElectricCooperative; aproved July 10   95-109; Bangor Hydro asks permission to borrow between $80 to $100million from a special Maine state trust fund as part of plan to float a$162-million buyout of two wood-fired independent power projects in WestEnfield and Jonesboro; PUC approves plan for buyouts   95-055; PUC proposal to create a general system in the state forutilities to collect stranded investment charges in the form of exit feesfrom retail customers who leave their grids; PUC terminates action in wakeof FERC NOPR on transmission access   94-475; Request by Maine Public Service that the PUC disallow a proposedpower sales contract between Central Maine Power and Houlton Water Company,a former MPS customer   94-379; PUC review of a 1967 state law allowing municipal utilities theright to compete with franchise investor-owned utilities for customers; PUCrules munis can take customers away from IOUs only if they were alreadyserving those customers in 1967   94-301; Maine Public Service request to cancel or modify power purchasecontract with a 17.6-MW biomass plant in Sherman Station developed byWheelabrator Environmental Systems; two hearing examiners say increasedcosts do not merit contract cancellation; PUC says PURPA preempts stateauthority to allow modification of contract   94-235; Central Maine Power plan to auction surplus energy to commercialand industrial customers; PUC orders utility to sell off 15% of surplusthrough auction, rather than 30% as recommended by staff   94-213; Proposed buyout and shutdown of 33-MW biomass-fired FairfieldEnergy Ventures non-utility generator for $78-million; plan for buyout andtakeover opposed by industrials in state Supreme Judicial Court on groundsthat ratepayers are shortchanged   94-176; PUC inquiry into stranded investment costs and standby servicecharges; towns of Jay, Norway, Old Orchard Beach and Westbrook considermunicipalization; Norway, Westbrook and Old Orchard Beach challenge stateauthority to assess stranded investment costs, calling them tantamount to atax   94-079; Central Maine Power general stranded investment tariff,including provision to recover stranded investment costs incurred whencustomers leave system but still require wheeling servicesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MARYLANDPublic Service Commission(410) 767-8022   Case 8678; PSC investigation into competition in the electricmarketplace; industrials advocate full retail competition, utilities favoreincreased wholesale competition   Case 8583; Consideration of alternative power supplies for PECOsubsidiary Conowingo Power; PSC hearing examiner to determine whetherDelmarva Power & Light can buy Conowingo; PSC tentatively approvesacquisition in late November   Case 8488; Panda Energy application for CPCN for 230-MW plant; PendingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MASSACHUSETTSDept. of Public Utilities(617) 727-9748   95-95; Com/Electric integrated resource plan for 1995-2014, includingRFP for 26 MW in 2001   (no number) Commonwealth Electric attempts to buy out 37-MW PepperellPower; DPU extends 9/7 deadline for decision   95-40; Massachusetts Electric performance-based rate filing, includingproposed auction of 10 to 25 MW of wires access; DPU says industrialscannot be made to pay for utility's excess power   95-35; Request by Cambridge Electric for recovery of stranded costsassociated with serving the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, whichhas left its system to self-generate; DPU allowed 75% cost recovery   95-30; Dept. of Public Utilities investigation into industryrestructuring; order issued Aug. 16 tells utilities to unbundle services,set up stranded investment charges, move toward customer choice; individualutility plans due in about six months   95-18; DPU investigation into Boston Edison claim that it is beingovercharged about $740,000 a year by MassPower   94-176; Request by town of Stow to switch service from Hudson Light &Power Dept. to NEES; HL&PD asserts that it must charge Stow strandedinvestment charges   94-162; The DPU agrees to request from Boston Edison, CambridgeElectric, Commonwealth Electric, Fitchburg Gas & Electric and WesternMassachusetts Electric to streamline integrated resource management rules;utilities request more control over bidding and reduced regulatoryoversight of resource portfolios; Div. of Energy Resources suggestsallowing third parties to rent space on utility T&D systems; CONUG saysshareholders, not ratepayers, should absorb costs incurred when utilitiesunderestimate need and have to go out to buy more expensive power   94-158; Investigation into replacing traditional utilitycost-of-service, rate-of-return regulation with performance-basedincentives; DPU rules that utilities can replace rate-of-return ratemakingwith performanc-based incentives   94-115; SESCO seeks disclosure of bids in Comonwealth Electric DSM RFP;SESCO says it was improperly excluded from award group; order 8/9 rejectingcomplaint   94-114; Request for approval of power sales deal between NantucketElectric and New England Electric System; Nantucket Electric board hasapproved acquisition in principle; briefs filed   94-112; Massachusetts Electric IRM stating need for 231 MW of new powerbeginning in 2002; No supply-side RFPs are included in plan; DPU requiresutility to take second loo at its forecast in June   94-110; Eastern Edison IRM proposes 65-MW RFP to be issued July 1995;settlement agreement filed; DPU approves RFP, subject to second look inMarch 1995   94-102; Investigation into Massachusetts Electric demand for strandedinvestment charge from ex-retail customer MBTA; FERC to await DPU findingsbefore ruling; technical session 11/2   94-49; Boston Edison integrated resource management plan; Boston Edproposes experimental 250-MW "options" RFP to be used in March 1995; CONUGsays utility should issue supply-side RFP; briefs and reply briefs filed   94-23; Investigation into regulatory treatment of costs incurred tocomply with Title IV of Clear Air Act Amendments. NUG coalition calls onDPU to penalize utilities that hoard emissions; Comments filed   94-12; Western Mass Electric's IRM; delayed pending progress of industryrestructuring   94-8-C; Investigation into monitoring and evaluation of Western MassElectric's DSM program; DPU requests further information 10/4   94-1-A; Generating unit performance review for Boston Ed; Briefs filedin JuneCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEW HAMPSHIREPublic Utilities Commission(603) 271-2431   DR95-250; State-sponsored retail wheeling pilot for 60 MW of load   DR95-231; New Hampshire Office of Consumer Advocate asks PUC to declarePSNH discounts with industrials void under agreements of merger with NU   DR95-216; Rulemaking on industrial rate discounts, intended todiscourage `poaching' of customers between utilities; PUC approves draftguidelines giving utilities some ability to tailor contracts to individualcustomers   Doc. No. 95-095; PUC order upholding PUC rights to order QF wheelingunder state's 1978 Limited Electrical Energy Producers Act; PSNH andConnecticut Valley Electric seek reversal   DE94-163; PUC rules Public Service New Hampshire does not have exclusivefranchise rights in its territoryand that reseller Freedom Electric Powerhas a legal right to recieve utility status and compete against PSNH forretail customers   DE94-004; Request by New Hampshire Electric Cooperative to use biddingamong qualifying facilities to set avoided costs   DR94-160; Proposal by New Hampshire Electric Cooperative to seek 20 MWfrom qualifying facilities; PUC rules that NHEC can issue RFP, but mustseek FERC ruling on whether it can legally contract for QF power   DR94-004; Request by New Hampshire Electric Cooperative to conductauction for QF power; granted by PUC Oct. 24DR94-239; Application by PublicService of New Hampshire to offer Polyvac a special rate discount on aconfidential basis; PUC rules 1/3/95 that utility must disclose terms ofdiscountCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEW JERSEYBoard of Regulatory Commissioners(201) 648-2375   EE95-090415; Jersey Central Power & Light demand-side management filing,including set-aside for 150-MW block for bidding by ESCOs   EE95-080359; Power purchase agreement between Jersey Central Power &Light and Niagara Mohawk Power   EE95-040185; Power purchase agreement between Jersey Central Power &Light and Cleveland Electric Illuminating   EE95-040184; Power purchase agreement between Jersey Central Power &Light and Pennsylvania Power & Light   EC92-040516/EM 88-010206; American Ref-Fuel request to switch PSE&Gcontract to JCP&L   EE92-920103; Atlantic Electric plan to cut demand by 5.6 MW throughtwo-year DSM program   EE92-090883; Atlantic Electric annual bidding filing; Under staffreview   EE92-090911; JCP&L annual bidding filing; Under staff review   EE92-090212; PSE&G annual bidding filing; Under staff review   EE92-090884; Rockland Electric's annual bidding filing; Under staffreview   EE91-111747; Atlantic Electric's approved application for siting ofsubstation and transmission lines in Washington Twp. area; ALJ rulingpending   EM94-030058; Request by MidAtlantic Energy to order Jersey Central Power& Light to buy power from a 198-MW NUG in Pennsylvania   ER95-010005; Application by Public Service Electric & Gas for approvalof a rate discount for Co-Steel Raritan; approved by BPU   ER94-0577; Jersey Central Power and Light request for $68.3-million ratehike under levelized energy adjustment clause filing, blaming NUG costs forincrease   ER94-07-0293; Public Service Electric & Gas levelized energy adjustmentclause filing; Independent Energy Producers of New Jersey claim PSE&G isimproperly trying to beat NUG costs by buying natural gas from itself   EX95-070320; Initiative to implement flexible ratemaking for electricutilities, in accordance with a new statute; approved by the BPU   EX94-120585Y; State energy master plan proceeding   EX9405-1060/EX9412-1578; Rules for utility integrated resource planning;to be published by end of January, with comment period of 45 days tofollowCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEW YORKPublic Service Commission(518) 474-2500   95-E-0924; Petition by the City of Cortland for permission to conduct afive-year pilot retail wheeling program   95-E-0867; Complaint agaisnt New York Power Authority by MunicipalElectric Utilities Association over use of allocated power by NYPA to servenew industrial load   95-E-0636; Request by Suffolk County to direct Long Island Lighting topass property tax refund back to ratepayers   95-E-0476; Request by the Long Island Power Authority to direct LongIsland Lighting to pass property tax refund back to ratepayers   95-E-0264; Request by Niagara Mohawk Power for assistance in monitoringcompliance by qualifying facilities with the requirements of PURPA   95-E-0141; Nassau County, N.Y., asks state PSC to allow retail wheelingfor its businesses and residences, claiming LILCO's high rates are stiflingthe local economy   95-E-0117; Parallel power exchange agreement between Kodak and RochesterGas & Electric   SAPA 94-E-00385SA1; Proposal by Education/Electric Buying Group to allowthe public schools on Long Island to purchase interruptible supplies ofelectric power on the open market   94-E-1091; Complaint by IPPNY that Niagara Mohawk is inappropriatelyusing a customer service line to advertise against NUGs; thrown out by thePUC   94-E-0952; PSC competitive opportunities investigation; ALJ issuesrecommendation urging ISO to oversee wholesale competition duringtransition to retail competition, but no timeline is offered   94-E-0908; Petition by Destec Energy to force LILCO to buy power from aplanned 300-MW power project at the Pilgrim State mental hospital on LongIsland   94-E-0611; Request for approval by Long Island Lighting of ratediscounts for industrial customers; PSC grants approval   94-E-0557; Request by Consolidated Edison to defer expense ofterminating a 140-MW contract with an unnamed non-utility generator   94-E-0334; Request for rate hike of $349 million, 6.6% by ConsolidatedEdison; various parties agree to and PSC approves a rate freeze through1995 and moderate rate hikes in 1996-97, revenue-per-customer cap, licensefor Con Ed to attempt marketing excess power to new customers   94-E-0136; Petition by Sithe/Independence Power Partners LP forcertificate of public convenience and necessity to provide electric serviceto Alcan Rolled Products and Liberty Paperboard; staff endorses competitiveentrant fee to be paid NiMo by Sithe; PSC grants certificate Sept. 8; feeof $19.6-million over 7.5 years agreed to by Sithe; NiMo wants PSC toreconsider certificate; NiMo plans to appeal to the state court followingPSC announcement that it would not reconsider Sithe sales to industrials   94-E-0098; Niagara Mohawk granted 1.1%, $36-million electric rateincrease for 1995   94-E-0051; Orange & Rockland petition for authorization to defer costsrelated to termination of power sales agreement with State Line PowerAssociates for a gas-fired NUG in Ringwood, N.J.; PSC authorizes defermentof expenses for termination, but not for litigation   94-M-0349; New York State Electric & Gas granted $108.9-million, 7.8%,rate increase effective 7/31 blamed largely on high cost of NUGs   94-T-0539; Petition by New York State Electricn & Gas for certificate ofenvironmental compatibility and public need for a proposed nine-mile,10-inch Arcadia natural gas pipeline to Empire State Pipeline   93-E-1123; LILCO's request for two-year base rate freeze and 4% hike inthird year; opposed by consumer and environmental intervenors; PSC approvesproposal that will freeze base rates in 1995 and will allow the utility toget a return on the Shoreham nuclear plant   93-E-1084, 92-E-1085, 92-G-1086, 94-M-0347; Petition by MultipleIntervenors to suspend modified settlement agreement concerning New YorkState Electric & Gas rates   93-E-1075/93-E-0912; Proceeding to simplify and annualize the processfor setting fuel targets, toward the end of calculating more accurateutility avoided costs   93-E-1074; U.S. Generating request for approval of a financing plan forits 150-MW Wallkill plant   93-E-1073; U.S. Generating application for a CPCN for its 150-MWWallkill plant; certificate granted on condition that on-line date bedelayed until 12/15/96, with all penalties for not meeting on-line datemilestone waived by Orange & Rockland Utilities, and that U.S. Generatingbe required to accept a reasonable buyout offer   93-E-0295; NiMo petition for clarification urging Inter-Power to seekother purchasers for Halfmoon; Pending   93-E-0272; NiMo petition for a declaratory ruling against Sithe's planto sell 40 MW to a retail customer; PSC rules April 6 that Sithe retailsale is subject to minimal regulation; Written order expected in a fewweeks   93-E-0127; New York State Electric & Gas proposal to suspend curtailablerate options for commercial and institutional customers   93-E-0082 and 93-M-0849; Examination of Orange & Rockland Utilitiesrates, charges, rules and regulations; PSC ordered 6/10 that O&R fileamendments to its tariff to revise the revenue decoupling mechanism   93-M-0643; CHG&E request for permission to invest an additional$5-million in its energy services subsidiary; Pending   93-M-0229; PSC examination of competition in the electric and gasindustries; PSC decides to open second phase July 20 to determinefeasibility of establishing a wholesale competitive market; PSC rules thatutilities must provide efficiency upgrades when offering discounts toretain big customers   92-E-1187; Proceeding to determine whether environmental externalitiesshould be included in LRACs; ALJ urges removal of externalities from rates   92-E-0954, Opinion No. 94-23; PSC approval of a settlement onincremental development of renewable-fueled capacity in New York state; RFPto be forthcoming in the next few months; NiMo files petition asking forpermission to fund program thorugh voluntary residential rates   92-E-0992; Buyout of Destec Energy's 57-MW Northway cogeneration projectby Orange & Rockland Utilities; Settlement reached 6/28, termsconfidential   92-E-0886; Call for comments on updating of utility integrated resourceplans due 4/1/95; comments due 9/23   92-E-0841; Request by Niagara Mohawk Power for permission to curtailpurchases of power from non-utility generators during periods of lightload; NiMo sought to reactivate request in early April; IPPNY chargescurtailment violates PURPACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PENNSYLVANIAPublic Utility Commission(717) 783-3190   A-00110500F0172; Pennsylvania Power & Light request to build 2.75-miletransmission line; Pending   A-00110300F051; Siting hearings for 500-kV transmission line betweenPittsburgh and Harrisburg; Testimony resumed with Office of Trial Staffsaying a wider right-of-way was needed   C-00935374; Findlay Township request to switch electricity suppliersfrom Duquesne Light to West Penn Power; ALJ request that PUC rule on retailwheeling declined, with commissioners favoring addressing the issue ingeneric competition proceeding   C-00934947 and C-00934948; Complaints from the Riverside SchoolDistrict, which wants PP&L to relocate certain transmission lines due toEMF concerns   I-00940032; Investigation into wholesale and retail electricitycompetition; Scheduled for completion in February 1995; hearings scheduledfor Dec. 8, 1995, and Jan 12, 16 and 17, 1996   M-00940527; Pa. Office of Consumer Counsel challenges replacement powercosts during Susquehanna outage claimed by Pennsylvania Power & Light inits energy cost rate filing; PUC disallows $14-million; utility to appeal   M-00940504; PJM companies directed to notify PUC when a voltagereduction warning is issued   M-00920312C0005; Complaint on energy cost rate filed by industrials thatPP&L is using power supplied by NUGs to sell capacity off-system   P-00940774; 10-year discount rate contract between PECO Energy and theUniversity of Pennsylvania, designed to forestall the construction of auniversity cogeneration facility; approved by PUC   P-00920578; Petition by Metropolitan Edison to purchase 89 MW formNorthampton Energy Project; Pending   I-00860025; PUC investigation of competitive bidding in the electricpower marketplace; PUC rules that investor-owned utilities should usebidding to procure future resourcesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   RHODE ISLANDPublic Utilities Commission(401) 277-3500   1186; Tariff filing by Newport Electric, a subsidiary of EasternUtilities Associates, petitioning to give defense manufacturers a 10% baserate discount   939; Review of Naragansett Electric's 1992 C&LM program and costrecovery for 1993; Utility ordered to limit spending to 1992 levels; CLF,Energy CouncilCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   VERMONTPublic Service BoardFrederick Weston, (802) 821-2358   5854; Investigation into electric industry restructuringCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION   EL-95-71; Complaint filed by PSNH charging the New Hampshire ElectricCooperative with preparing to violate a partial-requirements contract byissuing a solicitation for QF power   EL-95-64; Request by Freedom Enegy Inc. for an expedited ruling on itsplan to wheel power over Public Service of New Hampshire lines to retailcustomers; FERC sets 8/8 deadline for intervenor comments   EL-95-57; Complaint agaisnt New York Power Authority by MunicipalElectric Utilities Association over use of allocated power by NYPA to servenew industrial load   EL-95-41; Petition by Metropolitan Edison and Pennsylvania Electric toovertun six NUG contracts; denied by FERC in late June   EL-95-38; Petition by Niagara Mohawk Power to dismiss complaint by SitheEnergies alleging overcharges for transmission of power from Sithe projectalong NiMo lines   EL-95-36; Petition by Jersey Central Power & Light asking that FERCdeclare its contract with a 117-MW independent power project developed byAdvanced Power Systems and Constellation Energy in Freehold is illegal   EL-95-30; Petition by West Penn Power for rate relief in connection withobligations to buy power from the 85-MW Washington Water Power project inBurgettstown; FERC refuses to consider   ER-96-200; Filing by New England Electric System for approval of firmtransmission rate to be charged to a group of Massachusetts municipals   ER-95-1782; Filing for approval of 32nd amendment to the New EnglandPower Pool agreement; approved by FERC   ER-95-1696; Northeast Utilities' new Tariff No. 7, based on FERC proforma tariffs; rejected by FERC   ER-95-1586/EL-96-17; Citizens Utilities point-to-point and networkintegration service transmission tariffs   ER-95-1625; Application by U.S. Generating to form USGen Power Services,a power marketer   ER-95-1491; Application by Energy Alliance Partnership, comprised ofsubsidiaries of Hydro-Quebec, Consolidated Natural Gas and Noverco, forstatus as a power marketer; FERC says Hydro-Quebec must open itstransmission lines   ER-95-1466; Proposal by NEPOOL to allow members to trade energy based oncost of capacity committed to the pool; rejected by FERC   ER-95-1010; Transmission service agreement between New York StateElectric & Gas and Heartland Energy Services   ER-95-992; Transmission service agreement between New England Power andLouis Dreyfus Electric Power   ER-95-892; Filing by Citizens Lehman Power L.P. for approval to createfive subsidiaries to facilitate certain long-term power contracts   ER-95-887; Agreement reached between Delmarva Power & Light and OldDominion Electric Cooperative that will enable DP&L to secure the lowestcost energy on a daily or hourly basis and serve part of ODEC commitmentsto Public Service Electric & Gas   ER-95-870; Petition by Enron Power Marketing and Jones Capital to sellpart of the output from a 149-MW power project in Milford, Mass., to EnronPower Marketing; approved by FERC 6/2   ER-95-885; Non-firm transmission service agreement between NortheastUtilities and Citizens Lehman Power Sales   ER-95-852; Filing by Maine Public Service to sell power to the Northeastbulk power market at market rates and an open acess, comparable servicetransmission tariff   ER-95-851; Maine Public Service is ordered to include point-to-pointflexibility in its tariff   ER-96-839; Maine Public Service open access tariff   ER-95-836; Filing by Houlton Water Dept., Van Buren Light & PowerDistrict and Eastern Maine Electric Cooperative objecting to a proposedMaine Public Service open access transmission tariff   ER-95-823; Transmission service agreements between Central Maine Powerand Catex Vitol Electric, Citizens Lehman Power Sales, Louis DreyfusElectric Power and Enron Power Marketing   ER-95-791; General Public Utilities transmission tariffs, includingdistance-sensitive rates   ER-95-759; Request by Niagara Mohawk Power for approval of atransmission service agreement with Citizens P&L   ER-95-752; Request by Northeast Utilities for approval of transmissionservice agreement with Electric Clearinghouse   ER-95-746; Request by Montaup Electric for approval of transmissionrates for Rainbow Energy Marketing   ER-95-743; Request by Boston Edison for approval of transmission serviceagreement with InterCoast Power Marketing   ER-95-742; Request by Boston Edison for approval of transmission serviceagreement with Citizens Power & Light   ER-95-738; Request by New York State Electric & Gas for approval ofsales of capacity and energy to Electric Clearinghouse   ER-95-735; Request by Central Maine Power for permission to sell 12.5 MWfrom a bought out NUG to a new wholesale power customer, Houlton Water Co.,which used to be a customer of neighboring Maine Public Service; approvedby PSC 6/15   ER-95-730; Request by New England Power for approval of transmissionrate for Enron Power Marketing   ER-95-708; Request by Central Hudson Gas & Electric for approval of atransmission service agreement with Citizens Lehman Power Sales   ER-95-679, -680; Central Vermont network service and open accesstransmission tariff filings   ER-95-601; Request by General Public Utilities Service Corp. forapproval of a service agreement with Electric Clearinghouse under whichGPU's operating companies will make available their surplus operatingcapacity for sale   ER-95-570; Request by Allegheny Power System to add Enron and ElectricClearinghouse to their list of customers under APS' Standard GenerationService Rate Schedule   ER-95-539; Request by New England Power for approval of a contract withCatex Vitol that allows NEP to make economy purchases of power from Catexsupplied by third-party sources from February to April 1995   ER-95-419; Request by RG&E for approval of a service agreements withwith Louis Dreyfus Electric Power   ER-95-267-000; FERC approves rate settlement under which New EnglandElectric System will freeze its base wholesale rates through the end of1996; NEES and key intervenors filed the settlement with FERC saying thatit would avoid a major NEES rate hike by balancing charges for NEES overthe two years   ER-94-1446-000; Application for approval of membership in New EnglandPower Pool for Milford Power Ltd., an independent power producer inMilford, Mass., developed by Enron Power and Jones Capital; FERC approvedAug. 10   ER-94-1200-000; Proposal by Maine Public Service to sell 64 MW of powerfrom Maine Yankee and Wyman 4 power plants at market rates; FERC rejects,saying it will require MPS to file an open access transmission tariff ifthe utility wants to sell the power that way; MPS decides not to submittariff   ER-94-994-000; Enron Milford disputes $2.5-million in supplementalinterconnection charges sought by NEES   ER-94-291-000; MMWEC and NU transmission agreement whereby NU sellsnon-firm Tariff No. 2 of $9/kW short-term power to MMWEC members; Pending   ER-94-129; FERC approves compromise settlement of stranded investmentdispute between NEES and MBTA covering 16 MW of firm wheeling service. Thetwo sides agreed on a five-year contract with a $44.40/kW/year startingrate. MBTA will treat the charge as a flat rate while NEES will use$24/kW/year of the revenue as a stranded investment charge to reduce coststo other customers   EL-94-41; Request by Metropolitan Edison and Pennsylvania Electric tovoid contracts with five NUGs; FERC refused; utilities request rehearing   ER-93-920-000; NEES proposed firm transmission tariff; FERC approvalaccepted without challenge by intervenors.   ER-93-902-000, 93-925-000; NU request for approval to sell 10 MW toUNITIL and 3 MW to Princeton Municipal Light Dept.; Pending   ER-92-67-000; Altresco's interconnection agreement with WMECo fortransmission; ALJ said NUGs can be charged for transmission upgrades tosupport tie-in   EC-90-10-010; Transmission tariffs proposed by Northeast Utilities fortransmission-dependent utilities So. Hadley Electric Light Dept. andWestfield Gas and Electric Light Dept.; approved Nov. 30   QF95-302; Application by Brooklyn Navy Yard Congeration Partners forstatus as a qualifying facility under PURPA for its 315-MW NUG; Con Edobjects   RM95-8/RM94-7; Revamp of the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-MarylandInterconnection Association, proposing an independent operator   TX94-6-000; Request by Reading (Mass.) Municipal Light Dept. to preserveNEPOOL preferential transmission arrangements under authority of Section211 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992; opposed by Northeast Utilities, NewEngland Electric System, Boston Edison   TX-94-5; Request by Old Dominion Electric Cooperative for orderinstructing Delmarva Power to wheel 150 MW from PSE&G to three ODEC-servedco-opsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-26IA059-000325-B006-171http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey72.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233722 text/html 105022HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:35:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:16 GMTContent-length: 104834Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey72.html Sample Issue Copyright NUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNet January 1, 1996 Vol. 21, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SPOT U PRICE IN U.S. RISES ABRUPTLY; DOC CLEARS ENTERGY LEU SHIPMENT (1926 words) MINATOM OFFICIAL CALLS FOR MAKE-OR-BREAK DECISION ON KRASNOYARSK RT-2 PLANT (864 words) LA HAGUE SITE REACHES NOMINAL PRODUCTION; MELOX GEARS UP (240 words) BNFL TAPS EXXON CHEMICAL VICE PRESIDENT FOR COMPANY'S CHIEF EXECUTIVE SLOT (249 words) WASTE MANAGEMENT YEAR LATER PASSAGE OF WASTE BILL REMAINS AN INDUSTRY TOP PRIORITY (601 words) HOLTEC, SIERRA NUCLEAR, AND SEG-VECTRA MAKE MESCALERO PROJECT SHORT LIST (442 words) IN MATTER OF YEARS, DOE STANCE SHIFTS FROM `OBLIGATION' TO NO CLEAR LEGAL DUTY (1466 words) SOUTH CAROLINA STUDIES WASTE FEE OPTIONS (235 words) WESTINGHOUSE HANFORD AWARD FEE $1.5-MILLION (169 words) HOLTEC WINS RERACKING JOB AT ANGRA-1 (99 words) NRC STAFF LOOKS TO FRENCH PROGRAM AS IT REVIEWS DOE WORK ON BURNUP CREDIT (687 words) TOLEDO EDISON BEGINS LOADING THREE NUHOMS MODULES AT DAVIS-BESSE (416 words) ENRICHMENT USEC SALE SHOULD BE CANCELED, SAYS HARVARD STUDY OF HEU DEAL (739 words) NONPROLIFERATION MINATOM EXPECTS EURATOM HEU DEAL; STATE DEPT. WON'T INTERVENE ON FRM-2 (527 words) GAN IN NO POSITION TO TAKE RUSSIAN PHYSICAL INVENTORY (1219 words) WITHOUT EC ASSURANCES, NRC MOVES TO SUSPEND COMPONENT EXPORTS (1359 words) DOE POSTPONES DECISION ON ALTERNATIVE FOR TAKING BACK RESEARCH REACTOR FUEL (548 words) REPROCESSING RT-1 OPERATION FACES COST CRISIS, UNCERTAIN FUTURE DEMAND SCHEDULE (1168 words) REPROCESSING CRITICS SAY MAYAK WILL DIE WITHOUT FOREIGN BUSINESS (893 words) FUEL CYCLE NONPROLIFERATION, SPENT FUEL HANDLING KEY TO LWR SUPPLY CONTRACT WITH DPRK (1140 words) URANIUM CAMECO'S PORT HOPE REFINERY LICENSE RENEWED JUST DAYS BEFORE EXPIRATION (289 words) CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoSPOT U PRICE IN U.S. RISES ABRUPTLY; DOC CLEARS ENTERGY LEU SHIPMENTBy:Michael Knapik, Washington; Ray Silver, Toronto; Ann MacLachlan, ParisThe spot uranium price in the U.S. rose in the last weeks in December. TheUranium Exchange Co. raised its spot U3O8 price to $12.10 per pound onDecember 18; Washington Nuclear Corp. raised its U3O8 price December 21 to$12.50/lb. Some analysts thought that latter figure was high, but mostagreed that the market was clearly trending upward.   In deals completed before the holidays, Cameco apparently selectedseveral suppliers to fill its request for offers for 700,000 U3O8, but willprobably not buy the entire amount. The mining company, sources said,didn't see any offers below $12/lb and will probably buy much of thematerial at a price around $12.25/lb, plus or minus 10 cents. Some offersreportedly as high as $12.50/lb were considered, but several others withprices a $1 or so higher than that were dismissed.   British Nuclear Fuels reportedly also selected more than one supplier,reportedly for more than 200,000 lb U3O8. One source suggested that thecompany may have bought as much as 500,000 lb U3O8 equivalent at pricesranging from $12.20/lb to slightly above $12.40/lb.   San Diego Gas & Electric is said to have selected a supplier for U3O8.(The utility had been looking for offers to supply 223,000 lb.) The priceis said to be at or slightly above $11.85/lb, the TradeTech value at theend of November. Said one source, ``San Diego and Wisconsin Public Service(which is still evaluating offers) may have seen the last of theunder-$12/lb uranium.''   At press time there was a report that Consumers Power was out lookingfor a supply of 600,000 lb U3O8.   Fermco, the company in charge of cleaning up the DOE defense facility atFernald in Ohio, solicited offers last month for the purchase 484,061 lb ofexcess normal uranium, which is in various forms including derbies, ingots,recyclable metal, and UF4. The minimum acceptable price, the solicitationsaid, was $2.04/lb--$1.36/lb for the material and $0.68/lb for analysis,handling, and packaging. Bids were due December 20. According to sources,Fermco received expressions of interest from four companies.   In NuclearFuel's judgment, significant open-market transactions in theU.S. during the forward two-week period could be concluded within the rangeof $12.00-$12.40/lb U3O8, a rise from the range reported two weeks ago of$11.80-$12.10/lb. So-called unrestricted buyers, those able to use uraniumfrom the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), could probably concludea deal within the range of $10.00-$10.30/lb, a slight rise in the rangereported two weeks ago of $9.90-$10.20/lb.DOC Clears Import Of Entergy LEU   A shipment of low-enriched uranium (LEU) destined for use in one ofEntergy's reactors was finally released December 21 by the U.S. CustomsService after the import was cleared by the Department of Commerce. Thematerial, enriched at Eurodif and imported by Cogema Inc., containeduranium originally from Kazakstan and/or Uzbekistan. Sources said DOCcleared the shipment after Entergy agreed to match an equal quantity of theuranium with newly produced U.S. uranium. Neither DOC nor Entergy officialswere available to confirm that report, however.   Under the terms of the antidumping suspension agreements with thosecountries, the origin of the uranium does not change when it is enriched ina third country and therefore, the uranium can only be imported right nowinto the U.S. under the quota systems in both suspension agreements.   Joseph Spetrini, DOC deputy assistant secretary for importadministration, has been trying to negotiate an agreement to grandfathersome of the so-called bypass Uzbek and Kazak uranium. In October, Spetriniproposed to grandfather 75% of the uranium utilities contracted for beforeMarch 27, the date the Kazak agreement was signed. The remaining 25% couldcome in if the utilities matched the uranium with newly produced U.S.uranium. The mining company petitioners, including Cogema Inc.'s PathfinderMines, protested to Spetrini and told him that they would agree tograndfathering only under certain conditions.   Spetrini found himself in a bind and, according to one source, wasfacing the threat of a lawsuit by Entergy if the shipment was not cleared.   (Washington Nuclear reported that Customs cleared the five containers ofEntergy's LEU that had been held up at Portsmouth, Va. since December 8.)   On the Entergy shipment, DOC, according to one source, ``used chewinggum to patch together'' the settlement, allowing Commerce to make the callto Customs to clear the shipment. The mining companies apparently didn'tagree to the settlement and still maintain that there is no legal basis tolet the uranium in.Miners' Conditions For Grandfathering   The ad hoc group of U.S. uranium mining companies, petitioners in theantidumping cases, submitted a confidential set of conditions that they saymust be met for them to agree to any grandfathering of Uzbek or Kazakuranium (NF, 18 Dec. '95, 2). The miners say these conditions represent ``afirm position of industry.'' Among the conditions, sources said, are thefollowing: The quantity of grandfathered material is not to exceed9.5-million lb; the material to be allowed in without restrictions must beonly 75% of the nominal quantity contracted for; the matched sales to allowimport of the remaining 25% must be done by June 30 and must be matchedwith newly produced U.S. uranium; the utility contracts for the purchase ofUzbek or Kazak uranium concluded after March 27 and those not brought toDOC's attention in response to September 22 Federal Register notice wouldnot be eligible for grandfathering; and the DOC must reverse itsinterpretation of the Uzbek agreement--and an interpretation that allowsfor a doubling quota amount to 1.88-million lb U3O8 per year after 1996.   ``There are limits to industry's willingness to accept mechanisms whichwill flood the U.S. market with dumped CIS uranium,'' the miners said.``Those limits have been reached.''Australian Analysts See $14.25/lb U Price in 1996   Analyst Daniel Stubbs of the Australian Bureau of Agriculture & ResourceEconomics is predicting that the average spot uranium price will rise to(US)$14.25/lb U3O8 in 1996 from $11.50/lb in 1995. Stubbs and fellowanalyst Charles Millsteed are predicting that in the longer term, the spotprice will increase to $19.70/lb ($17/lb in 1995 dollars) by the end of2000. Rising prices will lead to increased production from Australia's twooperating companies--Energy Resources of Australia and Western Mining Corp.The cost of production in Australian uranium mines is estimated to be inthe range of $10-$15/lb U3O8. Production is expected to rise from 4,700metric tons U3O8 to 6,300 MT in 1999-2000, the analysts say. The articlesabout uranium appeared in the December 1995 issue of the journal AustralianCommodities.INI: Price Spike In 1998, But Softening Thereafter   International Nuclear Inc. (INI), whose president is ex-Nuexco analystDavid Schramm, has recently completed an analysis of the market thatforecasts a spot market price spike by 1998, but with the price softeningafter that. INI says it believes the spot price in constant 1995 dollarswill be in the $16.50 range by 1998 but will fall by the year 2000 toaround $14.80/lb U3O8. The spiking will occur, INI believes, because ofpressure to produce more uranium as utility stocks get used up over thenext two years. The softening will occur, however, as more blended-down HEUenters the market under the formula called for in the pending U.S.Enrichment Corp. privatization bill and as more uranium enters the U.S.from Kazakstan and Uzbekistan under their suspension agreement quotas, INIbelieves. INI, as do most analysts, foresees essentially flat requirementsover the next five years.   INI also believes there could be a rising premium for longer-termcontracts, and it forecasts a base price for those types of contracts inthe mid-$18/lb range by 1998.ESA Advisory Group Elects New Officers   The Euratom Supply Agency's advisory group met last month to elect newofficers and hear updates on various items of interest, but took no newinitiatives, participants reported.   Elected chairman was Jose-Luis Gonzalez of Enusa; new vice chairmen areStig Sandklef of Vattenfall Fuel and H. Blackwell Gresley of Urenco Ltd.   The committee heard a brief report on the U.S.-Euratom agreement fornuclear cooperation, now under review by the U.S. Congress, and onrelations with Russia and the ex-Soviet republics that export uranium, buta source said there is ``nothing new'' in the latter field. The committeewill have to tackle the issue during the coming year, to define whether andhow the ESA's ``common policy'' of limiting nuclear materials imports fromRussia must change when the overall European Union-Russian Federationpartnership and cooperation agreement enters into force, in principle onJanuary 1, 1997. The agreement calls for free trade between the two partieson that date, but the EU insisted on a potential exemption for nucleartrade if the required market conditions are not fulfilled.Linder Fund Buys More Stock In URI   Uranium Resources announced December 26 that one of its largeststockholders--the Linder Dividend Fund Inc.--had exercised it rights undera May 1995 warrant agreement to buy more common stock in the company. Theexercise of 500,000 warrants will infuse the company with $2-million inworking capital for project development and other purposes.   URI said that it expects production to begin at its Kingsville Dome sitelate in the first quarter. Combined with production from Rosita, URI saidit expects to produce more than 2-million lb in 1996. In 1995, URI said610,000 lb U3O8 were produced at Rosita.   URI's stock closed December 26 at 5 3/8, with 16,800 shares beingtraded. Its 52-week high was 8 5/8.Court Okays Denison Restructure   Four days before Christmas, Denison Mines President Bill James announceda new deal for shareholders who have been in financial limbo for four yearssince Ontario Hydro canceled its long-term commitment to buy 100-million lbof high-cost Elliot Lake uranium. With final approval from the OntarioCourt of Justice, General Division, James said the company could proceedwith a restructuring plan that will reclassify existing Class A, Class Band preferred shares into new common shares. The new shares should belisted for trading on Montreal and Toronto stock exchanges by January 3, hesaid.   ``It has been a long road and all stakeholders have paid a price. The(federal and Ontario) governments have provided interest relief on taxesand a postponement of taxes payable; corporate lenders and Canada Mortgage& Housing Corp. have given interest, principal and repayment concessions;preferred shareholders have agreed to eliminate a large amount of dividendsin arrears and their priority on liquidation; Class A and Class Bshareholders have accepted a significant dilution of their equityinterest,'' James explained. The provincial government have madeconcessions in exchange for assurance that decommissioning of DenisonMines' Elliot Lake mine-mill facility would be completed.   ``As a result of the stakeholders contributions, Denison has beenpreserved as a going concern and its capital structure have beensubstantially improved,'' James noted.Czech Deal With Cameco   The first company in Eastern Europe to take its uranium conversionbusiness to Canada, the Czech electric power utility CEZ has contractedwith Cameco Corp. for conversion services at Port Hope, Ontario. Notingthat the Soviet Union previously met such nuclear fuel demands, CamecoChairman and President Bernard Michel said the CEZ deal ``reflects thechanging global marketplace as Eastern European countries open their doorsto Western business.'' Cameco would not say how much uranium would beinvolved nor the dollar value of the CEZ contract.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoMINATOM OFFICIAL CALLS FOR MAKE-OR-BREAK DECISION ON KRASNOYARSK RT-2PLANTBy:Mark Hibbs, Moscow   Prospects for completing the RT-2 reprocessing plant at Krasnoyarsk-26are bleak, according to a key official at the Russian Ministry of AtomicEnergy (Minatom).   RT-2, with a design throughput of 1,500 metric tons heavy metal (MTHM)per year, was supposed to reprocess spent fuel from VVER-1000 plants.Construction began in 1987 but was stopped two years later for lack offunds (NF, 4 Jan. '89, 5). Meanwhile, spent fuel is being stored atreactors and at an interim storage facility adjacent to the RT-2construction site at Krasnoyarsk-26.   Evgeny Mikerin, who heads up nuclear fuel production at Minatom, saidlast month the plant is about 30% complete. Since 1989, the project hasbeen modified to include design innovations, including safety improvementsin the aftermath of an explosion at a separation plant at Tomsk-7 (NF, 12April '93, 1). If construction were to resume now, Mikerin said, RT-2 couldbe completed by the end of 2003.   Construction cannot proceed, however, until regulator Gosatomnadzor andlocal authorities review reports required under Russia's new nuclearlicensing laws, passed in mid-1995. Mikerin said Minatom anticipatesdifficulties in getting all consulting experts to agree on the contents ofan ecological report that must be submitted to licensing authorities.   In the meantime, Mikerin said, Minatom has not appropriated anyconstruction funding for the project. Russian media reported in early 1995that following a decree by Russian President Boris Yeltsin to completeRT-2, that the central government, Minatom, and local and regionalauthorities earmarked more than $100-million for the project. But Mikerinsaid those reports were false.   ``There is no money for RT-2 beyond the small amounts required tomaintain the infrastructure already there,'' he said. Mikerin added that,because construction on the Siberian site had started nearly 10 years ago,infrastructure maintenance must be funded at a higher level now in order toprevent the equipment from deteriorating.Taiwan, ROK Won't Take Back HLW   There also is no longer an agreement inside the Russian administrationon the project's cost. Mikerin said that while costs associated with RT-1have been rising, cost estimates for the construction and operation of RT-2also have increased. But, he said, ``the government has taken no decisionon this as of yet.''   He said Minatom still is looking for foreign partners wanting toreprocess fuel at RT-2 ``because we cannot continue to depend upongovernment support.'' Mikerin said on December 5, ``As of today, all those(parties) we have discussed the project with have declined'' to beinvolved.   Mikerin confirmed that utilities in Germany and Switzerland haveformally declined to consider a reprocessing joint venture atKrasnoyarsk-26. He said that talks also had been held with utilities inTaiwan and the Republic of Korea (ROK). Those potential clients have notcategorically withdrawn from the talks, Mikerin said. But the two Asianstates are not yet willing to take back high-level reprocessing waste(HLW), he added. That takeback is now required by Russian law.   Mikerin also contradicted speculation that Japan, as part of an ongoingreview of its own reprocessing expansion program, might fund completion ofRT-2 to reprocess Japanese spent fuel. The Minatom official said thatnuclear political relations between Tokyo and Moscow are ``not good'' andare hampered by a long-running dispute about Russian Navy low-level wastedumping off Russia's Pacific Coast. Under these circumstances, he said, itis not possible to strike a deal with Japan involving RT-2.   Mikerin acknowledged that the slow pace of Minatom's nuclear powerdevelopment program since the Chernobyl accident in 1986 now poses problemsfor the economics of the reprocessing project. At 1,500 MTHM/yr, RT-2 wasdesigned to be much too large for the current projected demand.   ``It's time to make hard decisions about RT-2'' Mikerin said. ``If wewant to finish it, we should find the money and do so--now. If not, weshould give it up.''   The interim storage facility at Krasnoyarsk-26 for VVER-1000 spent fuelis 15% full, Mikerin said, compared to 13% at the end of 1994.   As a result of a government-to-government agreement with Ukraine, abouthalf the spent fuel to be added to the storage facility will come fromVVER-1000 units in Ukraine, he said.   Following a commercial contract two years ago, Ukraine is trying to payfor the storage of its spent fuel at Krasnoyarsk-26. About half of thepayments it makes to Minatom are in cash. The rest are in barter, mostly infood and stainless steel tubing provided in advance for RT-2, as well aszirconium and a small amount of uranium ore.   While RT-2 could be ready in eight years if approved and funded, Minatomofficials said, without foreign help, it will take longer for Russia todigest the plutonium output of the plant in the form of plutonium-uraniumfuel.   So far, Mikerin said, an experimental fabrication line forplutonium-based fast reactor fuel at Chelyabinsk-65 has produced only twoto three assemblies per year. They have been loaded into the BN-600 fastreactor at Beloyarsk, near Ekaterinburg. The reactor, like most otherSoviet-design fast reactors, has traditionally operated on uranium fuelenriched to up to 25% U-235.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoLA HAGUE SITE REACHES NOMINAL PRODUCTION; MELOX GEARS UPBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Cogema's La Hague reprocessing site reached its nominal capacity for thefirst time in 1995, processing some 1,550 metric tons heavy metal (MTHM),despite the labor unrest that slowed production in June, said Jean-LouisRicaud, the company's reprocessing chief.   The UP3 plant that reprocesses foreign reactor fuel was commissioned in1990 but reached its nominal capacity of 800 MTHM/year five years later.UP2-800, commissioned in August 1994, took less than a year to reach thesame target, Cogema officials point out, saying this demonstrates thecompany's mastery of the industrial process.   Ricaud said that Cogema's mixed-oxide (MOX) fuel fabrication complexalso is gearing up, with the refurbished Cadarache MOX plant havingmanufactured more than 30 MTHM of fuel for Electricite de France (EDF) in1995.   The much bigger Melox MOX plant at Marcoule produced low-enrichment andmedium-enrichment MOX pins last year, but complete fuel assemblies includedhigh-enrichment pins made in Cadarache, he said. About 70-75 fuelassemblies were produced at the plant, or 20 MTHM equivalent of MOX fuel.   But Melox will really begin full production in 1996, Ricaud said. ``Weare confident that the plant will be able to deliver 85 tons to EDF in 1996with the label `Made in Melox,' as scheduled,'' he said.   The nominal capacity of Melox is 120 MTHM/year. Cogema has announcedplans to increase that to 160 MTHM/year in the near term.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoBNFL TAPS EXXON CHEMICAL VICE PRESIDENT FOR COMPANY'S CHIEF EXECUTIVE SLOT   British Nuclear Fuels plc (BNFL) has confirmed the appointment ofinternational chemical industry executive John Taylor as its new chiefexecutive. His appointment will go into effect in March.   Taylor, currently a vice president of Brussels-based Exxon ChemicalEurope Inc., replaces Neville Chamberlain. Last month Chamberlain left thatpost for a promotion as deputy chairman of BNFL (NF, 4 Dec. '95, 11).Chamberlain is combining both roles until Taylor's installation.   BNFL is beefing up its top management in efforts to maximize overseasopportunities. Taylor, 48, has been with Exxon Chemical for 26 years,holding a number of senior international management positions in the U.K.,U.S. and Belgium.   Taylor said that BNFL's improved safety and environmental performance,coupled with recent successes in winning international business, made it an``exciting time...to move the company forward.'' BNFL was recently namedthe U.K.'s fastest growing large exporter (NF, 23 Oct. '95, 8).   Taylor's appointment coincided with BNFL's announcement that site workhas started on a revolutionary 360-million-pound (U.S.$560-million) plantto treat intermediate-level radioactive waste (ILW). The plant is expectedto cut 500-million pounds from the lifetime costs of BNFL's ILW program andto attract international business with its state-of-the-art technology.   The Sellafield Drypac plant, scheduled to come on line in 2002, willconvert wet ILW into dry material that can be compacted, mixed withconcrete, and packed in 500-liter stainless steel containers. Main buildingand civil contract work on the plant is due to start April 1997.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoYEAR LATER PASSAGE OF WASTE BILL REMAINS AN INDUSTRY TOP PRIORITY   The nuclear power industry has no ``Plan B'' up its sleeve in the eventnuclear waste legislation does not pass this year, said Joseph Colvin,executive vice president of the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI).   ``There is a strong consensus across the nation this needs to be done,''he said.   A year after the industry trade association set waste legislation as itstop priority for 1995, a congressional fix of the faltering DOE wasteprogram still has top billing. But Colvin remains optimistic that can beaccomplished.   Even as the Upton-Towns nuclear waste bill, H.R. 1020, became boggeddown in congressional budget battles on Capitol Hill, it remained one ofthe strongest bipartisan bills making its way through the legislativeprocess, he said. Supported by the Republican leadership and suchinfluential Democrats as Reps. John Dingell of Michigan and Frank PalloneJr. of New Jersey, the bill has a hefty list of supporters.   More than 230 members of the House are ready to move on the bill,according to Colvin.Breaking The `Scoring' Logjam   NEI has sent suggested solutions to the House Commerce Committee in aneffort to break the ``scoring'' logjam that prevented the bill from movingto the floor in 1995. Earlier Budget Committee Chairman John Kasich(R-Ohio) had warned that the user fee provisions in the bill would requireabout $4.2-billion in new offsetting budget cuts.   Under H.R. 1020, money collected from nuclear utility ratepayers to fundthe DOE waste program would be limited to the amount the program spent theyear before. The provisions would eliminate the hundreds of millions ofdollars in surplus fees collected from ratepayers each year that arescored, or counted against the federal budget.   Colvin said that doing away with the new railroad spur called for inH.R. 1020 would save $1-billion. That, coupled with the one-time paymentsutilities are required to make to the DOE program, would put the scoringdifference at less than $1-billion, he said.   He noted that NEI still has a lot more to do in working with the Senateleadership on fixing the waste program. Sen. Larry Craig's (R-Idaho) S.1271 is the companion to H.R. 1020 and will be tackled this year.   Timing will be everything in both chambers. Colvin said NEI isoptimistic about getting a bill through the Senate early in the year,before the political pressure of the presidential election year gets toohigh. He noted there was no magic cutoff point for passing nuclear wastelegislation, but that the longer that effort dragged on the more difficultit would be.Increasing Industry Role   The role the nuclear industry will have in the DOE waste program isexpected to increase in 1996. Colvin said that DOE is expected to issue arequest for proposals early in the year, seeking private sector involvementor input on spent fuel transportation.   DOE program director Daniel Dreyfus has noted that budget cuts wouldforce DOE to turn that work over to the private sector. The department alsowill be terminating its multipurpose canister (MPC) program, also leavingthat work up to the private sector.   Colvin said NEI plans to play a key role in the private-sectordevelopment of spent fuel canisters that can be used to store, ship, andultimately bury the waste. NEI will be a key coordinator of work and isexpected to outline utility specifications for the canisters, much likewhat the industry did for advanced light water reactor requirements throughthe Electric Power Research Institute.   ``Clearly NEI will have some type of catalyst role,'' said Colvin.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoHOLTEC, SIERRA NUCLEAR, AND SEG-VECTRA MAKE MESCALERO PROJECT SHORT LISTBy:Elaine Hiruo, Washington   Three dry storage teams made it to the Mescalero project's short listlast month, keeping them in the running as potential suppliers for thecommercial spent fuel storage business planned for Mescalero tribal land inNew Mexico. Final selection is expected early this year.   On the short list are Holtec International, Sierra Nuclear, and a teammade up of Westinghouse subsidiary SEG and Vectra Technologies Inc.   A contract with the Mescalero-utility project could open doorselsewhere. Northern States Power Co. (NSP), for example, is the leadutility in the project and will only consider storage technologies tappedfor the Mescalero venture when it develops its own away-from-reactorstorage facility.   Under Minnesota law, the utility must look for sites elsewhere inGoodhue County, away from the Mississippi River, to store Prairie Islandspent fuel. The plant is in Goodhue County near the river. Jim Alders, NSPmanager of regulatory projects, said last week that the storage capacity atthe away-from-reactor site will be limited to 680 fuel assemblies.   NSP, he said, expects to receive vendor bids in mid-January and toselect the winning technology by mid-March. The utility plans to submit alicense application to the NRC in October.   Public opposition, meanwhile, is mounting against attempts to movePrairie Island spent fuel away from the reactor site. A citizens advisorygroup's draft report now circulating recommends that the state scrap plansfor an away-from-reactor storage facility, said Alders. The group isscheduled to submit its final report to the Minnesota Environmental QualityBoard in mid-January.   Alders said he did not know if a board decision to leave spent fuel atPrairie Island would put the issue back in the lap of the Minnesotalegislature.   Meanwhile, dry storage vendors expect the Mescalero Apache Tribe and itsutility partners to select more than one technology for the spent fuelstorage facility planned for New Mexico. The project is aimed at providinglimited storage relief to participating utilities, which feel they can nolonger rely solely on the faltering DOE nuclear waste program.   The commercial venture is slated to have enough storage capacity tohandle 20,000 metric tons uranium of spent fuel. It will be built andoperated as a business, with an operating life of no more than 40 years.   The short-listed companies already have links to utilities participatingin the project. Holtec, for instance, earlier sold its canister-based spentfuel storage system to Commonwealth Edison, the largest nuclear utility inthe U.S. and a member of the Mescalero project. Sierra Nuclear and Vectrastorage systems, likewise, have been purchased by other project members.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoIN MATTER OF YEARS, DOE STANCE SHIFTS FROM `OBLIGATION' TO NO CLEAR LEGALDUTY   In 1984, DOE correspondence on the department's accepting utility spentfuel in 1998 was peppered with such phrases as ``legal obligations.''Despite being called for in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 and incontracts DOE signed with utilities, by 1993 those phrases were gone, andDOE officials maintained they didn't have a clear legal obligation to takethe spent fuel by the 1998 contract date if DOE failed to have a place toput the waste.   Attorneys for states and nuclear utilities suing the department over its1998 responsibility have submitted DOE correspondence to the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the District of Columbia Circuit that appears to show anevolving policy. Plaintiffs in the case have asked the court to reinforcewhat they consider a binding DOE obligation to begin taking utility spentfuel by January 31, 1998.   Oral arguments are slated for January 17.   The following are excerpts from DOE correspondence in the joint appendixplaintiffs' attorneys filed with the court or in DOE's response to aFreedom of Information request.May 30, 1984 letter from DOE General Counsel Theodore Garrish to Sen.Bennett Johnston (D-La.), ranking Democrat on the Energy & NaturalResources Committee:   ``The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 was passed with the presumptionthat a repository would be operational by January 31, 1998. The Departmentfully intends to meet this congressional objective and is currently in theprocess of taking the steps necessary to ensure that we fulfill all of ourcorresponding legal obligations under the act....   ``We believe the intent of Congress when formulating the act wasdirected toward commencing disposal operations by 1998. The Department istotally committed to achieving this objective. In light of this commitment,we are not now in a position to analyze in any meaningful way the legalconsequences raised by your question as the act was premised upon theexistence of an operational repository by the January 31, 1998 date.''June 21, 1984 letter from Johnston to Secretary of Energy Donald Hodel:   ``For some time I have been concerned about the Department's nuclearwaste program. In pursuing this concern I have put several questions toDepartmental spokesmen. Recently I received a rather extraordinary letterfrom your General Counsel, Theodore J. Garrish, responding to a requestthat I had made of the Department for a memorandum on the Department'sinterpretation of certain provisions of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of1982.   ``I had asked for an opinion on the legal obligation of the Departmentand the Department's authority to take title to spent nuclear fuel in theevent that a repository has not commenced operation. Garrish's reply was asfollows: ``...(W)e are not now in a position to analyze in any meaningfulway the legal consequences raised by your question....   ``The only sensible interpretation I can put on this response is thatthe Department does not want to provide an answer to my question.''Draft letter, dated June 29, 1984, from Hodel to Johnston [Eric Fygi, DOEdeputy general counsel under the current administration, later said this isan unused draft of the response Hodel later sent to Johnston on September7, 1984.]:   ``My first reaction to your letter was sympathy. Lord knows that manytimes I, too, have despaired at getting a `sensible interpretation' out ofthe Office of General Counsel. As if that were not enough, the Office ofGeneral Counsel has adopted its own version of the winemaker's adage, underwhich `they'll not opine before it's time.'   ``But as I actually turned to Mr. Garrish's repsonse [sic] of May 30 itseemed to make a good deal of sense. It emphasized Congress' clear policyobjective that acceptance of spent fuel for disposal would commence byJanuary 31, 1998. Instead of trying to render a legal opinion in a factualvacuum, Mr. Garrish's letter advised you, correctly, that the Department is`totally committed to achieving this objective.'''August 30, 1984 letter from Garrish to Johnston:   ``The Department does not intend to breach the legal commitments it hasmade in carrying out the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, and, of course, to datethere has been no suggestion that it has defaulted on any of itsobligations. To the contrary, this administration's clear policy commitmentis directed to commencing waste acceptance `beginning in 1998.'...   ``Since the clear policy commitment made by the Congress in formulatingthe Act was directed to beginning repository operations in sufficient timeto commence disposal of spent fuel by 1998, and since the Administration iscommitted to achieving precisely that objective, the issues that might bepresented by the unavailability of a repository at that time have anabstract quality. We are not in a position now to analyze in any meaningfulway the legal consequences of unavailability of a repository wholly bereftof a real factual setting necessary to aid our understanding of thequestion. Section 302(a) (5) contemplates beginning disposal of spent fuelby January 31, 1998, and the Department is fully committed to achievingthat objective.''September 7, 1984 letter from Hodel to Johnston:   ``In our original letter, the Department stated a firm commitment toaccept for disposal, on an orderly schedule, high-level radioactive wasteand spent fuel not (sic) later than January 31, 1998.''March 12, 1987 letter from DOE General Counsel J. Michael Farrell to Rep.Philip Sharp (R-Ind.):   ``(A)cceptance of spent fuel for storage at an MRS (monitoredretrievable storage) facility beginning January 31, 1998 would comply withthe contract requirements that were based on the Nuclear Waste PolicyAct...''   ``Thus we believe section 302(a) (5) (A) imposes a duty on the Secretaryafter commencement of repository operations to take title to spent fuelpromptly on request, but does not foreclose the Secretary from taking titleto spent fuel in advance of commencement of repository operations if thatstep is necessary and appropriate in fulfilling the terms of the contractby which the program is implemented.''April 1, 1987 letter from Farrell to Sharp:   ``Had Congress intended in section 302(a) (5) to specify a date by whicha first repository was to begin operations, the logical point at which toexpress this policy would have been in that section's subsection that dealsexpressly with `commencement of operation of a repository.' Instead, itrefrained from specifying a date certain for commencement of repositoryoperations, but required only that, once a repository has begun operations,the Secretary shall act with expedition to take title to spent fuel on therequest of the generator or owner of spent fuel.''Prehearing questions and answers related to the April 23, 1987 hearing bythe Senate Environment & Public Works Subcommittee on Nuclear Regulation.Witness: Secretary of Energy John Herrington.   Q: ``Do you view the MRS facility as either a `disposal' facility or afacility in which to `dispose' of `spent nuclear fuel?'''   A: ``No. The MRS is viewed as a DOE facility as defined in Article I 10of the contract; which would be an integral part of the waste disposalsystem. That definition expressly includes a facility to which spent fuel`may be shipped by DOE prior to its transportation to a disposal facility.'The purpose of that definition was described in the preamble of the finalrule adopting the contract terms `to expressly state, an accordance withthe act, that there may be an interim storage facility...which DOE mayutilize prior to emplacement in a repository.''January 12, 1991 letter from DOE waste program director Daniel Dreyfus toCommissioner Susan Clark of the Florida Public Service Commission:   ``The Department does not have a clear legal obligation under theNuclear Waste Policy Act to accept spent nuclear fuel absent an operationalrepository or other facility. However, the Secretary has acknowledged herbelief that the Department may have created such an expectation through itsimplementation of the Standard Contract for Disposal of Spent Nuclear Fueland/or High-Level Radioactive Waste (10 CFR 961). The Secretary has furtherindicated her intention to explore with affected utilities various optionsand methods for offsetting a portion of the financial burden associatedwith continued onsite storage in order to address expectations resultingfrom currently projected waste acceptance schedules.''December 29, 1993 letter from Dreyfus to Robert Butterworth, Florida stateattorney general:   ``The Department shares your concern regarding the timely provision ofdisposal services for the Nation's spent nuclear fuel. When the NuclearWaste Policy Act was enacted in 1982, the Department planned to have afacility in operation and prepared to begin acceptance of spent nuclearfuel in 1998. The Department does not have a clear legal obligation underthe Nuclear Waste Policy Act to accept spent nuclear fuel absent anoperations repository or other facility.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoSOUTH CAROLINA STUDIES WASTE FEE OPTIONS   Concerned about the lack of progress in the DOE civilian high-levelnuclear waste program, South Carolina last month became the third state tolook into withholding nuclear utility ratepayer contributions from thefederal Nuclear Waste Fund. The state Public Service Commission on December20 approved Commissioner Warren Arthur's motion to establish the reviewprocess. Arthur said the commission is obligated to determine if the wastefee is in fact a ``prudent expenditure.'' He said that commission staffwill look into such things as the legal aspects, under South Carolina laws,of withholding the ratepayer payments.   Arthur said that, in the context of a rate case proceeding, thecommission might later pursue such options as barring utilities frompassing the fee on to ratepayers, or placing that money into a specialescrow account. Arthur said the staff has been asked to present itspreliminary report to the commission February 22. The final report is dueby June 1.   The Virginia State Corporation Commission (SCC) became the first statebody to request such a study in July 1995. SCC staff was slated to presentthe report to the commission late last week. The Minnesota Department ofPublic Service (DSC) announced its probe of the fee issue in November. AnyDSC recommendation to change the way the fee is handled would have to betaken up by the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoWESTINGHOUSE HANFORD AWARD FEE $1.5-MILLION   The Westinghouse Hanford Co. received a $1.5-million DOE award fee lastmonth after receiving a rating of ``good'' for its work at the shutteredHanford nuclear arms plant in Washington state. The rating covers thesix-month period ending September 30 and is up from the satisfactory gradethe company received for the previous six months. The maximum award feepossible for work done during this latest rating period was $5-million.   The fee is one of several the company can receive, based on the caliberof its work. Westinghouse Hanford is prime contractor at the DOE site. DOEsaid that fiscal 1995 fees awarded to the company as of December 15included: $11.7-million out of a possible $13.3-million for meetingperformance-based objectives; $9.4-million, based on a claimed savings of$188-million (DOE said a cost savings validations is under way and isexpected to add to the cost-savings fee.); and $2.6-million out of apossible $3-million for its handling of solid waste at the site.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoHOLTEC WINS RERACKING JOB AT ANGRA-1   The team of Holtec International and U.S. Tool & Die has received acontract to install high density spent fuel storage racks at Angra-1 inBrazil. Value of the deal has been estimated at $6-million. The rerackingwill increase the in-pool storage capacity of the Furnas CentraisElectricas S.A. unit from 363 storage locations to 1,252 slots. Holtec saidthe racks are designed to store fuel in two regions of the pool: Region 1will be designed for storing fresh fuel assemblies, and Region 2 will befor assemblies taking credit for burnup.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoNRC STAFF LOOKS TO FRENCH PROGRAM AS IT REVIEWS DOE WORK ON BURNUP CREDITBy:Elaine Hiruo, Washington; Ann MacLachlan, Paris   NRC staff expects to soon be able to submit questions to DOE on thedepartment's topical report on burnup credit. When approved, the reportcould serve as a valuable reference to dry storage vendors in the U.S.,according to one DOE official.   Late last month Charles Haughney, deputy director of the NRC spent fuelprogram office, said he believed that DOE was on the road to addressingissues surrounding the use of burnup credit. Key among them iscriticality.   ``You really have to take an attitude that a criticality accident in thepublic sector is absolutely unacceptable,'' Haughney said. Criticalityalready is on NRC's roster of technical issues that must be addressed inits licensing of such things as the spent fuel containers and therepository itself.   Any NRC approval of the DOE topical report is expected to have vendorsscrambling back to the drawing boards to redesign spent fuel basketsalready approved by the NRC. The credit could result in higher capacitywaste packages.   Burnup credit is not now used in the U.S. Haughney was part of atwo-member NRC team that went to France in November to see how the issue ishandled there. The differences between the more mature French program andDOE's would prevent any direct shifting of technology and ideas. ButHaughney said the visit left him wondering how some of what the French docould be adapted to fit within the framework of the U.S. program.   ``We went over there to get a little smarter, not to find the keys tothe kingdom,'' he said.   French officials say that as fuel burnups increase, calculating theresidual uranium enrichment of spent fuel precisely can translate intooptimization of transport and consequent cost savings.   Jean-Louis Ricaud, head of Cogema's reprocessing and engineeringoperations, which also includes the Cogema group's transportation business,said no special burnup credit was needed for fuels with an initialuranium-235 enrichment of around 3%-3.5%, corresponding to today's standardburnups of around 35,000 megawatt-days per metric ton. Standard spent fueltransport casks and especially internal fuel baskets were designed toprevent criticality accidents for such enrichment levels, he explained.   But when utilities began moving to higher burnups, requiring initialenrichments above 3.5%, the French company and its customers sought amethod to give credit for U-235 burnup in a reactor, in order todemonstrate that spent higher-enrichment fuel does not in fact have aresidual enrichment greater than 3% and thus that no special measures arerequired for its transport, such as loading the transport baskets withfewer fuel elements.   Ricaud said equipment has been developed to measure the dose rate fromassemblies in the reactor, calculate the fuel's content in fissionproducts, and deduce the amount of U burned and thus the amount remainingin the assembly after discharge. The method requires monitoring fuel burnupin-reactor. Ricaud said he didn't know how widespread the practice is inFrance today; Electricite de France is only beginning to move tohigher-burnup fuel.   Research staff of the Institute of Nuclear Safety and Protection (IPSN)have participated in the development. IPSN is a semi-autonomous unit of theCommissariat a l'Energie Atomique (CEA) which works partly for the CEA andother industry customers, and partly in a safety analysis function for theFrench nuclear safety authority, DSIN.   Ricaud said that following a criticality specialists' meeting inAlbuquerque, N.M. last September, technicians from the CEA and the NRC hadagreed to pursue discussions on burnup credit.   Ricaud observed that the U.S. situation is ``fundamentally different''from the French situation, because spent fuel is generally shipped inFrance to La Hague after only one or two years' cooling. In the U.S., hesaid, fuel cools longer at-reactor, so the capacity of each transport caskis theoretically higher. An additional margin could be won if credit isgiven for burnup in calculating the amount of fuel that can be loaded intoa given basket. But the real problem in the U.S., he said, is that``there's no place to ship'' the spent fuel.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoTOLEDO EDISON BEGINS LOADING THREE NUHOMS MODULES AT DAVIS-BESSE   Toledo Edison Co., after being cleared by NRC, began the process ofloading three Nuhoms spent fuel storage modules December 26 at Davis-Besse.The modules, made by Vectra Technologies Inc., will hold 72 assemblies andallow the utility to maintain a full-core off-load capability when itenters a refueling outage in April. The utility may need two or moreadditional modules in early 1998 (before the next refueling outage) if afederal interim storage facility is not available, a company spokeswomansaid.   NRC declined to grant a request from the Toledo Coalition for SafeEnergy to halt the loading of the casks. The Toledo group had one lawsuitdismissed in November challenging the NRC rule allowing the Nuhoms cask tobe used for spent fuel storage. However,the group November 30 filed a newlawsuit in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit,claiming that NRC improperly allowed Vectra to alter a safety analysisreport commitment on cask wall thickness (NF, 6 Nov. '95, 17). Joining theToledo Coalition in its latest suit is the Maryland Safe Energy Coalition,which seeks to block the use of Nuhoms modules at Baltimore Gas & ElectricCo.'s Calvert Cliffs.   Separately, Vectra reported in mid-November a net loss of $1.9-millionfor the three months ending October 1 on revenue of $24-million. In thesame period a year ago, the company earned $23,000 on revenue of$32.5-million.   In a filing with the U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, Vectra saidthe revenue decrease was due partially to a decrease in nuclear engineeringservices. Vectra President Ray Fortney said the company would have astronger fourth quarter.   In September, the company negotiated a new $3-million loan, which itsays will be sufficient to meet all its commitments through the end of1995. But the 10Q filing notes that operations in 1995 will not alonegenerate sufficient cash to continue operations. But it adds that``management anticipates that sufficient cash will be provided throughadditional reductions in operating expenses, entering into a joint ventureor strategic partnership, or the sale of other assets. The company alsointends to explore alternatives for raising capital through preferred stockor a rights offering.'' Fortney said he is confident that ``Vectra will bein business in 1996.''   Earlier in the year, the company sold its chemical decontaminationbusiness, Plant Services Inc., to Westinghouse for $19-million, lesscertain adjustments. Among other things, Vectra used the money to reducelong-term debt.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoUSEC SALE SHOULD BE CANCELED, SAYS HARVARD STUDY OF HEU DEALBy:Wilson Dizard III   The planned privatization of the U.S. Enrichment Corp. (USEC) is a baddeal for the U.S. Treasury and for national security, according to aforthcoming book by Richard Falkenrath and others of Harvard University'sCenter for Science & International Affairs (CSIA).   Falkenrath's study of the high-enriched uranium (HEU) deal and USEC'srole in it appears as part of Avoiding Nuclear Anarchy: Containing theThreat of Loose Russian Nuclear Weapons and Fissile Material, to bepublished by CSIA this year.   According to a prepublication copy of the study provided to NuclearFuel,``The U.S. government could resolve many of the problems with the U.S.purchase of Russian HEU if it were simply to cancel the privatization ofUSEC.   ``Under this option, USEC would remain the executive agent of the HEUdeal, but the U.S. Treasury would remain USEC's sole owner. As agovernment-owned corporation, USEC could be instructed to accept lowerprofits for the foreign policy gains associated with the purchase ofRussian HEU--a trade the corporation would resist making if it were ownedby normal, profit maximizing investors.   ``This solution, of course, would work only so long as the governmentexercises more effective oversight of USEC's purchase of HEU from Russiathan was the case in 1994-95.   ``Canceling the public sale of USEC is a less radical idea than it mayseem. Most if not all of the efficiency gains associated withprivate-sector management were achieved in July 1993, when USEC wasestablished as a government-owned corporation out of the highly inefficientgovernment enrichment operation run by DOE. Few if any additionalefficiency gains can be expected by transferring the ownership from thegovernment to the private sector. Indeed, there are at least two reasonswhy the public sale of USEC may be a poor choice for the government. Thefirst reason has already been noted: the White House could compel agovernment-owned USEC to accept the lower profits associated with buyingRussian HEU, whereas a publicly owned USEC would resist this pressure.   ``The second argument against privatizing USEC is that the net presentvalue of USEC as a government-owned corporation exceeds by a substantialmargin the net expected proceeds of the sale of USEC.''   Falkenrath's analysis of the costs to USEC of buying Russian material isbased on his view that USEC's production cost for SWU hovers around $60,compared to the current cost of SWU to USEC under the HEU deal of $82.50.   The Harvard scholar's view that the sale of USEC will cost the U.S.government more than it gains is based in part on a study of thetransaction conducted by the General Accounting Office last year (NF, 25Sept. '95, 1).   Other enrichment market analysts have raised the point that delaying,rather than canceling, the sale of USEC could lead to increased revenue forthe U.S. government. Under one privately discussed analysis, the Treasurywould stand to gain as much as $1-billion by delaying the sale of USEC forone year.NRC Sees Certification Delay   Another factor that could impair the privatization of USEC is the recentannouncement by NRC staff that completion of the review of the federal SWUcompany's application for safety certification will be delayed by severalweeks.   NRC's Executive Director for Operations, James Taylor, informed the NRCcommissioners November 28 that the certification schedule was likely toslip several weeks from the previous completion date of February 29.   NRC staff asked USEC 1,300 first-round questions about the second safetycertification application the federal SWU corporation submitted onSeptember 15. The first safety certification application was rejected inApril   ``USEC has responded to a substantial number of questions,'' Taylorwrote. ``However, responses to a number of substantive issues have not yetbeen received. In addition, it is apparent from discussions with USEC thatcertain issues raised by the staff's questions will not be easily resolved.For example, the staff believes that substantial improvements are needed inUSEC's proposed technical safety requirements, particularly those needed toensure protection of workers from death or serious injuries from potentialuranium hexafluoride accidents.''   Taylor said NRC staff would brief the commission before making adecision on certification. He made his comments in Secy 95-279, ``Status ofCertification of the USEC Gaseous Diffusion Plants.''   Separately, USEC announced that it has hired Donald Hatcher as directorof risk management. Hatcher will oversee insurance programs at USEC.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoMINATOM EXPECTS EURATOM HEU DEAL; STATE DEPT. WON'T INTERVENE ON FRM-2By:Mark Hibbs, Moscow; Michael Knapik, Washington   The Ministry of Atomic Energy (Minatom) for the Russian Federation andthe European Union (EU) have begun negotiations over supply of weapon-gradehigh-enriched uranium (HEU) to the Euratom Supply Agency (ESA) and may soonconclude an agreement, Moscow officials confirmed last month.   According to an aide to Minatom head Viktor Mikhailov, negotiations onsupply of HEU for research reactor fuel to ESA might be concluded by lateJanuary. The aide added, however, that scheduling and other details couldpush back a final agreement until sometime in February.   Diplomatic sources in Moscow said that so far Minatom had not attachedany ``unusual restrictions'' on the supply of the HEU to Euratom beyondrequiring the usual peaceful-use commitments. Accordingly, HEU supplied byMinatom to ESA would be fungible under the terms of a peaceful-useagreement, and it will be up to ESA to determine how the material would bedistributed.   The sources said that, also conforming with usual practice forpeaceful-use agreements, Minatom would specify that HEU it supplied isintended for use in research reactor fuel and would expect to receive alist of where Euratom intends to store, process, and irradiate thematerial.   German opponents to the FRM-2 materials test reactor project, planned tobe built by the Technical University of Munich, have said the Russian HEUwould effectively relieve pressure from the U.S. to convert the reactor touse low-enriched uranium (LEU) fuel.   Following up high-level talks in September between Secretary of EnergyHazel O'Leary and German IAEA representative Cornelia Yzer, U.S. and Germanofficials are expected to meet in Garching in mid-January to discuss theprospects for building the FRM-2 with a slightly larger power rating and acore using lower-enriched uranium. DOE hopes to see Germany agree tore-design FRM-2 to use fuel proposed by the Reduced Enrichment for Researchand Test Reactor (RERTR) program. Argonne National Laboratory unilaterallyproduced such a redesign last year at a meeting of the RERTR programparticipants, raising protests from the FRM-2 sponsors and constructorSiemens (NF, 25 Sept. '95, 7).No State Department Action   After the U.S. Department of State asked Germany to confirm a reportthat Minatom and ESA had agreed to supply HEU for research reactors (NF, 25Sept. '95, 7), diplomatic sources speculated that the State Departmentwould intervene--either to persuade Russia not to consummate a deal thatwould challenge U.S. nonproliferation policy, or to request assurances fromESA that FRM-2 would not be supplied Russian-origin HEU.   But a senior U.S. official said last week that the State Departmentwould not take any action with Moscow. The official suggested that as longas the U.S. is using HEU in some research reactors, U.S. objections toFRM-2 running on the material are not credible. In the past this argumenthas been pushed by European operators, who have said they are disadvantagedcommercially by the continued use of HEU in the U.S.   Other U.S. officials say that the German desk at the State Departmenthas determined that proliferation concern about using HEU in FRM-2 is alow-priority issue in U.S.-German affairs.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoGAN IN NO POSITION TO TAKE RUSSIAN PHYSICAL INVENTORYBy:Mark Hibbs, Moscow   Gosatomnadzor (GAN), the agency appointed by President Boris Yeltsin towatch over Russia's nuclear materials, has neither the means nor thepolitical clout to carry out a comprehensive material balance inventory,Russian officials said last month.   Yuri Volodin, head of the department of safeguards at GAN, said thatinspectors have been able to do only ``book audits'' based on data alreadycollected by operators of facilities under the control of the Ministry ofAtomic Energy (Minatom). In addition to the audits, GAN personnel canconduct ``problem checks'' of data, to see how a facility operator obtainsand processes the information.   ``In a few cases,'' Volodin said, facility operators ``measuredcanisters for us,'' to verify the amounts of material declared to GAN. ``Wehave been everywhere and seen everything, but not much of the inventory hasbeen verified,'' he said.   There is no central data bank at Minatom or GAN for inventories ofnuclear material. GAN officials said that inventory data are in the handsof plant operators. The only reporting obligation plant management has tocentral authorities in Moscow, one official said, is an ``annual request''by the Ministry of Finance to report on the production of materials forcustoms purposes. GAN does not know whether Minatom facilities routinelycomply with those reporting requests, he said.   GAN staffers complain that the agency has never seen some sensitiveinventory data that Minatom passed on to the U.S. DOE in mid-1995. Thatinformation was given to the U.S. as part of a bilateral agreement relatedto the transfer of weapon-grade uranium to the U.S. and the disposition ofRussian plutonium.   There are also no plans at GAN to conduct a comprehensive physicalinventory in Russia. Volodin said that such an effort would requiretechnical means, political authority, and funding that is out of hisagency's reach. The cost of new equipment needed to take a completephysical inventory would be about $6-million. GAN has nearly no resourcesat all and is routinely two to three weeks behind in paying staffers, hesaid.   To meet payroll and routine expenses for the last several months of1995, the central government had to scrape to find an extra 300-millionrubles (about $60,000 at current exchange rates). For safeguards efforts atDOE or Euratom, Volodin said, ``this amount would be a pittance.''   But it paid about 30 safeguards inspectors located in four Russianregions that GAN has staffed up during the 24 months since Yeltsin made GANresponsible for nuclear materials accounting. Permanent on-site inspectorshave been assigned to bulk-handling facilities at Tomsk-7, Krasnoyarsk-26,Chelyabinsk-65, and Sverdlovsk-44.   Regional centers have been set up in St. Petersburg for northeasternRussia (Northern Fleet naval fuel inventories in Severodvinsk, allRMBK-design reactors, and St. Petersburg research institutions); inNovosibirsk for Siberia (11 fuel cycle processing facilities, includingTomsk-7, Krasnoyarsk-26, and Angarsk; plus a uranium mining operation inChita); and Ekaterinburg for the Urals (fuel processing plants inSverdlovsk-44 and Chelyabinsk-65).Naval Fuel Accounting Deficiencies   A fourth regional center for the Far East is also being set up inKhabarovsk, centering on the Komsomolsk shipyard at the mouth of the AmurRiver. Officials said that GAN had gotten enough access to fuel assemblyoperations for the Pacific Fleet to have determined that there is ``noinput control, no quality control for nuclear material, no check of thequantity of material in single cores, and no accounting system'' duringpreparation of naval propulsion fuel, another Russian official said.   Through the St. Petersburg center, GAN is working with the MurmanskShipping Co. and the German firm Gesellschaft fuer Anlagen- undReaktorsicherheit mbH (GRS) to improve physical protection and accountingmeasures for nuclear fuels associated with Russian icebreakers and othernon-military vessels.   While Yeltsin at the outset had put GAN in charge of accounting for allRussian nuclear materials, in October 1994 Yeltsin stripped GAN ofresponsibility for military inventories and production facilities.   Volodin downplayed the impact of the Yeltsin decision, calling it a``relief'' that served to clarify questions about GAN's access andeliminate a conflict point between GAN, Minatom, and the Ministry ofDefense (MOD). But other officials complained that Minatom had pressedYeltsin to keep GAN out of military activities. Minatom ``plays all kindsof political games in Moscow'' to deny GAN funds and authority, another GANinspector complained. ``The basic problem we have is that Minatom justdoesn't believe in the need for an independent safeguards agency.''   Just before Yeltsin cut off GAN's access to military activities, thisofficial elaborated, MOD had begun to work with GAN and had appointed arepresentative on a joint committee to organize safeguards activities atdefense-related facilities. Now, MOD itself is in sole charge of safeguardsat these sites. GAN officials said that MOD, unlike GAN, does not have aset of procedures for accounting for weapon-grade uranium and plutonium,however. In the meantime, MOD has assured GAN that it will get completeaccess to disarmament materials, once they are broken down from weaponscomponents.   Minatom officials objected that, in the U.S., NRC also has no safeguardsaccess to defense-related materials. But GAN staffers replied that DOE,unlike Minatom, has a complex defense material accounting and controlsystem that relies heavily on established safeguards practices.Plutonium MUF Problems   One result of Yeltsin's October 1994 ``clarification'' is that GAN hasbeen told it has access in principle to all inventories of UO2 and PuO2,including those produced by defense-related facilities, officials said.   According to Volodin, GAN's access is blocked once oxides are processedinto metal form. A discussion is underway between Minatom and GAN about thepoint where GAN must forfeit access and the material becomes categorized asdefense material, Volodin said. ``But we have access to all the PuO2 storedat all the reprocessing plants,'' he said.   Regardless of access in principle to PuO2 inventories, lack of properequipment has prevented GAN and Minatom so far from accurately measuringand verifying plutonium inventories at bulk-handling facilities. This hascontributed to a significant estimate of material unaccounted for (MUF) inprocess inventories at the RT-1 reprocessing plant at Chelyabinsk-65(Ozersk), for example, officials said.   Surge tanks at RT-1 have a ring geometry that, one GAN official said,prevents plutonium in solution from settling homogeneously, causingsignificant reliability problems. In addition, the accuracy of equipmentused at RT-1 to weigh samples of material is only plus or minus 5 grams pereach 3-kilogram sample.   The point of departure for Minatom's calculation of initial inventory atany bulk-handling facility is the estimated amount of U-235 in fresh fuelfeedstocks. GAN has access to historical records of these estimates, but,officials said, Minatom never used non-destructive or destructive analysisto verify the estimates. The only reliable plutonium inventory figuresavailable for reprocessing plants are for the plutonium output itself,which can be determined analytically.   Independently of the battles over authority, GAN officials said that, atthe facility level, plant management is very cooperative with their effortsto assess inventories. According to fuel cycle plant officials, however,cooperation would be less if facilities were operating at Western capacityfactors. RT-1 last year ran at about 30% of design throughput. ``We haveplenty of time to show the inspectors around,'' said chief engineer EvgenyDzekun.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoWITHOUT EC ASSURANCES, NRC MOVES TO SUSPEND COMPONENT EXPORTSBy:Michael Knapik, Washington; Ann MacLachlan, Paris; Mark Hibbs, Bonn   A jurisdictional dispute between the European Commission and certainmember states prevented Euratom from giving the U.S. legal assurancesrequired for certain nuclear reactor and fuel component exports before theexpiration of the U.S.-Euratom agreement for cooperation on December 31.   As a result, the U.S. NRC was in the process, as NuclearFuel went topress December 28, of suspending the general and specific licenses (thoselicenses referred to as XCOM and XMAT) to export reactor components, heavywater, and nuclear-grade graphite to all Euratom countries except Spain,Sweden, and Finland. NRC's action could cost several companies``potentially millions of dollars,'' said one agency staffer.   A senior EC official said December 28 that member states are examiningtwo solutions but that neither would be in place when the originalU.S.-Euratom agreement expires, and with it the validity of the existingletters of assurance.   The list of so-called non-major or non-sensitive components is containedin items five through nine of Appendix A to 10 CFR Part 110. The itemsinclude pressure tubes, zirconium tubes, such reactor internals as coresupport structures, and reactor control drive mechanisms. Among thecompanies most affected by the suspension are Siemens--which importszirconium tubes from the U.S. and has a large fuel fabrication business inthe U.S.--and Carpenter Technology, sources said.   European Commission staff had hoped that an interim solution could beworked out to avoid an interruption of trade in the affected items onDecember 31. They had aimed at an ``interim measure'' under which theCommission would have made the necessary assurances on behalf of EuropeanUnion (EU) member countries, while preparing a permanent exchange ofletters--to be submitted for formal approval by the European Council--thatwould take effect with the new U.S.-Euratom agreement in the spring (NF, 18Dec. '95, 8).   Sources said, however, that France and Britain objected to theCommission making the assurances on their behalf, because they touch areasin which the Commission does not have jurisdiction, or shares it withmember states. This is notably the case for the assurance that the exporteditems will be used for peaceful purposes only, since defense is a nationalprerogative in the EU today.   Pressed by Siemens, the German government approached the U.S. aboutdelivering a separate set of assurances so that exports could continue toGermany. That solution became less attractive, however, when the Germanswere told that with such bilateral assurances, German companies could nottransfer the exported components to another country within Euratom withoutU.S. consent.   In addition to control over retransfers, the U.S. requires countries togive assurances that the components will be under IAEA safeguards and willbe used for peaceful purposes. In the U.S., the fact that the newassurances have not been given was described as ``disturbing andmystifying,'' by a senior administration official.   The assurances are necessary to satisfy U.S. law--which many Europeansapparently find just as mystifying. The non-major components and materialsare not covered by the U.S.-Euratom agreement, which contains similarassurances covering more sensitive nuclear materials, equipment andtechnology. But the 1978 Nuclear Nonproliferation Act requiredpeaceful-use, safeguards and retransfer-approval assurances on thenon-sensitive items, too--hence the need for separate assurances coveringthem.   The current generic component assurances, given in 1979, are tied to theexpiring U.S.-Euratom agreement, although they are not a part of it.   The U.S. entered into separate agreements with Sweden, Spain, andFinland before they became members of Euratom. As a result, nuclear exportscan continue to those countries under the individual agreements, even inthe absence of any agreement between the U.S. and Euratom.Authority Of EC Assurances Challenged   One source following the U.S.-Euratom saga in Brussels said that theCommission had produced a draft assurance package and submitted it to EUcountry ambassadors at their regular meeting December 22. But certain EUstates maintain that the Commission does not have the authority to make therequired commitments. ``They can't make a peaceful-use commitment for us,''said a French official. ``That's the prerogative of member states.''   Worse, said one industry official, EU states didn't know there had beenan exchange of letters between the Commission and the U.S. government in1979, containing such commitments on behalf of the states, until last July,when the Commission was forced to make the old letters public in the courseof EU debate on the new Euratom-U.S. agreement for cooperation.   The discovery that the Commission had unilaterally agreed to the U.S.conditions in 1979 added to the tension surrounding the intra-Communitynegotiation of the U.S.-Euratom text, member state sources said.   ``We were astonished when we discovered the existence of that exchangeof letters,'' said an attorney for a major French nuclear company.   The senior Commission official acknowledged that in fact the EuropeanCouncil--the EU's collective political leadership--had been informedofficially of the existing exchange only at the beginning of November. Anda check following the protests of member states last summer turned up ``notrace of a report to the Council'' in 1979, when the initial exchange wasaccomplished, or since then, he said.   The EC official said the history of the commitments was still unclear,but ``it's possible it was considered as a measure for management of the(U.S.-Euratom) agreement'' at the time. Such management measures can betaken without the Council's approval.   ``Obviously, that didn't improve the atmosphere'' between the Commissionand member states, which have criticized the Commission's negotiation ofthe U.S.-Euratom agreement, the Commission official acknowledged. It alsodidn't help, he said, that the matter was put before the EU ambassadors``under pressure'' right before the Christmas break. ``People got a bitirritated,'' the official said, and an agreement could not be found.   French vendors aren't very affected by the Section 109b assurances,industry sources said, because they export very few such components fromthe U.S. But they are worried about the principles involved in theassurances.   One attorney for a French vendor, who appeared to believe there wasstill some leeway in U.S. law to permit an alternative to the blanketassurance letters, said he wondered if it would be simpler to provideassurances case-by-case on affected components or materials destined forexport from the U.S. The industry does not like the fact that the lettersof assurance also list countries to which U.S.-origin components may befreely re-exported, he said.German Industry Sought Action   According to a German fuel cycle official, German industry pressed theGerman Foreign Ministry to submit independent assurances to the U.S.``after it became clear that (the EU) would not act in time'' to prevent aninterruption in bilateral commerce.   The German official said that difficulties had arisen during negotiationof a ``consensus text'' of the letters among Euratom parties, noting theobjections by France and Britain related to their status as nuclear weaponstates. The official also said that German representatives had haddifficulty demonstrating to Euratom ``just how serious our situation is.''   As of mid-December, he said, Bonn had been assured that the U.S.Department of State would take action on the letter submitted by Germany.   The official said that in anticipation of a December 31 cutoff, Siemenshad succeeded in stockpiling U.S.-origin zirconium in Germany for later usein manufacturing fuel assemblies. But the company did not manage to arrangefor advance production and delivery of all UO2 fuel assemblies undercontract with European customers through the first few months of 1996, norin stockpiling enough UO2 to manufacture assemblies using its limitedcapacity available in Germany.   The EC official said the Commission and member states are consideringtwo alternatives: either a complete set of bilateral assurances, such asthose proposed by Germany, but only provided any potential obstacle tointra-Community trade is removed; or ``collective assurances'' that wouldbe given by the Commission and member states together, ``each one accordingto his jurisdiction.''   Whatever is decided, an interruption in trade in the nonsensitivematerials and components is inevitable and will likely last for severalweeks, until the EU can formally approve a new set of assurance letters.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoDOE POSTPONES DECISION ON ALTERNATIVE FOR TAKING BACK RESEARCH REACTORFUELBy:Michael Knapik, Washington   Secretary of Energy Hazel O'Leary apparently decided December 22 not todecide on a preferred alternative for dealing with about 22,000 spent fuelelements of U.S.-origin fuel that have been used at non-U.S. researchreactors around the world. Sources said O'Leary wants some more analysisfrom her staff.   The fact that selection of a preferred alternative for DOE's finalenvironmental impact statement (EIS) was again delayed would typically becriticized by advocates of those foreign research reactors facing a spentfuel storage crisis. Instead, the non-decision was greeted with a sigh ofrelief by those sources because, in their opinion, DOE was about to decideon an alternative that would be ineffective, be open to legal challenge byGreenpeace, and be fatal to the U.S.'s reduced enrichment in research andtest reactor (RERTR) program.   Those points were made in a December 20 letter to O'Leary by HowardShapar, who along with Joseph Egan has provided legal assistance to a groupof 17 foreign research reactor operators--a group put together by EdlowInternational--that have spent fuel covered by the EIS. Shapar told O'Learythat he learned her staff was leaning toward an option that would haveforced operators in countries with a nuclear waste program to send theirfuel to the U.K's Dounreay plant for reprocessing. DOE would sign amemorandum of understanding with the U.K. under which Dounreay would, inthe future, begin reprocessing low-enriched spent fuel. Reactors operatingtemporarily on high-enriched fuel would have to down-blend to LEU with DOEpaying the cost of down-blending. DOE would reprocess the remainder of thefuel at its Savannah River Site (SRS) in South Carolina except for Trigafuel, which would be shipped to the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory.   This option, Shapar said, ``would send a strong signal to the foreignresearch reactor community that DOE has abandoned the RERTR program for allbut a few select reactors.'' He mentioned that government authorities inSweden and Denmark, and probably in Norway, will not allow reactoroperators in those countries to pursue the Dounreay option, ``largely forpolitical reasons.'' DOE, Shapar said, will have stranded these countrieswith no alternative other than shutdown and/or HEU dry storage.   Other operators, Shapar said, will stop efforts to convert theirreactors. ``They will not now expend millions of dollars on conversion,''Shapar said, ``in the hope that DOE's MOU with Britain will produce an LEUreprocessing stream at Dounreay by the time they are ready to ship theirLEU spent fuel. Instead, they will maintain operations on HEU fuel andavail themselves of a certain HEU reprocessing stream, with reliance onRussian HEU.''   Shapar went on to note that Greenpeace, which is opposed to reprocessingat Dounreay, would likely sue DOE ``for failing to consider theextraterritorial impacts of its actions in the U.K.''   Shapar said DOE should decide to bring all of the spent fuel (except theTriga fuel) to Savannah River. ``Given DOE's recent decisions to keep oneof the reprocessing canyons open at the SRS...it is unlikely that thestate's congressional delegation will oppose taking the foreign researchfuel back,'' Shapar said. The governor of South Carolina could sue, ``butwe believe that to be very winnable litigation,'' Shapar said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoRT-1 OPERATION FACES COST CRISIS, UNCERTAIN FUTURE DEMAND SCHEDULEBy:Mark Hibbs, Moscow   A senior official at the Russian Federation Ministry of Atomic Energy(Minatom) said last month that prices for reprocessing services at the RT-1separation plant at Ozersk must be raised to justify further operation.   Evgeny Dzekun, chief engineer at RT-1, told NuclearFuel that thereprocessing plant, designed to handle a throughput of 400 metric tonsheavy metal (MTHM) of spent fuel from VVER-440 reactors, naval reactors,and fast reactors, is currently allowed by local authorities to reprocessup to 250 MTHM/yr spent fuel.   During 1995, however, RT-1 handled far less than that amount, and in1996 it will process still less spent fuel, officials in Moscow said lastmonth. Ozersk was earlier known as Chelyabinsk-65.   Dzekun said that between 150 and 180 MT of spent fuel were reprocessedat RT-1 in 1995. According to information from other Minatom fuel cycleofficials, the total was closer to 150 MT. At average discharge burnups forVVER-440 fuel of 20,000-25,000 megawatt-days/MT, about 0.8% of therecovered output is plutonium. Since Dzekun said that the amount of freshplutonium added to the stockpile at Ozersk during 1995 was just over 1 MT,no more than about 150 MT of spent fuel could have been handled there,these experts said.   Dzekun had said previously that, up to 1990, the historical averagethroughput at RT-1 was about 200 MT/yr; in 1991, he said, 170 MT wasreprocessed, and in 1992, 120 MT (NF, 4 Jan. '93, 4).   Russia's overall economic situation, and the failure of nuclear powerplants to be paid for power they produce (Nucleonics Week, 7 Dec. '95, 1),meant that plant management ``can no longer pay for reprocessing,'' Dzekunsaid.U.S. `Interference'   Dzekun also claimed that U.S. government interference posed a threat tohis reprocessing operation, and he blamed Washington for persuading VVERreactor management outside Russia to opt for dry storage of spent fuel.   Officials in Finland, Hungary, Slovakia, and the Czech Republic all havefelt diplomatic pressure from the U.S. not to reprocess any more VVER fuel,he said.   Last month, under terms of a commercial contract with Finland's IVO, thelatest annual shipment of spent fuel from the Loviisa VVERs to Ozerskoccurred. The Finns are still considering whether to ship spent fuel toRT-1 in 1996 (NF, 18 Dec. '95, 15). Dzekun said that, contrary to claims byenvironmental groups, safety will not be a factor in Finland's decision.Both IVO and regulator STUK have surveyed the RT-1 reprocessing operationand found it ``safe and reliable.'' However, IVO can send the fuel to thestorage facility being built by Finland's other nuclear utility, TVO.   In both 1994 and 1995, RT-1 took delivery of spent fuel from the PaksVVER station in Hungary under a spent fuel takeback deal signed in 1994.Dzekun said that Paks management has decided in principle to continuereprocessing spent fuel at RT-1 in 1996 but that it is ``intimidated'' bythe consequences of Russian nuclear law, passed in mid-1995. The lawobliges RT-1's foreign clients to take back high-level reprocessing waste(HLW) in vitrified form after 25 years of interim storage.   Hungary ``must take this into consideration if it wants to keepreprocessing,'' he said. GEC-Alsthom is building a vault-type spent fuelstorage facility for the Paks Nuclear Power Plant that Dzekun suggestedcould be licensed to contain HLW.Reprocessing Cost Inflation   Dzekun said that, every three months, the cost of inputs for RT-1reprocessing operations are adjusted upward because of continuing Russianinflation and market price reforms.   Real prices for electricity, chemicals, equipment, and transportationhave reached near-Western levels, he said, while RT-1 is tied to premarketcontracts and is not able to pass these increased costs on to customers.``We will have to raise the price of reprocessing to Russian reactors tocontinue justifying operation of the plant,'' Dzekun said. Dzekun said thathe was holding talks with Russian VVER plant managers in an effort to``persuade'' them to pay more for reprocessing services.   Dzekun would not reveal the price that VVER-440 stations in Russia payfor reprocessing. According to unconfirmed reports from other Minatomsources, however, in some cases reactor management pays as little as $50per kilogram heavy metal (kgHM), compared to European reprocessors' goingrate of about $1,000/kgMH.   Similar to steps taken by Cogema to hang on to its German reprocessingclients (NF, 4 July '94, 1), Minatom will offer VVER-440 reactors a``package deal'' involving an array of fuel cycle services, including fuelfabrication, along with higher reprocessing prices, Moscow officials said.   One senior Russian fuel cycle official qualified that because Minatomhas dropped the VVER-440 from its nuclear energy development plan, ``thereal issue for RT-1 is who its clients will be'' in the future.   In the meantime, the RT-1 client base is expected to shrink further.Minatom plans to decommission soon after 2000 the country's older VVER-440reactors, including Kola-1 and -2, and Novovoronezh-3 and -4. These unitsreprocess their spent fuel at Ozersk. Dzekun ``must convince foreignclients to keep reprocessing'' to keep RT-1 operating, according to an aideto Minatom head Viktor Mikhailov.   The aide speculated that an alternative strategy would be to put RT-1 towork on the huge inventory of spent fuel from the Russian Navy icebreakerand submarine fleet. But he said that neither Minatom nor the Ministry ofDefense can fund major management of Russia's daunting propulsion reactorfuel inventory.   Evgeny Mikerin, head of Minatom's fuel cycle operations, said thatreprocessing of UO2-based icebreaker fuel at RT-1 poses no technicalchallenges, but that a large inventory of spent icebreaker fuel presentlystored near Murmansk would be ``difficult to transport'' to Ozersk.Uranium-zirconium fuels used in submarine reactors, Mikerin said, aredifficult to reprocess there.   Dzekun also would not disclose prices paid by RT-1's foreign clients.But Mikerin said that speculation that Hungary pays only about $200/kgHMfor reprocessing services is false. Mikerin said that both the Paks VVERstation and IVO are paying ``somewhat less'' than the Western price, addingthat the rates charged foreign clients are consistent with Minatom's policyof slightly undercutting market prices.   According to unconfirmed reports from other Moscow sources, IVO paysabout $700/kgHM for RT-1 reprocessing.   At present, about 28 MT of separated plutonium from RT-1 VVERreprocessing operations are stored at Ozersk, Dzekun reported. A littlemore than 1 MT was added in 1995. Minatom will continue to stockpile theplutonium there, he said, in anticipation of BN-800 fast reactors beingbuilt at the Beloyarsk and South Urals sites--the latter adjacent toRT-1--to absorb the material later as MOX fuel.   According to Mikerin, however, no funding is allocated for BN-800construction, and the units will not be built until sometime in the nextcentury.   Three years ago, Dzekun said, reprocessing-related operations atChelyabinsk-65 employed about 18,000 people. Now the complex provides workfor 14,000; the other 4,000 employees have left for commercial workelsewhere in the formerly closed city.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoREPROCESSING CRITICS SAY MAYAK WILL DIE WITHOUT FOREIGN BUSINESSBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Official Russian recognition that the RT-1 reprocessing plant at Ozerskis fighting for its future confirms predictions made by reprocessingcritics last year.   In companion papers submitted to the recent Global 95 conference inVersailles, Anatoly Diakov of the Moscow Institute of Physics & Technology,and Oleg Bukharin of Princeton University, argued that without reprocessingbusiness from Hungary and Finland, paid for in hard currency, RT-1 ``wouldbe completely unprofitable,'' as Diakov put it.   Ironically, Bukharin pointed out that the existing backlog of navalspent fuel and submarine dismantlement--amounting to up to 350 submarinereactor cores' worth of spent fuel within a few years--would provide enoughwork for RT-1's naval fuel processing line for ``tens of years,'' even at100% capacity. But ``this work does not add to the plant's revenues,''Bukharin said, since the fees paid to RT-1 operator Mayak by the Navy andthe icebreaker fleet only cover production costs. He added that the Navy ishaving trouble finding even that amount, independent of the problem ofshipping the spent cores.   Reprocessing of HEU fuel, Bukharin said, is not favored by Mayak becauseit must be funded by Minatom (the Russian Ministry for Atomic Energy) andis actually a drag on Mayak's own budget.   Bukharin reviewed the situation with operators of VVER-440 reactors inRussia and abroad, concluding that economic difficulties in Ukraine andBulgaria would diminish the economic value of any spent fuel takebackarrangements with reactors there. As for VVER-440 operators in centralEurope and Finland, they are gradually moving toward alternativearrangements, in light of Minatom's high reprocessing fees and the newrequirement for returning waste to reprocessing customers.   ``Reprocessing of foreign spent fuel has become the principal source ofrevenues for Mayak,'' Bukharin said, but those revenues ``cannot be assuredin the future....The loss of the foreign contracts would likely undermineMayak's reprocessing business.''   Recently, Minatom officials--like some of their counterparts in theWest--have attempted to sell future reprocessing operations at RT-1 as partof a global disarmament and waste management strategy involving mixed-oxidefuel use and, potentially, advanced techniques of actinide incineration.   Even if Mayak stopped processing spent fuel soon, Russia would stillhave a weapons plutonium inventory of 125 metric tons--an amount destinedto grow in the future as plutonium is separated out from nuclear weaponscomponents--and a civilian stockpile totaling 72 MT, excluding plutoniumcontained in about 8,000 MT of spent fuel stored at reactor sites,according to Diakov's figures. As of October 1994, all newly producedplutonium is supposed to be stored in oxide form. High-level Minatomofficials have argued that this plutonium represents a ``nationaltreasure'' whose use as fuel must be promoted.   But Diakov argued that technical difficulties, including reactor design,costs and licensing requirements, would foreclose the introduction of MOXfuels in Russia's VVER-1000 reactor fleet. Minatom has essentially noexperience burning MOX in LWRs, an argument used by breeder reactorenthusiasts to promote the recycling of plutonium in fast reactors insteadof LWRs (NF, 9 Oct. '95, 6).   Diakov, however, contends that the high cost of MOX in a breederstrategy also would kill that option. He cited an estimated cost of$765-million for a new BN-800 fast reactor at Beloyarsk and amultimillion-dollar cost for the so-called Shop 300 plutonium fuelfabrication plant at Ozersk. An additional three BN-800 units planned forthe South Urals site, near the Mayak complex, would cost $3-billion, hesaid.   Diakov--a well-known opponent of reprocessing and bete noire ofMinatom--said that the nuclear ministry had requested $85-million as partof its fiscal 1995 program to support a program for transforming ex-weaponsplutonium into MOX fuel. But as of last June 30, the ministry had receivedless than 10% of the funds, he said.   Another potential obstacle is Russia's new nuclear legislation, whichimposes more stringent environmental standards and consequently complicateslicensing of new fuels.   Because of ``Russia's current chaotic political and economicalcondition,'' the Moscow researcher wrote, ``it is unlikely that plans forPu utilization will be carried out soon.''   Moreover, Diakov said, Minatom is not enthusiastic about non-reactoroptions for plutonium disposition, such as vitrifying the material, whichit perceives as unsafe.   Diakov predicted that ``in the next several decades...there will be noplutonium use in Russia.'' For one thing, Russia's uranium productioncapability can support 100 gigawatts of installed reactor capacity, whilethe country has only 22 GW. For another, its stockpiles of high-enricheduranium and uranium enrichment tails are estimated at 1,200 metric tons and300,000 MT, respectively. Finally, Diakov said, Minatom has about15-million SWU worth of enrichment capacity and the potential to fabricate4%-enriched uranium fuel from 0.3% tails at a cost of $540 per kilogram.   ``It is clear there is no economical motivation for Russia's nuclearindustry to reprocess spent fuel or use plutonium for fuel fabrication,''he said. Diakov argued that the real question is whether Russia's nuclearbusiness will take a short- or long-term view of the plutonium dispositionissue. He noted that the main concern is ``to prevent diversion and reuseof weapons-grade material in new weapons.''   Rather than seek new uses for plutonium, Diakov contended, the Russiangovernment should ally with the U.S. to ``make a determined effort to setup a reciprocal regime of plutonium storage under bilateral orinternational control.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoNONPROLIFERATION, SPENT FUEL HANDLING KEY TO LWR SUPPLY CONTRACT WITH DPRKBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   Under a supply contract signed between the Korean Peninsula EnergyDevelopment Organization (KEDO) and North Korea in New York December 15,KEDO will be responsible for providing fuel to and handling spent fuel fromthe two light water reactors promised to Pyongyang.   North Korea's ambassador to the United Nations, Ho Jon, and KEDOExecutive Director Stephen Bosworth signed the agreement following long anddifficult negotiations that began in Kuala Lumpur in September and resumedOctober 16 in New York City. While the contract leaves many details aboutthe reactor deal unanswered, it paves the way for a possibleground-breaking at the reactor site in North Korea as early as April, asource close to the talks said.   KEDO will finance the $4.5-billion reactor project. It still must enterinto a prime contract; select a ``program coordinator,'' as thearchitect/engineer is being called; and finish the site characterizationunderway at Sinpo. The Korean Electric Power Corp. is expected to be theprime contractor, with a number of subcontractors. The supply contract saysthat the program coordinator is to be a U.S. firm. The contract for programcoordinator is expected to be awarded based on open competition, with arequest for proposals going out in January or February, said one sourceclose to the talks. The contract calls for completion of the two reactorsby 2003.   The contract specifies that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea(DPRK) will continue the freeze on its 5-MW research reactor and refrainfrom building the two larger reactors that were planned, as well ascontinue to cooperate in safely storing and canning the spent fuel from theresearch reactor, Dan Poneman said at a news briefing in Washington, D.C.on December 15. Poneman is senior director for nonproliferation and exportcontrols at the National Security Council.   KEDO was established in March by the U.S., the Republic of Korea, andJapan to finance the cost of constructing two 1,000-MW reactors promised toNorth Korea under the October 1994 Agreed Framework between the U.S. andNorth Korea. The Clinton administration negotiated the agreement to addressthe nuclear weapons proliferation threat posed by the DPRK.   The supply contract says that KEDO will provide nuclear fuel for theinitial loading of each LWR and then will assist the DPRK in obtaining LWRfuel, other than that provided in the initial loading, through commercialcontracts. KEDO and the DPRK are to cooperate to ensure safe storage ofspent fuel. ``If requested by KEDO, the DPRK must relinquish any ownershiprights over the LWR spent fuel and agree to the transfer of the spent fuelout of the DPRK through commercial contracts,'' a KEDO statement said.Contract Prohibits Reprocessing   Under the contract, the DPRK agrees to apply IAEA safeguards to the LWRproject. North Korea also agrees not to reprocess or increase theenrichment level of any nuclear material used in or produced through theuse of any reactor or nuclear material transferred in connection with thereactor project.   KEDO officials insist that no target date has been set for theground-breaking, because there are still many uncertainties surrounding theproject. That decision will depend on the findings of the sitecharacterization teams and on the timetable for completion of the othercontracts and protocols that KEDO needs to negotiate.   KEDO sent a third site characterization team to the survey area nearSinpo City in South Hamgyong Province on December 16. The 15-member teamplans to remain in North Korea for a month, during which time it willgather information for a topographical map and prepare boring work for thenext step of the site survey, KEDO officials said.   Of the estimated $4.5-billion cost to construct the two reactors, it isexpected that South Korea will contribute about $3-billionz, Japan about$1-billion, and the U.S. and other KEDO members about $500,000, plus thecost of continuing shipments of heavy fuel oil promised to North Korea inthe agreedment, one source noted. However, the exact amounts of moneypledged by the two major players, as well as smaller donations pledged byother countries, have not been made public.   A KEDO spokesman declined to comment on the organization's finances orto provide information on the contributions provided by member nations orcontributing countries. A South Korean embassy official said December 19that a decision on the amount South Korea will contribute to KEDO has notbeen made yet, because the exact cost of the project is not yet known. Theofficial suggested that a decision might be made following the KEDO boardmeeting planned for mid-January.   Among the key issues to be worked out before construction can begin arethe details of how North Korea will repay South Korea for the financing.The supply contract states that KEDO will finance the cost of theconstruction and will be repaid by the DPRK, interest free, over 20 years,inclusive of a three-year grace period, beginning with the completion ofeach LWR.   ``Repayment may be in cash, cash equivalents or through transfer ofgoods,'' a KEDO release on the agreement stated.   Under the supply contract, KEDO is to provide a radioactive wastestorage building for low- and medium-level waste with a 10-year storagecapacity for the two LWRs; nuclear fuel for the initial loading of eachplant, including such fuel rods as may be necessary to preserve safety forinitial operation; and technical support services for the first LWR for oneyear after its completion.   The DPRK further agrees: to allow the IAEA to resume ad hoc and routineinspections of facilities not covered by the nuclear freeze when the supplyagreement was signed; to remain a party to the Treaty on theNonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to allow implementation ofits safeguards agreement under the NPT; and to come into full compliancewith its IAEA safeguards agreement when a ``significant portion'' of theLWR project is completed, but before the delivery of key nuclearcomponents.   The DPRK also agrees: to conclude a bilateral agreement for peacefulnuclear cooperation with the U.S. prior to the delivery of key nuclearcomponents, if U.S. firms provide such components; to transfer spent fuelfrom the 5-MW reactor from North Korea when the delivery of key nuclearcomponents for the first LWR begins; and to begin dismantling itsgraphite-moderated reactors and related facilities upon completion of thefirst LWR, and to complete the dismantlement upon completion of the secondLWR.   The contract further states that prior to shipment of any fuelassemblies, the DPRK will observe the provisions of Convention on NuclearSafety, the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, theConvention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or RadiologicalEmergency, and the Convention on the Physical Protection of NuclearMaterial.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoCAMECO'S PORT HOPE REFINERY LICENSE RENEWED JUST DAYS BEFORE EXPIRATIONBy:Ray Silver, Toronto   Cameco Corp.'s refinery at Port Hope, Ontario was granted a two-yearlicense renewal December 19, a dozen days before its operating permit wouldhave expired. The facility is the oldest of four large uranium processingplants in the world.   The license renewal had been deferred earlier in the month after arearesidents voiced safety and environmental concerns at an Atomic EnergyControl Board meeting. Despite staff reports that the facility posed nothreat to the environment or to public health and safety, several residentshad concerns ranging from emergency response plans to the ultimatedecommissioning of the facility.   The introduction of environmental issues into the license reviewapparently stemmed from a 15-year debate on the disposal of low-levelrefinery waste at Port Hope. The Port Hope license renewal was announced aweek after Canada's natural resources minister Anne McLellan said she wouldask the government early this year to consider a task force recommendationthat radioactive Port Hope refinery waste be buried at Atomic Energy ofCanada Ltd.'s Chalk River nuclear station.   Cameco's predecessor company, Eldorado Nuclear, built the Port Hopefacility in 1932 to extract radium from pitchblende. The plant was modified12 years later to refine the stockpiled residue and yellowcake to uraniumfor the Manhattan Project in the U.S.   In 1962 Eldorado began to produce uranium oxide (UO2) to fuel Candureactors and in 1969 to produce uranium hexafluoride (UF6) for light waterreactors. Both uranium trioxide (U03) from Cameco's Blind River, Ontariofacility and uranium from other producers feed the Port Hope refinery,which produces 8,000-9,500 metric tons of fuel a year, most of it as UF6for LWRs in the U.S. and abroad.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-27IA059-000325-B006-213http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey73.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233816 text/html 99036HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:35:50 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:17 GMTContent-length: 98849Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey73.html Sample Issue Copyright NUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNet September 12, 1991 Vol 69, SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EXPERTS SUPPORT CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO INTERNATIONAL SAFETY CONVENTION (1235 words) NOVOVORONEZH CALLED 'NO KOZLODUY' BUT SAFETY CULTURE FOUND LACKING (1118 words) PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS BEGINS AS FINNS PREPARE FOR REACTOR ORDER (304 words) CASH-STRAPPED MCDERMOTT MAY SELL FRAMATOME MORE OF B&W VENTURES (438 words) FIFTH TEAM OF WNP-2 OPERATORS AGAIN FAILS REQUALIFICATION TEST (189 words) BARSEBAECK BWR PUMP FAILURE REHEATS COOLANT DURING REFUELING (370 words) SETTLEMENT ON GRAND GULF COULD RECOUP $90-MILLION FOR NOPSI (260 words) IRRADIATION ACCIDENT SHOCKS FRANCE; 'CRACKDOWN' ON SMALL USERS PROMISED (526 words) CHEMICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS MIXED WASTE FACILITY AT HANFORD (579 words) COURT ORDER ENDS SECRECY IN DOE PROCEDURES THWARTING FOIA (502 words) SELIN BACKS LICENSING REFORM BILL DESPITE AMBIGUITY OVER NRC ROLE (1343 words) KOREA PLANS 13 MORE REACTORS TO MAKE NUCLEAR MAIN GENERATOR (510 words) ITALIAN REGULATOR GIVEN AUTONOMY AS ENERGY AGENCY CHANGES FOCUS (337 words) UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS LOOM ON IRAQI CENTRIFUGE EFFORT (1918 words) USSR OFFERS UP RBMKS TO SCRUTINY OF WORLD SAFETY EXPERTS, VIA IAEA (1052 words) CZECHS WERE FORCED TO TAKE UNITS THEY KNEW WERE BELOW-STANDARD (733 words) EDF AND SIEMENS TO BID TOGETHER ON KOZLODUY DESIGN IMPROVEMENTS (456 words) DIABLO CANYON-2 BREAKS RECORD FOR LWR CONTINUOUS OPERATION (284 words) NOTES PERTAINING TO THE GENERATING TABLE FOR JULY 1991 (2125 words) CORRECTION INDEX, NEDS ARE OPERATING. (179 words) Four BWR Mark IIIs operate in the U.S. Nucleonics Week noted incorrectly in (49 words) NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991 NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991 (25 words) CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, EXPERTS SUPPORT CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO INTERNATIONAL SAFETY CONVENTIONBy:Ann MacLachlan, Vienna   Nuclear safety officials from over 40 countries agreed in Vienna lastweek to proceed ''step by step'' towards an international safety regimethat could eventually include a framework convention defining a commonnuclear safety approach and how to achieve it practically.   German Environment/Nuclear Safety Minister Klaus Toepfer, who chairedthe Vienna meeting under the auspices of the IAEA, said the world iswaiting for all countries using nuclear energy to commit to a safetyregime, which he called ''the cornerstone of nuclear energy.''   As expected, the conference did not endorse the idea of a bindingconvention whereby nations would commit to meet certain minimum safetystandards and submit their installations to international audits--asurprise proposal Toepfer floated at the conference's opening session (NW,5 Sept., 1). But IAEA directors and conference participants hailed the10-point agreement they reached on ways to bolster the international safety''regime'' as the first tangible consensus of technical and politicalnuclear safety experts on the sensitive subject.   Participants in the meeting, called ''International Conference onNuclear Safety: Strategy for the Future,'' saw the unified approach asindispensable to ensure there are no dangerous outliers among the world'snuclear power plants and/or operators, which could suffer accidents thatwould put the rest of the world's nuclear programs in jeopardy.   Among the points the 350 experts agreed on were strengthening ofexisting IAEA safety service programs, developing ''a common basis'' onwhich to judge the safety of reactors built to earlier standards, moreexchange and dissemination of operating experience, and developing commonsafety criteria for future reactor designs.   They also agreed that safety is above all the responsibility of nationalauthorities, and that the IAEA should help promote ''sufficient nationalregulatory oversight.'' They called on national operating organizations andauthorities to come forward to ''identify operating nuclear power plantswhich do not meet the high safety performance levels of the vast majorityof operating plants and undertake improvements with assistance from theinternational community.''   Toepfer was visibly pleased at the result and, at a closing pressconference September 6, insisted that the momentum towards a convention ofa binding nature must not be lost. He firmly believes the world nuclearcommunity must have made clear progress towards such a text by next June,when the United Nations Conference on Environment & Development meets inBrazil to discuss, among other things, climate change and a possibleinternational convention on global warming. ''If you have no good answerabout the control of safety and about handling of nuclear wastes'' to bringto a concerned world, he said, ''you won't be able to have'' nuclearenergy.   IAEA Director General Hans Blix said that the earliest a conventioncould actually be presented to the agency's Board of Governors and GeneralConference would be in one year's time, but the task could well take twoyears. Once the convention entered into force, separate protocols thencould be concluded to agree on such things as incident reporting, use ofseverity scales, and safety reviews. ''The fewer things you try to do, theeasier it is,'' he commented.   Although the Soviet-design plants of central and eastern Europe came uprepeatedly in the three days of debate, senior IAEA officials said that therecommendations were aimed at all countries. Several participants namedIndia, Mexico, Argentina, and Cuba as countries considered worthy of closerscrutiny and/or intensified help in the nuclear safety domain, because ofeither their inexperience or the closed nature of their nuclear programs.   The experts also agreed that socio-economic factors should not be usedto justify continued operation of a plant that does not meet agreed-onminimum safety standards and that if sucha plant cannot be suitably backfitwith available resources, it should be shut down and alternativeelectricity sources ''sought.''But Who Decides?   The group did not say who should decide all this to whose standards, orwho should provide the electricity, but German technical nuclear safetychief Adolf Birkhofer said, ''We must judge (a plant's acceptability) on anad hoc basis using the best information available including (that of) theIAEA.'' Toepfer said this might be a ''second-best solution'' awaiting theagreement on universal standards, but said, ''That's what we have to livewith in political life.''   Blix told journalists the initial shock the convention proposalgenerated in some quarters may have stemmed from misinterpretation of theword. ''Is a 'convention' an instrument to drive through jointinternational standards, or an expression of states'' of their commoncommitment? he asked. ''We can come a long way'' towards strengtheningnuclear safety worldwide with existing services and standards promulgatedby the IAEA, such as OSART (Operational Safety Review Team) missions andNUSS (the agency's Nuclear Safety Standards series), Blix said, but ''aconvention gives it a more solid ground.'' He said a formal convention onsafety, like the conventions on early notification and mutual assistance incase of nuclear accidents negotiated quickly after the Chernobyl accidentin 1986, would represent ''a higher level of development in the field ofnuclear safety.''   It would also likely represent a higher level of expenditure for thosecountries whose budgets are already being strained for other contributions.Blix said one OSART typically costs $100,000 and that a program such asoutlined by the experts' meeting would surely cost ''millions of dollars.''The agency's current program to review the safety of older VVER plants ineastern Europe has been funded all off-budget, and Assistant DeputyDirector General for Nuclear Safety Morris Rosen said that one-third of the60 professionals in his division--which absorbs only 6% of the regular IAEAbudget--are working on extrabudgetary programs.   A major push to increase on-budget nuclear safety-related spending atthe IAEA would almost certainly provoke debate among members. The U.S.,which contributes 25% of the agency's budget, is concerned about theproliferation of expensive extrabudgetary programs at the IAEA, but at thesame time is apparently not ready to endorse budget growth for the agency,which has been living with zero-growth budgets for the past six years.   Blix said that ''if you run a great many'' of these programs, ''youcan't just run it on a shoestring.'' The agency's Chernobyl project and itsVVER-440 program ''started with nothing and we practically walked aroundwith a hat,'' he said. ''That's not the way to run a railroad.''   The issue was to be debated late this week at the IAEA Board ofGovernors' meeting before being taken up by the full General Conference,which meets September 16-20.   Some participants in the safety conference also questioned whether aninternational safety program would be the most efficient way to get at thereal problem plants in the world. ''I'm worried that an internationalorganization largely funded by us is going to spend a lot of time lookingat us and not where they should be looking,'' commented NRC CommissionerForrest Remick, who led the U.S. delegation.   ''If we're aiming at improving operating plants, setting standards won'timprove that in the short term. What those countries need is help inimplementing the standards we already have,'' Remick told Nucleonics Week.And ''knowing that some international organization has standards isn'tgoing to enhance public acceptance of nuclear in the U.S.'' or elsewhere,he added.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, NOVOVORONEZH CALLED 'NO KOZLODUY' BUT SAFETY CULTURE FOUND LACKINGBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   The first IAEA Safety Review Mission to a first-generation PWR(VVER-440) plant in the USSR, at Novovoronezh, confirmed that conditionsthere are nowhere near as alarming as those at the similar Kozloduy plantin Bulgaria. But officials returning from the Novovoronezh safety missionin early September said the Russian units still suffer from a number ofdesign deficiencies, notably lack of separation between systems andinadequate fire protection. More fundamentally, the Novovoronezh operatorsand management, while exhibiting competence and enthusiasm, showed adisturbing lack of safety culture and safety philosophy as it is understoodin the West, the officials said.   The conditions discovered by the IAEA team during their safety review ofthe four Kozloduy VVER-440 Model 230 reactors in May-June were sodisastrous that they set off alarms all over western Europe and launched acrash program to aid the Bulgarians to get their plant in order by thewinter. The program, under the auspices of the European Communities and theWorld Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), is already under way (NW, 29Aug., 11). However, Germany is pressing for recognition by the Bulgariansthat the oldest Kozloduy units, 1 and 2, should still be shut as soon aspossible.   An earlier review of VVER-440/230 units at Bohunice in Czechoslovakiaconfirmed that the Czechs had made many safety improvements and had asatisfactory safety culture. But the question remained open for thefirst-generation Soviet VVER-440s at Novovoronezh and Kola (two units ateach site).   The safety reviews are the final piece of a year-long IAEA-sponsored''Study of the Safety of Older Reactors,'' focussed on the first-generationVVER-440s, that is due to wind up in October. A safety review team leftVienna September 7 for the Kola plant, in the far north of the USSR nearMurmansk.   ''It's not Kozloduy,'' said a senior IAEA safety review official lastweek in regard to the Novovoronezh station. ''The management is committedto improvement and has sufficient resources and authority'' to do the job,whereas Kozloduy had been plagued with attrition of senior staff to betterjobs and wholesale abandonment earlier this year by the Soviet experts whohad in effect been running the plant. Nevertheless, the IAEA source said,the Novovoronezh team found housekeeping problems similar to those atKozloduy--indicating that the lessons of Kozloduy had not been taken intoaccount at the Russian VVER station--and confirmed the well-known designdeficiencies of the VVER-440/230 plants.   The review covered Novovoronezh-3 and -4, the head-of-series twinreactors on which Bohunice, Kozloduy, and the now-closed Greifswaldreactors in the former German Democratic Republic were based. Two earlierprototype units at Novovoronezh, VVER-440 Model 179s, were decommissionedin 1988 and 1990.   On the positive side, the IAEA review team confirmed the existence ofconservatism in the early VVER designs due to large primary system waterinventories and a wide core design safety margin. They also found thatpressure vessel annealing as carried out in the USSR today appeared to be''well established technology,'' according to a press release issued at theclose of the review, and approved backfits already carried out   Nevertheless, the team said that the leak-before-break concept forguaranteeing primary circuit integrity must be proven applicable atVVER-440s in order to establish ''an acceptable safety level for thelong-term backfitting program'' at Novovoronezh. The Soviets have usedleak-before-break to justify the absence of full-pressure containments overtheir early PWRs.   The IAEA team also remained concerned over the potential forcommon-cause failures that could affect safety functions, especially asregards service water systems, boron injection pumps, electrical andinstrumentation & control cable rooms, and control room I&C. The team, asource said, found a host of safety-related equipment, including safetyinjection pumps, in the auxiliary building that also contained turbines andcondensers, with inadequate separation between them. The control room wasseparated from the condensers in the turbine hall by a glass door, and firedoors were blocked open all over the plant.   ''They seem to have no idea about environmental qualification,especially for electrical equipment,'' said an IAEA official. The team wasalso chagrined at the lack of written procedures for both normal andemergency operations, and recommended that such procedures be developed soas to ''remove the reliance and burden placed on operators in needing torecall operating instructions from memory.''   The team also was concerned by the ''lack of understanding of safetyphilosophy'' at the plant level, as one member put it. Plant management andoperators had no idea about severe accident analyses, saying that was thebusiness of the design institutes in Moscow, and were not particularlyworried because they had been assured that severe accidents were impossibleat their plant. The plant simulator--the first in the USSR and nowsignificantly obsolete, according to the IAEA official--cannot reproduce asteam generator tube rupture beyond the very beginning of the accidentsequence.   As a start, the IAEA team advised the Novovoronezh management to compilea safety report for the plant. One never has existed, and safety-relatedinformation is spread over several different institutes, including the VVERscientific leader Kurchatov Atomic Energy Institute and architect/engineerAtomenergoprojekt. The plant management produced 600 pages ofsafety-related information for the IAEA review team the day the auditorsarrived, apparently the first time all the documentation had been collectedin a single report. ''We told them to pressure the design institutes forsafety studies. It's their plant, they have the right to the information,''a senior IAEA official said. VVER experts from Kurchatov have been invitedto show up at the current Kola review with their safety documentation, theofficial added.   Members of the Novovoronezh mission are not likely to forget their stayat the Russian PWR--not for reasons of nuclear safety, but because thesecond week of the reviewencompassed the Soviet Union's most dramaticevents in over 70 years. Far from being apathetic about another change ingovernment as hard-liners were attempting to carry through a coup d'etat inMoscow, the Novovoronezh citizens sprang to the defense of the USSR'slegitimate government. On August 19, a town meeting was broadcast live onlocal television in which the usurpers were repeatedly denounced.   Euphoria followed the failure of the coup two days later. ''I'll bet itwas the only time a safety review team will see reactor operators crying attheir stations--first from shame because of the coup, then for joy becausedemocracy had triumphed,'' an IAEA official remarked.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS BEGINS AS FINNS PREPARE FOR REACTOR ORDERBy:Risto Valkeapaa, Loviisa   Finnish power companies Imatran Voima Oy and Teollisuuden Voima Oy (IVOand TVO) have begun the information campaign that, under Finnish nuclearlaw, is the first step in preparations for the country's planned fifthnuclear reactor.   IVO and TVO sent 45,000 letters September 9 to households in the areasof Loviisa and Eurajoki, their two current nuclear power plant sites. Theletters contain a general study of the planned new power unit as well asnotification from the Ministry of Trade & Industry of public hearings onthe issue October 15 in Eurajoki and October 22 in Loviisa.   Preliminary public information meetings are also planned October 2 inthe two towns.   IVO Managing Director Kalevi Numminen opened the event at an informationmeeting in Loviisa and TVO Chairman Juhani Ahava, in Eurajoki, but theinterest center-of-gravity was Loviisa. IVO's predominant role in theinformation process was underscored by the fact that even the informationmaterial was produced mostly by IVO.   Numminen confirmed that four plant types are in the Finnish competition:ABB Atom's BWR-90; NPI-BWR, a Siemens-design BWR proposed by Nuclear PowerInternational (NPI); NPI-PWR, a Siemens-Framatome PWR also proposed by NPI;and a modern VVER-1000 from Atomenergoexport of the USSR. It is commonlyknown that IVO is keenly interested in being architect/engineer of theplanned reactor and that the company has very good knowledge of PWRs fromhaving operated the two Loviisa units.   Numminen said the Finnish project must proceed speedily because newgenerating capacity will certainly be needed after 1995. He said historyhad shown that electricity needs grow after periods of recession and thatFinland's economy has been raised by improving industrial efficiency andtechnical methods, all of which implies more electricity demand.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, CASH-STRAPPED MCDERMOTT MAY SELL FRAMATOME MORE OF B&W VENTURESBy:Ben A. Franklin, Washington; Ann MacLachlan, Paris   McDermott International, Inc., the Louisiana-based oil service companywhich now owns 50% stakes in the profitable Babcock & Wilcox subsidiaries,B&W Nuclear Services Co. (BWNS) and B&W Fuel Co. (BWFC), is expected tosell controlling interests in the two joint ventures to Framatome to raisecash. McDermott and Framatome held out the possibility that the Frenchcompany would increase its holding in the two subsidiaries at a laterdate.   In 1989 McDermott sold half ownership in BWNS to Framatome and 49% ofBWFC to Virginia Fuel Inc., a consortium of Framatome, Cogema, and UraniumPechiney in which Framatome holds 40%.   The deal now under discussion was said to be worth $70-million. It wouldraise the French owners' stake in each B&W enterprise to 75% for now, witha likely third helping later. BWNS and BWFC, which account for 85% of B&W'scivilian nuclear business, have been profitable and growing (NW, 13 June,11).   A Framatome official said that the French vendor is so pleased with theperformance of and prospects for the B&W ventures that ''if we had had totake over all of McDermott's share, we would have done it.''   B&W and Framatome said the parties expect to complete the transfer ofownership by the end of this year and added the companies are ''discussingarrangements whereby Framatome would have the opportunity to furtherincrease its ownership of both companies at a future date.''   Framatome board chairman Jean-Claude Leny said his firm's increasedcommitment to the B&W companies underscored its confidence in the future ofnuclear energy, especially in America. Leny said he believes a nuclearrevival ''inevitable'' in the U.S. and that it could start as soon as threeyears from now. Framatome also is counting on expansion of the nuclearservices market with massive replacement of steam generators andrejuvenation related to plant life extension.   By joint agreement, BWNS and BWFC are to remain under the management ofcurrent President Charles Pryor.   ''The motive here is pretty clearly McDermott's need to improve itsbalance sheet by adding cash,'' a Wall Street analyst said. ''They arelosing money in the oil service business. They sold the crown jewels ofB&W, Bailey Controls, to an Italian company, Finmeccanica, for $295-millionin 1989. But that and the earlier B&W spinoffs to the French apparentlyjust weren't enough.''   Don Washington, a McDermott spokesman, said his company's guidance toB&W in shedding its civilian nuclear business, which is based largely inLynchburg, Va., reflected McDermott's announced ''consideration of sales toincrease liquidity.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, FIFTH TEAM OF WNP-2 OPERATORS AGAIN FAILS REQUALIFICATION TEST   A WNP-2 crew has failed one of three simulator tests, postponing reactorrestart for ''at least several more weeks,'' according to utility spokesmanJohn Britton. The outage, which began for refueling in April, is costingthe Washington Public Power Supply System (WPPSS) about $100,000 per day.   When only three of the five required control room operator crews passedNRC requalification exams last February and March, WPPSS had to postpone tolate August WNP-2's post-refueling restart of WNP-2. Instead, WPPSS resumedretraining the two failed crews and prepared for re-exams (NW, 18 July,6).   On September 9, one of the two flunked crews again failed one of threesimulator emergency scenarios.   Britton said one of the two crews given makeup requalification teststhis week was successful. But the second--the fifth crew of the fiverequired--did not do well enough in a late afternoon and evening simulatorchallenge. ''They failed only one of three different emergency scenarios,''Britton said, ''but making no apologies, the overall fact is that theyfailed.'' He said WPPSS would begin immediately ''putting together a newcrew.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, BARSEBAECK BWR PUMP FAILUREREHEATS COOLANT DURING REFUELINGBy:Mark Hibbs, Bonn    A pump trip at Sydkraft AB' Barsebaeck-2 on September 6 led toreheating of reactor coolant in the pressure vessel for several hoursduring a refueling outage. The incident has been classified as level 1 onthe International Nuclear Event Scale (INES).    Plant officials this week said that for about 3.5 hours on Friday,September 6, failure of the one oprating residual heat removal (RHR) pumpoperating caused the water temperature in the pressure vessel to increasefrom 50 degrees C to about 98 degrees C. With the pump in operation afterthe BWR had been shut down to begin the outage, water temperature hadfallen as planned to 50 degrees C.    The two RHR pumps are periodically used during reactor operation tocirculate coolant through heat exchangers and ion filters. During refuelingoutages they are used to lower coolant temperature prior to opening thevessel.    The pump failed to work after a suction valve began to close andtripped the pump. The valve is pneumatic and nitrogen pressure dropped whena pressure relief valve was tested. With the main circulation pumps shutdown at the onset of the refueling operation, water temperature in thevessel began to increase when the heat removal pump failed. The second RHR1pump was available and was started manually after the first pump was foundout of service, officials said, and coolant temperature was again loweredto 50 degrees C.    Operators in the control room during the beginning of the refuelingexercise did not notice that water temperature in the vessel had increased,since temperature monitors were not located in a position on the residualheat removal lines so as to record the temperature. The increase wasnoticed only when the lid to the pressure vessel was removed and a ''smallrelease'' of steam occurred, the official said, but the release was belowthe level which, would have triggered radiation alarms. After a shortdelay, however, a fire protection alarm was triggered by the release, hesaid.   The refueling outage at the reactor was scheduled to take 13 days.Because of the incident, however, the lengthj of the outage might beincreased, the official said.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, SETTLEMENT ON GRAND GULF COULD RECOUP $90-MILLION FOR NOPSI   An agreement in principle would permit New Orleans Public Service Inc.(NOPSI) to recoup an additional $90-million of its Grand Gulf-1 nuclearplant investment from ratepayers. NOPSI has already written off$186.2-million of its $535.5-million share of Grand Gulf.   The tentative agreement announced last week between NOPSI, the NewOrleans City Council, and the Alliance for Affordable Energy would endthree years of litigation over the city council's ''prudence'' disallowanceof $135-million of Grand Gulf-1 costs.   The 1,306-MW General Electric BWR came on-line in 1985, and in 1988 thecity council disallowed recovery of $135-million after finding$476.2-million imprudent. The utility had already written off $51.2-millionof the plant's costs, which were 15.3% of Grand Gulf's $3.5-billion.   Appeals and counterappeals in the case were heard in both Louisiana andfederal courts, and the case is scheduled to be heard by the U.S. SupremeCourt later this year.   The agreement calls for NOPSI to reduce electric rates by $11.3-millionwhen the agreement becomes effective; but then allows rate increases of$7.3-million in 1992, $6.7-million in 1993, $5.2-million in 1994, and$4.4-million in 1995.   In exchange for these increases, aimed at re-capturing Grand Gulf costs,NOPSI will freeze any other rate increases for five years and concede to a13.76% cap on earnings from electric operations.   The New Orleans City Council has scheduled a public hearing on theproposed settlement for September 19, with a decision expected aroundOctober 3.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, IRRADIATION ACCIDENT SHOCKS FRANCE; 'CRACKDOWN' ON SMALL USERS PROMISEDBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Two men remained hospitalized in France this week after being severelyirradiated in August by electrons from a particle beam accelerator at anindustrial enterprise in Forbach, near Metz. France's environment ministersaid the accident shows that insufficient attention has been paid to smallusers of radioactivity and promised a ''crackdown'' on such uses.   The estimated doses sustained by the workers, who came from thetemporary-employment agency Manpower and had apparently not receivedtraining in radioprotection, were reported to be between 50 and 100 rem,but an expert at the Institut de Protection et de Surete Nucleaire (IPSN)said the exposures must have been much higher to have caused theradiation-induced burns from which the patients are suffering. IPSN wasconducting biological exams of the patients early this week at the Percymilitary hospital in Clamart, near Paris, to determine the doses withgreater accuracy. The accident is the most serious of its kind on LaborDepartment record in France.   A third person, a recently hired crew leader, was also irradiated butmuch less severely and was not hospitalized with the others August 27. Theenterprise, Electron Beam Service (EBS), which used the beams to refinecarbon particles, has been ordered closed and responsibilities in theaffair are under investigation by the regional Labor Department and theprosecutor general of Sarreguemines. The company, pleading human error onthe workers' part, says safety instructions forbade entering the beam hallfor 10 to 15 minutes after the beam was switched off, but local Laborofficials say the instructions were written in English and that EBS had notdeclared the existence of the accelerator to the authorities.   Environment/Risks Minister Brice Lalonde declared, ''I didn't know youcould have a particle accelerator in your attic. We have been paying somuch attention to the tree of nuclear power plants, we haven't seen theforest of small users'' of radiation equipment. ''We are going to have toreally crack down.''   The dose estimates of 50 to 100 rem reported in the French media overlast weekend were far too low, according to the IPSN expert, to have led tothe effects suffered by the two workers: skin burns several millimetersdeep and loss of hair. The results of the IPSN examination are covered bymedical confidentiality. But a radioprotection expert told Nucleonics Weekthat skin burns, radiodermatitis, and other radioactivity-induced effectsimply irradiation to at least ''several tens of Gray'' with a minimum of 6Gray. One Gray equals 100 rad. Grays and rads measure the energy absorbedby irradiated matter; 100 rem is equivalent to 100 rad, but rem measuresthe biological damage done to living tissue that has been irradiated.Experts say that above 50 rem--at which level no biological damage isobserved--one should speak rather of rad, or Gray.   By way of comparison, ''liquidators'' working on the Chernobyl nuclearplant site in 1986 almost routinely received doses of 50 rem, but those whocontracted radiation sickness on the night of the catastrophe were said tohave received upwards of 600 rem (6 Gray).Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, CHEMICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS MIXED WASTE FACILITY AT HANFORDBy:Richard R. Zuercher, Washington   Chemical Waste Management, Inc. (CWM) plans to spend more than$100-million to build and operate a facility to clean up waste that is bothhazardous and radioactive at DOE's Hanford nuclear reservation inWashington.   The company--a unit of Waste Management, Inc.--says the state-of-the-artTri-Cities Environmental Analysis & Treatment (Treat) complex will functionas an analytical laboratory and waste treatment facility for wastesproduced by DOE and other generators in the Pacific Northwest.   ''We expect to invest over $100-million in CWM facilities at Hanfordover the next six to eight years to bring our world-renowned commercialclean-up experience to serve DOE's needs as well as those of the PacificNorthwest,'' said CWM Chairman Jerry Dempsey. ''Having these facilitiesavailable will accelerate the cleanup of Hanford by years and reduceoverall restoration costs.''   Dempsey said CWM expects to first build an analytical facility adjacentto the Hanford reservation. Construction tentatively is set to start laterthis year, with the facility to come on line in 1993. The facility willprovide laboratory analysis of mixed waste (low level radwaste alsodesignated as chemically hazardous by the Environmental Protection Agency),and will accommodate Treat management staff and CWM scientists who plan toparticipate jointly in research with DOE's Pacific Northwest Laboratory.   CWM currently is negotiating for purchase of the land, in the city ofRichland at the Port of Benton's Richland Airport, CWM said.   The second major component of the Treat complex will be a wastetreatment facility on the Hanford reservation. That facility, to belicensed by Washington state and built over the next two to six years, willcontain separation, sampling, records management, incineration,stabilization, repackaging, and transportation operations needed to treatmixed waste from Hanford and regional commercial generators. Constructionis expected to begin in 1993, CWM said.   The waste treatment complex will be built in the center of the560-square-mile reservation, about eight miles from the Columbia River andagricultural areas of the Columbia Basin. CWM said the facility's advancedeffluent controls and the extensive buffer provided by the Hanford sitewill do much to make the facility environmentally sound.   ''The facility will be designed so that, as the Hanford mixed-wastemarket grows and advanced technologies become fully available, enhancementsto the treatment complex can be made to safely maintain efficientoperations and high environmental standards,'' the company said. Residuesfrom the processing of waste will not be dumped at the Treat facility butwill be disposed of at off-site commercial hazardous, licensed low-levelradwaste facilities, or--in the case of Hanford mixed waste--be returned toHanford.   While waste available for treatment in DOE's current inventory is smallcompared to other Pacific Northwest markets--about 75 tons of hazardouswaste and 50 tons of mixed waste annually--this type of waste is expectedto increase significantly over the next few years, CWM said. CWM projectsthat two-thirds of the waste it eventually will treat will come from DOE,with the remainder from the commercial market. No tonnage projections wereavailable. Constructing the waste facility now will serve to avoid the needfor prolonged storage and the environmental risks that accompany it, thecompany said.   Dempsey said serving both DOE and Pacific Northwest markets is key tothe Treat complex's financial viability. The complex is expected to employsome 200 workers, he added.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, COURT ORDER ENDS SECRECY IN DOE PROCEDURES THWARTING FOIABy:Ben A. Franklin, Washington   A federal judge in Los Angeles ruled this week that DOE--acting insecrecy--wrote departmental procedures designed to shield from disclosureunder the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) the safety, health and otherrecords of the corporate contractors running its nuclear weapons program.The court ordered an end to the concealment.   The September 9 ruling by U.S. District Judge Edward Rafeedie deniedDOE's petition for summary dismissal of the suit. Instead, the courtgranted all demands by the plaintiff in the case, the Committee to Bridgethe Gap (CBG), for the public release of DOE proposals for, and drafts of,previously hidden rules and orders designed both to thwart FOIA requestsand to block public scrutiny of the department's process of concealment.   The decision directs DOE henceforth to submit all directives and ordersaffecting the public release of contractor data to formal rulemakingprocedure, and requires public notice and opportunity for public comment.(Civil Action 90-3568-ER).   Daniel Hirsch, president of CBG, the Los Angeles-based public interestgroup that began the dispute in 1988 when DOE denied its FOIArequest--called the decision ''a tremendous victory for public oversight ofDOE.''   ''Proposals to prevent public access to records of DOE'scontractor-operated facilities have been roundly defeated,'' Hirsch said ina statement. ''This marks the end of DOE's practice of secretly makingrules affecting the public.'' The plaintiffs charged that DOE officials hadbeen proposing to shield from disclosure, among other things, data onworker exposure to radioactivity.   DOE seemed somewhat less excited by the court ruling. ''Our lawyers callit a non-event,'' a departmental spokesman said. ''We were going to do thisanyway, and told the court so. But I guess the plaintiffs would say we didnot agree to that until they filed suit.''   CBG said the irony was that DOE has been promulgating rules that tightenits FOIA procedures, and doing so in secret. ''They were doing it bycalling the changes 'orders' instead of regulations so they could evade therequirement that proposed regulations be published for public comment.''Hirsch said.   The lawsuit, given a preliminary hearing April 29 (NW, 2 May, 4), wasbased in part on CBG's unofficial access through a ''leak'' of amemorandum from Bruce Twining, manager of DOE's Albuquerque, N.M.,operations office. CBG cited what it said was Twining's proposal thatcontractors' documents on DOE weapons program activities be made virtuallyinvulnerable to requests under the FOIA, and even more tightly''suppressed'' than suggested by top department officials in Washington.   The litigation began when CBG submitted an FOIA request for copies ofchanges proposed by DOE in its FOIA procedures and had both that requestand an administrative appeal of its denial turned down by DOE. ''We had tofile an FOIA request, an appeal of its denial, and finally had to go tocourt to obtain a copy of DOE's proposed FOIA rule changes,'' Hirsch said.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, SELIN BACKS LICENSING REFORM BILL DESPITE AMBIGUITY OVER NRC ROLEBy:David Stellfox and Dave Airozo, Washington   NRC can live with the Bush Administration's ideas on nuclear plantlicensing reform legislation even though the pending legislation thatbrings about the change (S. 1220) is ''sort of ambiguous'' about NRC'sauthority to make a final, overall, pre-operational safety finding.   Though he concedes the ambiguity, NRC Chairman Ivan Selin isn't botheredby it. What does have him uneasy is the possibility that the House ofRepresentatives will offer companion legislation that will gut one of thekeystones of the Administration-backed bill or that the Administration, inits zeal to pass licensing reform, could ''inadvertently trash'' theagency's new one step-licensing rule--a rule the commission believes isadequate and not in need of legislative undergirding.   Selin's comments to Nucleonics Week came by way of explanation ofprevious and apparently contradictory statements on S. 1220.   When Selin told a House subcommittee in July that the commission wouldnot object to certain changes in the bill, he appeared to contradict, or atleast back away from, previous commission support for the legislation.   Secretary of Energy James Watkins, keenly aware of Wall Street'sleeriness about nuclear investments, thinks S. 1220 is fine the way it isand could help spark a nuclear revival here. Selin's comments promptedWatkins to dash off a letter--which quickly became public--taking issuewith Selin's statements, particularly his apparent endorsement of aproposed change that might make it easier for intervenors to get apost-construction hearing on a new plant.   Post-construction hearings are anathema to nuclear power's boosters,because of the uncertainty they create. Such hearings could drag on formonths or years, they argue, and the finished plant could sit idle,generating nothing but additional interest payments, as has happened in thepast.   Selin told Nucleonics Week last week that the difference in positions isonly apparent and that he was speaking in the abstract when he testified tothe House subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Peter Kostmayer (D-Pa.)    ''Kostmayer asked a number of questions about (whether) we wouldsupport certain kinds of legislation,'' Selin said. ''I'm sure he askedthem in the context of his interpretation of S. 1220, but they're notnecessarily our interpretation of S. 1220. So I just took them on the faceof it.   ''It did not seem appropriate...(to) argue with him as to whether hisquestions described a particular piece of legislation,'' Selin continued.''I answered them as, if faced with such legislation, what would ourreaction be. When Secretary Watkins wrote to me, he was talking about aspecific piece of legislation, which is somewhat different from the pieceof legislation described by Chairman Kostmayer in his questions to me andtherefore elicits somewhat different answers.''   In fact, the answers were sufficiently different as to appearcontradictory--supporting on the one hand S. 1220, which increases theburden on intervenors seeking hearings, and Kostmayer's suggested changesto S. 1220, which would lower those same thresholds.   Congressional sources found Selin's explanation lacking. ''ChairmanKostmayer's understanding is, and the transcript shows, that that is whathe was trying to get to,'' one source close to the matter said. ''He hasdeep concerns about the hurdles intervenors would have to jump under thelegislation.''   Selin said some of Kostmayer's questioning was aimed at trying ''to puta little daylight between the commission and the Administration in saying'you don't really support this bill that's up there, do you?'''   Selin reiterated NRC's support for S. 1220 last week, but toldNucleonics Week supporting the Administration's view is not NRC's job.''The commission's view, from a regulatory point of view, (10 Code ofFederal Regulations) Part 52 is quite adequate, and we still believe that.On the other hand, we don't have a judgment as to what it is going to taketo have the industry invest or for people to raise money. That's DOE's job.If it is their judgment that legislation would make it more likely tofoster an attractive competitive climate, we neither agree nor disagree,that's not our job. So when we make our statement that (Part) 52 isadequate, we're not making a business judgment, we're making a regulatoryjudgment.''   With that qualification, Selin said the commission could support S. 1220as it now stands, adding however that the commission is concerned aboutwhat will happen with legislation in the House. He said it's clearKostmayer wants the bill amended so that the opportunity for a second,pre-operational hearing would be mandatory--a requirement that would''displease'' the commission.   Some NRC sources believe S. 1220 would unduly tie the commission's handsby limiting its authority to make an overall, pre-operational determinationabout a plant's safety. In his letter to Selin, Watkins said S. 1220 doesnot diminish the discretion that the commission ''currently has underexisting authority'' to make safety determinations on its own initiative.   Though S. 1220 does not eliminate the long-standing authority for apre-operational hearing in Section 189(a) of the Atomic Energy Act (AEA),the bill establishes a whole new subsection, 189(b), which creates a higherthreshold for intervenors seeking hearings and restricts such hearingssolely to conformance with the requirements of the combined constructionpermit/operating license and its associated inspections, tests, analyses,and acceptance criteria (ITAAC).   Selin acknowledged that S. 1220 is ''sort of ambiguous'' on this point,but the ambiguity doesn't really bother him because courts have alwaysdeferred to NRC's broad authority to protect the public health and safety.''So, as a practical matter I don't think there's any difference betweenthe two, but it's helpful to have the executive agency (DOE) agree...thatnothing precludes our ability to find that a plant is or isn't healthfuland safe at the time of operation,'' Selin said.   Ron Simard, a spokesman for the Nuclear Management & Resources Council,said the new AEA section covering combined licenses would restrict NRC tothe ITAAC, but added that the agency has sufficient authority under Section161(b) and 161(p) ''to immediately shut down a plant or impose otherconditions'' at any time. That NRC authority applies only to plants alreadylicensed and operating. The purpose of the new Section 189(b) created bythe legislation is ''to establish some reasonable constraints on the issuesthat will be considered during the post-construction and pre-operationalstage,'' Simard said.   The removal of language from the new Section 189(b) which would requirea commission ''finding'' that the plant is ready to go on line was toaccommodate a DOE concern, Selin said. ''Their understanding is that, byputting in the word 'finding,' we require a hearing, or at least if someonechallenges, they have to be given a hearing. Our understanding--my GeneralCounsel--says that's not true. The hearing situation is not affected by thephrase.    ''Our General Counsel thinks the hearing situation is identicalwhether you call it a finding, or approval of an ITAAC, or a judgment,''Selin continued. ''It's still the commission's decision on whether ahearing is called for or not, subject to judicial review. So, at least inmy opinion...what they were nervous about was that, in putting in the word'finding,' we would make it more difficult for the commission to decide ina specific case that a hearing was unnecessary.''   Selin said the big difference between NRC and the Administration is''none of these things. Our main discomfort is none of these things we'vediscussed. If, in trying to get (S.) 1220 through, the Administration wereto inadvertently trash Part 52, we then might end up with neither (thenuclear power provisions) of (S.) 1220 nor a practical (Part) 52 and thenwe don't have a single-step license.''   He said, ''The Department...just as they think we've changed our publicpolicy a little bit, they've changed their nuances a little bit. In theirlast statement, I'm very comfortable with the letter Secretary Watkins sentus.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, KOREA PLANS 13 MORE REACTORS TO MAKE NUCLEAR MAIN GENERATORBy:Elaine Hiruo, London   An additional 13 commercial reactors will be constructed by the year2006 in South Korea under the government's revised long-term developmentprogram, according to Choi Dae Yong, vice president of procurement withKorea Electric Power Corp.   The units will be in addition to a 700-MW Candu plant Atomic Energy ofCanada Ltd. received a contract for in February (NW, 3 Jan., 1) and the two1,000-MW PWRs that will be constructed under a contract awarded to ABBCombustion Engineering in July (NW, 25 July, 1). The country plansincreasing domestic content of the new reactors and is aiming for completeself-sufficiency in nuclear construction and operation (NW, 11 Oct. '90,5).   Speaking at the Uranium Institute symposium last week in London, Choisaid two more 700-MW Candu pressurized heavy water reactors (PHWRs) and two1,000-MW PWRs will be constructed by 2001, and six 1,000-MW PWRs and three700-MW PHWRs are planned for construction by 2006.   ''The electrical share of final (all) energy consumption increased from3.7% in 1970 to 11% in 1991. It will be over 14% in 2001,'' Choi said.''Korea's (per capita) electricity consumption is still much less than thatof advanced industrialized countries, being one-quarter that of Japan andone-sixth that of the United States. There is therefore the potential for arapid increase in electricity demand in the future.''   He said that peak electricity demand in the country recorded an annualaverage growth of 15% during the last 30 years but that reserve capacityduring the 1991 summer peak was only 4.5%.   Nuclear accounted for 49.1% of electricity generation in South Korea in1990; the average capacity factor of its nine units exceeded 70%. Nuclearis projected to produce 54.6% of electricity in 2006, with coal producing29.8%.   The projections are a sharp contrast to 1981 when oil was the dominantgenerator, producing 79.8% of the country's electricity. Projections for2006 show a drastic drop in oil, with that fuel's power production at only2.6%. In 1981 nuclear was the No. 2 producer in South Korea with a 7.2%share. Coal--which was at the bottom, trailing behind hydro's6.7%--accounted for only 6.3% of the total power generation.   But in order for new units to be constructed in a timely manner, Choisaid, such hurdles as investment financing, securing sites for constructionand transmission equipment, and public opinion must be overcome. He pointedto a 1991 poll that showed that only 67.6% of the people surveyed supportedconstruction of nuclear power plants. A 1986 poll put support at 72.4%.   ''If Korea is to develop nuclear power continuously, and to achieveself-reliance in energy, the misconceptions among the public on the safetyof nuclear power must be cleared up and their understanding and supportsecured,'' he said. The public outreach campaign underway in South Koreainvolves the publication of booklets and pamphlets, conducting site tours,and making nuclear-related information available to the public, he said.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, ITALIAN REGULATOR GIVEN AUTONOMY AS ENERGY AGENCY CHANGES FOCUSBy:Marion Bywater, Rome   Italian nuclear regulatory agency DISP is to be rendered more''legitimate'' and financially autonomous under new legislation passed byParliament, although it will continue to be a part of state energy researchagency ENEA.   The new law also officially transforms ENEA from a predominantlynuclear-oriented entity to one focusing on the environment and alternateenergy sources and carrying out only limited nuclear research in the areasof plant safety and radiation protection. ENEA's full name--but not itsacronym--will change to ''Ente per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia el'Ambiente'' (Agency for New Technologies, Energy & Environment).   Officials at DISP (Direzione Centrale per la Sicorezza Nucleare e laProtezione Sanitaria) say the new legislation contains no great practicalinnovations but it ''institutionalizes our autonomy. We are very pleasedabout the change because it makes things clearer. It truly gives us acompletely independent identity.''   The changes have been under discussion by Italian legislators sinceItaly voted its nuclear moratorium in 1987. Initially it looked as if ENEAmight be abolished and DISP spun off as a stand-alone agency, butlegislators ultimately decided to leave the regulatory agency as adirectorate within ENEA, apparently because they felt establishing aseparate regulatory board could have sent the wrong signals innuclear-sensitive Italy.   The wording of the law, however, ''underscores our legitimacy,'' DISPofficials said. It provides a statutory guarantee that DISP should have''independence in carrying out its specific functions and full managementand organizational autonomy.''   Instead of having its budget allocated by ENEA, DISP has been given anannual allocation of 45-billion lire (U.S.$40-million) within the1.7-trillion lire ($1.3-billion) budget authorization for ENEA for theperiod 1991-1993.   DISP officials said that they expect to have enough funds within thisbudget not only to run the 290-person agency on a day-to-day basis, but tohave ''not much, but a not negligible'' margin left over for regulatoryresearch.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS LOOM ON IRAQI CENTRIFUGE EFFORTBy:Mark Hibbs, Bonn   A fifth IAEA inspection team will head for Iraq this month in search ofanswers to key unresolved questions about that country's clandestine effortto build and operate gas centrifuges. In October, a larger IAEA missionwill go to Iraq to follow up.   At present, there is no consensus at the IAEA about the extent to whichIraq relied on foreign assistance to build centrifuge components andassemble them at a facility known as El Pharat, located south of Baghdad.Official sources said that Iraq still refuses to disclose foreign sourcesfor centrifuge design information and components. ''They are notcooperating and they still claim they can make and operate centrifuges allby themselves,'' one official said (NW, 22 Aug., 7).   According to the IAEA inspection report on the fourth mission to Iraq,which was completed last week but has not been made public, beforeinspectors arrived at El Pharat, the labels had been scraped off importedequipment meant to be used for manufacturing centrifuge components, in anattempt to disguise their origin.   Iraqi experts previously told the IAEA that Iraq had designed itsclandestine nuclear program by building redundant facilities in order toprevent interruption should any one secret location be discovered ordestroyed. Thus, Iraq constructed two identical calutron enrichmentfacilities at Tarmiyah and Al Sharqat, although inspectors are not surewhether Al Sharqat, which was less complete when the Gulf War began, wasmeant as a backup for Tarmiyah or as a simultaneous operation.   During the fourth inspection, however, the IAEA was not shown a twin forthe centrifuge production facility at El Pharat.   The latest IAEA report states that, in the view of inspectors, Iraq,which claimed it could manufacture 200 centrifuges per year at El Pharat asof 1993, might have been able to manufacture as many as 600 centrifuges peryear later in the 1990s.   But that is viewed with skepticism by some western centrifuge experts.These sources say that the IAEA estimate extrapolates future centrifugeoutput in large part from the spatial dimensions of the workshops at ElPharat. These experts asserted that IAEA inspectors have seen no evidenceyet that Iraq can mass-produce key components such as spiral-grooved bottombearings and magnetic suspension top bearings, no evidence that Iraq hasaccess to sufficient quantities of centrifuge-grade maraging steel, and noevidence that Iraq has cascade engineering expertise.   For these reasons, these experts assert, Iraq would need substantialhelp from a foreign source to meet its goal of building and operating a500-centrifuge cascade by 1996. A cascade that large might have beencapable of producing about 5 kilograms of high-enriched uranium (HEU) peryear--about one-fifth the amount needed for an initial nuclear explosivedevice (NuclearFuel, 19 Aug., 12).Two Rotor Assemblies Operated   The IAEA report on the fourth inspection confirmed that no indigenouslymanufactured rotors shown to inspectors were of sufficient quality foruranium enrichment.   During the inspection, IAEA officials learned that Iraq had obtained 10carbon fiber centrifuge rotors, and test-operated two complete carbon fiberrotor assemblies using uranium hexafluoride feed material. However, theserotor tubes were supplied to Iraq by an outside source.   With the exception of some simple rotor tubes made of aluminum, allrotor tubes manufactured in Iraq were made of maraging steel. To producethese, IAEA inspectors found, Iraq had obtained 25 plates of 350-grademaraging steel from a foreign source. Iraq claimed that 19 sheets were madeinto preforms at the Al Nassr State Enterprise for Mechanical Industries atTaji, near Baghdad. Iraq also told inspectors that six more maraging steelpreforms for centrifuge rotors had been obtained from a foreign source.   According to IAEA documents, only nine sufficiently balanced maragingsteel rotors had been made using the 25 pieces of maraging steel. None wereof sufficient quality for enriching uranium.   Some Iraqi officials told IAEA inspectors they were confident that Iraqcould have evaded export controls on 350-grade maraging steel and couldhave imported sufficient quantities for building many centrifuges. However,IAEA inspectors found no other quantities of maraging steel in Iraq.   An interim IAEA report compiled during the fourth inspection stated thatIraqi officials ''claim to have had severe difficulties in obtainingmaraging steel yet they proceed with a plan that would require a dependablesupply.''   The interim report stated that Iraqi officials led IAEA officials tobelieve that Iraq planned to indigenously produce maraging steel. However,Iraqi suggestions that domestic production of this specialty steel waspossible were not supported by officials at the Al Badr GeneralEstablishment, located south of Baghdad at Mahmoudiya, which Iraq declaredto be a centrifuge production facility. Engineers at Al Badr ''complainedbitterly about the poor quality'' of carbon steel which Iraq had alreadyproduced.Cascade Engineering Primitive?   The three large-scale centrifuge enrichment facilities in Europe whichare owned and operated by the Urenco consortium were built only aftercentrifuge designs had been proven in extensive test programs and machinesassembled and operated in small pilot cascades.   One western centrifuge expert told Nucleonics Week he was ''astonished''that Iraq had planned to build two large cascades based on a centrifugedesign very similar to Urenco's G-1 centrifuge--a 100-machine cascade by1993 and a 500-machine cascade by 1996--without having first built andsuccessfully operated a pilot cascade with only a few machines.   Advanced countries ''wouldn't have done it that way,'' he said. InBrazil's clandestine centrifuge program, experts built and operated acascade with eight machines in the late 1980s before manufacturing severalhundred centrifuges for a larger cascade.   Iraq had considered building a cascade with 36 centrifuges after ittested single rotors, but then abandoned that plan and proceeded instead toconcentrate on a cascade design with 102 centrifuges, western sources said.Cascade designs shown to inspectors by the Iraqis for both the 36-machineand the 102-machine configurations were based on a separation factor of1.15-1.18 and a ''cut'' of 0.5. The separation factor quantifies the degreeof separation which can be obtained in a single centrifuge. The ''cut''describes the ratio of product flow to feed flow in a centrifuge stage.   However, one western expert said, Iraq's cascade designs were based ononly ''back of the envelope calculations'' for production of enricheduranium. Iraqi experts showed inspectors calculations for production of 3%U-235 only, using simple, ideal cascades, which provided no evidence ofextensive cascade engineering know-how.   Iraqi officials denied that they had tried to design a cascade forproduction of highly-enriched uranium (HEU). But that assertion is viewedwith skepticism by western experts.   Iraqi officials' confidence in their ability to proceed from singlecentrifuges to large cascades might have been illusory, and prompted bycompetition between task teams involved in Iraq's clandestine nucleareffort, sources said.   Alternately, Iraqi confidence might also indicate that the centrifugeprogram was guided by an outside expert,yet unknown to the IAEA or westernintelligence agencies, who had great familiarity with centrifuge design andmanufacture. The chief inspector during the fourth IAEA mission, David Kay,reported from the field last month that such a guiding hand ''must havebeen there.'' In evidence of this, inspectors found that Iraq had modifiedits centrifuge design, which closely resembled the Urenco G-1 centrifugebuilt in Germany, to include the spiral-grooved bottom bearing from G-2, animproved Urenco centrifuge.   During the fourth inspection, the most senior Iraqi official providinginformation to the IAEA was Jaffar Dhiah, a vice director of the IraqiAtomic Energy Commission. While Kay stated last month that he believedJaffar Dhiah was not the guiding light behind Iraq's secret program, theofficial inspection report completed by the IAEA last week asserted thatJaffar had been in charge of the program.   At the outset of bench testing of a G-1 rotor assembly, the ''cut'' ofthe centrifuge might be as low as 0.1, requiring optimization of scoopswhich are fitted inside the rotor tube. At a warehouse complex called AshShakyh, inspectors found a press for inserting baffles and scoops into therotor cylinder. But sources said that, even if Iraqi experts had managed tooptimize the ''cut'' of the G-1 centrifuge to 0.5 (which at Urenco mighthave taken only several weeks of careful and intensive testing), Iraq wouldstill have had to build 50 or more stages containing several thousandoptimized G-1 centrifuges in a cascade to make significant quantities ofHEU.   But Iraq had apparently not optimized the single rotors it hadflow-formed itself. Using the first of two test stands found in Iraq byinspectors, Iraq was able to spin a simple, so-called Beams-type or ''modelI'' centrifuge rotor at a velocity of 50,000 revolutions per minute (rpm).However, when the ''model I'' rotor assembly was used for test separationof product using light gases (not heavy uranium hexaflouride), speeds ofonly 20,000 to 25,000 rpm were achieved.   The ''model II'' centrifuge rotors which Iraq tested on a second teststand, and which officials described as very close to G-1, could spin at anoptimal speed of 60,000 rpm without feed material. However,mass-spectrometric examinations indicated that these rotors had apparentlynot been tested with uranium hexaflouride feed.   After inspectors arrive in Iraq on the fifth mission, they will pursueIraq's claim that it had manufactured magnetic suspension top bearings. AGerman firm, Inwako GmbH, exported some British-made components forsamarium-cobalt top bearings to Iraq last year, criminal justice officialssaid. On the last day of the fourth inspection, Iraq claimed it hadmanufactured 50 top bearings, but when the inspectors left for Vienna theyhad seen only a single top bearing, and no manufacturing equipment formaking the bearings.Al Qaqaa for Missile Testing?   Western intelligence reports in 1990 stated that the Al Qaqaa StateEstablishment, located about 30 miles south of Baghdad, was ''concernedwith the development of the nonnuclear components of a nuclear weapon''(NuclearFuel, 21 Jan., 3). But, according to the IAEA, Iraq has given a''plausible alternative explanation'' for secret work going on at AlQaqaa.   At Al Qaqaa, Iraqi experts had been working on bridge wires--a crucialelectronic component which can be used for precise detonation of highexplosives in a nuclear implosion device. According to Iraqi officials,however, the bridge wires were being developed at Al Qaqaa for so-calledfire-set components to separate missile stages within time tolerances of0.5 microseconds. Iraqi officials also stated that experts had been workingon development of so-called RDX explosives and metal cast explosives, andhad imported hundreds of tons of the explosive known as HMX. Theseexplosives can be used in a nuclear weapon.   For any nuclear weapon, Iraq would probably need a steady supply ofpolonium-210, which is used with a small amount of beryllium as a neutroninitiator (NW, 25 July, 12). Sources said that evidence of production ofPo-210, which has a half-life of only 138 days, would serve as ''indirectconfirmation'' that Iraq was working on nuclear explosives. IAEA inspectorsfound no indication of Po-210 production or handling at the TuwaithaNuclear Research Center, Al Qaqaa, or two facilities for materials researchand high explosives testing, Al Atheer and Al Musayyaib. However, Jaffartold IAEA officials during the fourth inspection that Iraq had made ''smallquantities'' of Po-210 for ''steady-state ion sources.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, USSR OFFERS UP RBMKS TO SCRUTINY OF WORLD SAFETY EXPERTS, VIA IAEABy:Ann MacLachlan, Vienna   The Soviet Union has proposed that the international community conduct asafety review of its RBMK graphite-moderated channel-type reactors in a newprogram managed by the IAEA. The offer, made at an international safetyconference in Vienna last week, marks the first time the Soviets have beenwilling to subject design and operation of the Chernobyl-type units tointernational scrutiny.   The USSR's existing 16 RBMK units provide about half of the country'snuclear-generated electricity. But their safety systems and basic design,even after post-Chernobyl backfitting, are considered by some in the Westas insufficient to justify long-term operation.   The Soviet offer was endorsed by the experts who were meeting in Viennato set a nuclear safety strategy for the next decade (see related story,this issue), and it seemed sure to be accepted by the IAEA Board ofGovernors at the end of this week and the agency's general conference,which convenes Monday, September 16. It would be modeled on the IAEA's''Study of the Safety of Older Reactors,'' a safety review offirst-generation Soviet-design VVER (PWR) units in central and easternEurope, which is due to wind up this fall.   Lars Hoegberg, director of the Swedish Nuclear Inspectorate (SKI),estimated that an RBMK safety study of the same scope as the VVER studywould require tens of engineering man-hours and up to $200,000 per unitexamined.   The Russians evidently believe their channel reactors will pass musterafter completion of a five-year program of safety improvements and upgradesfollowing the 1986 accident at Chernobyl. They hope that an internationalstamp of approval will allow them to finish RBMK units whose constructionwas frozen in the wake of the Chernobyl accident.   Separately, a senior Soviet official said regulators expect to rule byOctober on whether first-generation RBMK units can resume operation at fullpower. The Committee for State Supervision of Safety in Industry & NuclearPower (CSSSINP) imposed a ceiling of 70% power operation in June 1990because of concerns about the consequences of a fuel-damage accident at theolder plants if they operated at full power (NW, 12 July '90, 1). Butcommittee deputy chairman Anatoly Belyaev told Nucleonics Week last weekthat the Ministry of Atomic Power & Industry (MAPI), which operates Sovietnuclear reactors, is about to submit to the regulators a technical studyaimed at proving that the consequences of a severe core-damage accidentwould not be higher at 100% than at 70% power.   Belyaev said the ministry had stressed, in debating the RBMK matter withthe safety committee, that operating at reduced power means lower revenuesfor the power plants and thus ''eventually reduces the capability toimprove safety at those plants.'' MAPI had officially committed to investall additional income from full-power operation in improving safety at theunits, Belyaev said. ''We understand their arguments and are trying tolisten to them,'' he said. He cited ''very important changes'' maderecently to the first large RBMK at Leningrad, including rebuilding ofpressure tubes, which had kept Leningrad-1 off line for nearly two years,and said similar backfits were planned at other RBMKs.   ''The energy supply situation is still very difficult'' in the USSR,Belyaev said. ''We would like to make a final decision (on the RMBKfull-power operation) no later than October if there's enough evidence.''   The Soviet proposal for an RBMK safety review program was aired byAndrei Gagarinski, deputy director of the Kurchatov Atomic EnergyInstitute, on behalf of MAPI. The program would encompass work that is justabout to begin between safety experts in the USSR and four western Europeancountries.   MAPI first deputy director Viktor Sidorenko wrote August 22 to nuclearregulatory bodies and safety experts in Germany, Sweden, the U.K., andFinland to invite them to begin in-depth examination of RBMK safety in amultilateral effort that would encompass incipient bilateral work. Theexperts from those four countries, plus possibly Italy, are scheduled tomeet in Moscow next week to discuss how to proceed.   Up to now, the western world's influence in the RBMK program has beenlimited to certain technical points, such as Gesellschaft fuerReaktorsicherheit's (GRS) proposal to try to apply its thermohydraulicscodes to RBMK accidents. The Swedish Nuclear Power Inspectorate (SKI)recently signed an agreement with CSSSINP to study the safety of BWRs,while the U.K. Atomic Energy Authority has been discussing points of commoninterest concerning graphite-moderated reactors.International Financing Assumed   It is assumed that any changes deemed necessary in the RBMKs afterinternational scrutiny--like those now being worked out under a EuropeanCommunity program for the old Kozloduy VVERs in Bulgaria--would have to befunded through borrowing from international institutions like the WorldBank and the European Bank for Reconstruction & Development.   Last year, the International Advisory Committee (IAC) of senior nuclearexperts underlined the large contribution of the Soviet-design reactors tototal world nuclear power risk and recommended that, if nationalgovernments cannot fund them completely, then safety-necessary backfitsshould be supported by the west's nuclear industry and governments mostinterested in preserving the nuclear option (NW, 20 Sept. '90, 2).More recently, at the Andrei Sakharov Memorial Conference held in Moscow inlate May, an international expert panel recommended ''urgently'' thatfurther operation of the RBMK units ''be recognized as a temporaryemergency measure.''   Both the IAC and the Sakharov panel estimated that the risk of a severeaccident with major off-site consequences from the Soviet-design reactorswas as high as 50% over five years.   Meanwhile, Lithuanian independence poses special questions around theIgnalina RBMK station in that Baltic nation. The Ignalina units--twooperating and one in suspended construction--are the only RBMKs outside theRussian Federation, but they are also the biggest ones, at unit electricpower of 1,500 megawatts for a core the same size as the 1,000-MW Chernobylunits. They produce a substantial share of Lithuania's electricity andcould help generate export revenues for the republic. Following therecognition of Lithuania by the Nordic states, close cooperation on RBMKsafety and nuclear safety supervision is expected to be put in place bySweden and Finland.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, CZECHS WERE FORCED TO TAKE UNITS THEY KNEW WERE BELOW-STANDARDBy:Ann MacLachlan, Vienna   Czechoslovakia's senior nuclear regulator said last week his countryknew from the beginning that the reactors it imported from the USSR in the1970s did not meet prevailing nuclear safety requirements, but could donothing about it. He painted a stark picture of the situation of formerUSSR satellites, forced by politics to accept nuclear power plants theyrealized were below standards in force at the time in the West.   Zdenek Kriz, chief inspector of the Czechoslovak Atomic EnergyCommission, told a meeting of international nuclear safety experts at theIAEA in Vienna that the decision to buy two VVER-440 units at Bohunice fromthe Soviet Union ''was a purely political decision made by our government.Safety was not a criterion. There was no tender, no discussion aboutsafety'' before the sale, he said. The decision involved ''acceptance ofthe philosophy of the Soviet vendor, which at that time differedsignificantly from U.S. (safety) criteria,'' Kriz said. For example, theSoviet's defense-in-depth concept stressed accident prevention, and''suppressed other parts (of the philosophy) partially or totally.'' TheSoviet approach violated the spirit of IAEA nuclear safety standards aswell, he said.   Later, he said other central and eastern countries had been in the samesituation, and his remarks were meant to speak for all of them.   Karel Wagner, chairman of the Czech Atomic Energy Commission, later toldNucleonics Week that the eastern Europeans ''did a lot of things that werenot up to western standards'' in the years they spent as satellites of theUSSR.   ''The role of safety regulation was fully underestimated in our countryand others,'' Kriz said.   Czechoslovakia passed a law on state supervision of nuclear power in1984. ''But the two units (Bohunice-1 and -2, the early-design VVER-440s)were commissioned in 1978 and 1980. The law came too late,'' Kriz said.   ''From the beginning we were aware of the situation. Both operators andthe regulatory body made many efforts to enhance safety and improve thesituation'' at Bohunice, Kriz recounted. The ''most important obstacle,''he said, was that, since all significant changes had to be approved by thevendor, ''people said the vendor country was responsible for safety.''   A series of backfits was proposed to the Czech government in 1986. ''Butwe were aware the problem was not solved,'' Kriz said.   During the past year, Kriz said, the Czech Nuclear Inspectorateconducted ''a very extensive'' 10th-year safety assessment of the Bohuniceunits, advised by a government commission, and ruled that they should beupgraded over two years. The program, Kriz said, costs about one-quarterthe units' original price and is the prerequisite for their operation to1995. At that time, the operator either will propose further measures tobring the units up to acceptable safety levels or will have to shut them.   Wagner said that 60 of the proposed improvements are already made, and,of the 81 still to be realized, 17 should be finished by the end of thisyear and the others in 1992. Thereafter, the units will undergo yearlyregulatory review to 1995, with yearly extensions of their operatinglicenses if they pass muster.   After 1995, Wagner said, the two units must shut down unless their owneragrees to backfit a ''proven substitute for containment'' that includes aspecial primary circuit pressure suppression system and a large inventoryof primary coolant. Wagner reckons that the ''only way'' to do this is toadd ''some type of barbotage'' system similar to the bubbler-towercondenser systems that were added to the design for second-generationVVER-440s such as Bohunice-3 and -4.   The initial Bohunice units represent ''a young station,'' Wagner said,''with only 10 and 12 years of operation, or less than half their expecteddesign life. They could operate another 10 years'' if they areappropriately backfit, he observed.   Kriz told the Vienna meeting that ''although we are aware that thesafety level (of Bohunice) is lower than that at other PWRs, we, theregulatory body, took our responsibility and defined measures that must befulfilled by the operator'' at Bohunice.   ''I assure you,'' he told the IAEA delegates, ''that we are fully awarethat responsibility (for the Bohunice units' safety) is in our hands. Wemust achieve a level of safety acceptable for all in the world.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, EDF AND SIEMENS TO BID TOGETHER ON KOZLODUY DESIGN IMPROVEMENTSBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Electricite de France (EDF) and Siemens have formed a joint venture tobid on design studies of improving the Kozloduy nuclear power plant inBulgaria in the framework of the European Commission/World Association ofNuclear Operators (EC/WANO) program of aid to the Bulgarian nuclearoperators.   The joint venture agreement, which links Siemens and EDF's subsidiaryEDF International, was signed at the end of July. An EDF official said thatthe consortium agreement runs only for the length of the EC short-termprogram for Kozloduy; that is, to the end of this year. Nevertheless, theEC/WANO program could be extended into 1992, and in that case theEDF-Siemens venture could also be lengthened.   Any initiative past the Kozloduy work, however, would imply creation ofa new consortium or conclusion of an annex to the present consortiumcontract, the EDF official said.   The two companies will reply to a bid solicitation from the BulgarianEnergy Committee, which is managing the Kozloduy improvement program fromSofia's side. The first of four first-generation Soviet-design PWRs at thesite in northwestern Bulgaria was shut September 4 for near-term upgradesand a second unit is scheduled to be shut shortly.   The EDF official said that the initiative for the consortium came fromSiemens because of EDF's ''excellent contacts'' with the Bulgarian EnergyCommittee. The French utility had agreed with the Bulgarians in early June,before international attention was focused on Kozloduy after an IAEA auditfound serious safety deficiencies at the plant, on ''active twinning''between Kozloduy and EDF's Bugey nuclear power plant, and EDF staff were atKozloduy by the end of August.   On the other hand, said the EDF official, the French ''lackedknowledge'' of the VVER-440 reactor design, which could be supplied bySiemens because of its work on VVER-440s at Greifswald in the former GermanDemocratic Republic.   The EDF-Siemens accord has raised some eyebrows in France, where reactorvendor Framatome and EDF, as two monopolies, are condemned to get alongwith each other. But Framatome could not counter EDF's argument of Siemens'greater experience with the VVER reactor type. Moreover, it is no secretthat the Germans have far closer industrial contacts in central and easternEurope. If Siemens sees EDF as key to closer contact with the Bulgarianenergy production establishment--and perhaps counterparts in other easternEuropean countries--the German company may be one card for EDF to play inits drive to take positions in foreign markets. If the ''trial balloon'' ofthe Kozloduy partnership works well, the EDF official said, the experimentcould well be extended into other markets behind the former Iron Curtain.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, DIABLO CANYON-2 BREAKS RECORD FOR LWR CONTINUOUS OPERATION   On August 30, Pacific Gas & Electric Co.'s Diablo Canyon-2 broke by oneday the LWR continuous operation record set in July by GPU Nuclear's ThreeMile Island-1. However, Wolf Creek may break the new record this week.   Diablo Canyon-2 shut down after 481 days of operation, 10 days short ofits planned September 9 refueling outage, because of a leak in the reactorcoolant system. TMI-1 had broken the 477-day record, set by Omaha PublicPower District's Fort Calhoun in 1988, by three days but then scrammedautomatically because of a test procedure failure (NW, 1 Aug., 16).   Wolf Creek, owned by Kansas Gas & Electric Co., Kansas City Power &Light Co., and Kansas Electric Power Cooperative, reached 478 days ofcontinuous operation on September 10 and was still running. It is notscheduled to shut for refueling until September 19, giving it theopportunity to run 487 days. All are PWRs: Diablo Canyon-2 and Wolf Creekfrom Westinghouse; TMI-1 from Babcock & Wilcox; Fort Calhoun, fromCombustion Engineering.   Another kind of record is being claimed by Commonwealth Edison for itsByron station: the longest continuous U.S. run for both units of a two-unitstation. The two Westinghouse units were both on line for just over 258days, from December 21, 1990 to September 6.   A review of recent operations of two-unit stations as reported toNucleonics Week found the longest run internationally was chalked up in1990, when both Asea-Atom BWRs at Sweden's Barsebaeck station ran togetherfor 335 days. However, since statistics have not always been kept ontwo-unit station runs, there may be longer runs not reported.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, NOTES PERTAINING TO THE GENERATING TABLE FOR JULY 1991   Cattenom-4 is being added to the table this month. The 1,362-MW PWR,operated by Electricite de France, achieved criticality May 4 and generatedits first electricity May 27. It is in precommercial testing and isscheduled for commissioning before the end of the year.   This month, statistics from all countries but Britain are reported onthe basis of 744 hours. In Britain, units owned by Nuclear Electric andScottish Nuclear are both reported for 672 hours. For the year-to-date,statistics are based on 5,087 hours of operation through July 31 in Europeand the U.S., except Britain's Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear, whosefigures are based on 5,039 hours. Figures from all other countries arebased on 5,088 hours.   Belgium's Doel-3 was down for 287.18 hours for refueling.   In Brazil, Angra-1 was down for 26.5 hours for repair of the heatingline of the steam generator 1A feed pump on the secondary side.   Britain's Hunterston B-1 continued in shutdown the entire month for itsstatutory biennial outage. Torness-1 was down 136 hours for its statutorybiennial outage and 27 hours for a turbine/reactor trip. Torness-2 was downfor 336 hours for refueling.   In Canada, Pickering-3 restarted after being shut since 1989 for fuelchannel replacement. Pickering-5 was down for 675 hours for repair of agenerator hydrogen leak. Bruce-1 was forced down for 520.7 hours due to aboiler (steam generator) tube leak. Darlington-2 continued in its forcedoutage all month to repair cracked end plates.   In France, Electricite de France's nuclear plants generated 22.4-billionkilowatt-hours (KWH), or about 71% of total French electricity produced inJuly. EDF's 900-MW PWR series averaged 71.6% energy availability(capability factor) during the month and 74.2% over the 12 months endedJuly 31. During the month, the 900-MW-class units averaged unavailabilityof 18.5% for scheduled refueling and maintenance and 9.9% for unscheduleddowntime, of which 4.4% was forced outages caused by equipment problems.   The utility's 1,300-MW PWR series had average energy availability of57.6% in July and 72.2% over the 12 preceding months. Their unavailabilityduring the month was due 14.6% to scheduled outages and 27.8% tounscheduled outages, with 11% of the latter classified as forced outage.   EDF classified 13 incidents on the French nuclear event scale during themonth, two of them at Level 2 and the others at Level 1:   --Belleville-2, which had a Level 2 event in May, had another, unrelatedone July 10, when 10 cubic meters of non-borated water were injected bymistake into the reactor coolant system (RCS) because of an error inestimating the level of water in a feed tank that had been used for a test.Although the average boron concentration of the RCS remained abovespecified limits at all times, the incident was classified at Level 2because of its potential safety consequences.   --The problem of peeling paint on the inside walls of containment sumps,discovered the previous month, was reclassified from Level 1 to Level 2because a check showed it had affected a significant number of units in the1,300-MW PWR series. However, by mid-August EDF had remedied the peelingproblem.   --At St. Alban-2 on July 1, a fuel handling incident put a fuel assemblyoff balance, causing its head to strike the head of another assembly. Thetwo assemblies were removed to the fuel building for inspection.   --At Tricastin-2 on July 1, deterioration of a main coolant pump sealcaused the pump to trip and the reactor to scram. About 300 cubic meters ofprimary coolant leaked onto the reactor building floor.   --At Tricastin-3 on July 4, reactor protection signals from one of thefour ionization chambers were discovered to be unavailable because ofincorrect wiring in the associated data processing system. The anomaly wasnot revealed during the usual periodic testing of the measuring device butduring maintenance on the electric cabinet where the signals are produced.   --The volume of primary coolant at Gravelines-5 on July 5 was found tobe about 10 cubic meters lower than required. This happened because thereactor vessel vent valve, which allows expulsion of air during RCSfilling, had remained closed, leading to formation of an air cushion underthe vessel head and an erroneous measurement of primary coolant level.   --The boron concentration in a tank of the auxiliary boron circuit atChinon-B1 fell below the required level July 7, and operators took ninehours longer to rectify it than is required by technical specifications.The incident was traced to a failure of level alarms to switch on whileanother tank was being filled.   --At Tricastin-3 on July 12, a fuel handling incident caused slightdeformation of a fuel assembly. The fuel element was being lowered slowlytowards the upending device of the fuel storage pool when by mistake theoperation was switched to high speed. Although the operator stopped themaneuver immediately, the leg of the fuel element ended up pressing againstthe upending device and the element was slanted about 10 degrees offvertical.   --Paluel-1 was off line with fuel discharged on July 17 when, duringplanned maintenance on a switch, a second switch was opened by mistake,interrupting the off-site power source. The second diesel generatorswitched in immediately.   --An electric distribution panel on one power supply train was renderedunavailable at Gravelines-5 July 19 because of a mixup in preparingmaintenance on the other train. This caused startup of an emergency diesel.At the same time, spent fuel pool cooling was interrupted for about twohours, leading to a rise in pool temperature of about 4 degrees C, althoughit remained within prescribed limits. The maintenance file was revised toavoid recurrence of such an incident.   --An alarm indicating too-low boron concentration (below 2,000 ppm) inthe Dampierre-2 RCS on July 24 was not taken into account until six hoursafter it appeared. However, the concentration remained above the level of1,950 ppm covered by safety studies.   --One of the two pumps of the residual heat removal system atFlamanville-1 had to be stopped for 90 minutes on July 25 due to thepassage of an air pocket through the pump. The pocket had been entrainedfrom a pipe into the pump when a valve was opened.   --Operators took 50 minutes too long to stop Nogent-2 on July 29following a leak of primary coolant that exceeded the regulatory operatinglimit of 230 liters per hour. The plant had been kept operating for threehours after the leak was detected at the request of the power dispatcher.Nogent operators expected to need only one hour to stop the reactor(technical specifications require a reactor to be stopped four hours afterdetection of a primary coolant leak), but it actually took one hour and 50minutes.   Pre-commercial testing resumed at Cattenom-4 on July 22; the unit hadbeen down since June 12 for work on a reactor scram control train andrepair of a defective nozzle on the low-pressure safety injection system.Bugey-2 restarted July 26; it had been down since April 6 for refueling andmaintenance, but it was taken down again July 27 and 28 for work on a6.6-kilovolt electric cable. Bugey-3 restarted July 1 following completionof work on high-pressure turbine steam pipe supports. The unit was stoppedagain July 19 at the end of its regular duty cycle in anticipation of theprogrammed refueling outage.   Cattenom-3 restarted July 10; it had been down since June 27 for repairsto a low-pressure safety injection system nozzle. The unit was down againJuly 28-30 for work on a main coolant pump.   Chinon-B3 was down July 27-28 for work in the reactor building. Cruas-1came back on line July 4 following completion of its fifth-year inspectionand refueling outage, which began March 30. It was down again July 4-15 forwork on generator exciter control cabinets. Cruas-2 was down July 25-26 forwork on the generator hydrogen system. Nogent-1 was taken down July 27 forwork on thecooling modules of the atmospheric cooling tower. Nogent-2 wastaken down July 29 for work on a valve part of an RCS auxiliary system.Paluel-3 remained down (since June 29) for work on the sumps of the reactorbuilding and nozzles on the safety injection and containment spray systems.Penly-1 was down July 20-21 for work on the nuclear island fire protectionsystem. St. Alban-1 was down July 5-15 for repairs to a defective nozzle onthe containment spray system. Tricastin-2 was down July 1-25 for work onmain coolant pump seals.   The Creys-Malville breeder reactor remained down for various workassociated with purification of primary sodium and review of operating andmanagement measures by French safety authorities. The prototype breederPhenix, owned by the Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique, also remained offline following the reactivity drop incident of fall 1990.   Gravelines-2 remained down (since May 11) for its 10th-year inspectionand refueling outage. Gravelines-5 remained down (since June 29) for itsfifth-year inspection and refueling, as did Chinon-B2 (since May 18). St.Laurent-B1, down since January 19 for refueling and maintenance, restartedJuly 1. The St. Laurent-A2 gas-cooled reactor was taken down July 31 forits annual inspection.   Bugey-1, a gas-cooled reactor, remained off line since June 24 becauseof low electricity demand. Dampierre-2 was taken down July 15 aftercompletion of its duty cycle in anticipation of scheduled refueling.Flamanville-1 was taken down July 4 at the end of its duty cycle and beganscheduled refueling/maintenance on July 29.   Units off line all or part of the month for regular refueling andmaintenance included Belleville-2, Blayais-3, Cattenom-1, Dampierre-1,Dampierre-3, Fessenheim-2, Paluel-1, Paluel-2, Tricastin-3, and St.Alban-2.   Hungary's Paks-1 returned July 16 from routine refueling andmaintenance, and Paks-3 was shut for its annual refueling/maintenance thesame day.   In Japan, down for refueling and maintenance all or part of the monthwere: Fukushima I-1 and II-4, Hamaoka-3, Kashiwazaki-Kariwa-5, Mihama-2,Ohi-2, Shimane-2, Takahama-2 and -4, Tokai-2, Tomari-1, and Tsuruga-1.Sendai-1 was down for 48 hours due to a neutron flux disorder.   South Africa's Koeberg-2 was down the entire month for refueling.   South Korea's Wolsung-1 was off-line for 220 hours for routinemaintenance.   Spain's Asco-1 was down for 407 hours for refueling. Trillo was down for305 scheduled hours for accommodating chemical parameters and to repair aleakage in a boron addition line.   In Sweden, Forsmark-2 was down for 464 hours for refueling. Ringhals-3was down 310 hours for refueling and maintenance.   Switzerland's Beznau-2 was in a scheduled refueling outage for 472hours. Goesgen-Daeniken, Leibstadt, and Muehleberg were down for 144.86,163, and 245 hours, respectively, for scheduled refueling outages as well.   In Taiwan, Kuosheng-1 was down for 73.75 forced hours due to an averagepower range monitor A/B upscale trip. Maanshan-1 was down for 46.05 forcedhours due to a typhoon and bad water chemistry. Maanshan-2 was down 113.92scheduled hours for the same typhoon.   Yugoslavia's Krsko went into hot shutdown and reduced power-leveloperation as a result of armed hostilities in its vicinity and threateningfighter-jet overflights (NW, 25 July, 6).   Baltimore Gas & Electric's Calvert Cliffs-1 was out for 417.9 scheduledhours for maintenance and testing. The outage was extended for 241.9 forcedhours to correct vibration on a reactor coolant pump.   Carolina Power & Light's Brunswick-1 was down for 182 forced hours dueto reactor scram because of a faulty instrument manifold valve.   Commonwealth Edison's Quad Cities-2 was forced down 75.44 hours torepair leaking condenser tube.   Consumers Power's Big Rock Point was down 49 forced hours to repairturbine generator main condenser tube leaks. Palisades was down for 148.9forced hours due to equipment failure.   System Energy Resources Inc.'s Grand Gulf-1 was forced down for 94.50hours when the reactor scrammed due to balance-of-plant load shedding.   GPU Nuclear's Three Mile Island-1 was forced down 51.9 hours when thereactor tripped automatically on low pressure after dropping Group 7 rods.   Philadelphia Electric's Peach Bottom-3 was forced down for 156.3 hoursdue to a lightning strike that affected the generator output breaker.   Washington Public Power Supply System's WNP-2 continued in its forcedoutage all month for an administrative shutdown to revise emergencyoperating procedures and to retrain operators.   Out for part or all of the month in the U.S. for maintenance and/orrefueling were: Boston Edison's Pilgrim, Consolidated Edison's IndianPoint-2, Duquesne Light's Beaver Valley-1, Louisiana Power & Light'sWaterford-3, Niagara Mohawk Power's Nine Mile Point-1, and Portland GeneralElectric's Trojan.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, INDEX, NEDS ARE OPERATING.A box on page 9 of the Special Report, ''Outlook on Security,'' includedwith the June 27 issue of Nucleonics Week, incorrectly said neither theIntegrated Nuclear Data Exchange (INDEX) or the Nuclear Employee DataSystem (NEDS) had ''received enough industry support to survive alone.''Both are now active. INDEX is a consortium of 14 nuclear utilities thatshare a computer data base listing some 20,000 reactor outage workers whomeet NRC standards for plant access as temporary workers. INDEX is headedby Hollis Hutchison, nuclear personnel manager of Texas Utilities Co., andhas offices at 150 South Spring Lake Drive, Itasca IL 60143, (708)825-3000. NEDS has been taken over and is being revived by GPU NuclearCorp. as a for-sale service, not a membership consortium. According to ChipFenton, GPU director of human resources and head of NEDS, NEDS has''letters of intent'' to join from seven other utilities, chiefly in thenortheast. Fenton is reachable at GPU Nuclear Corp., One Upper Pond Road,Parsippany NJ 07054, (201) 316-7044.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, Four BWR Mark IIIs operate in the U.S. Nucleonics Week noted incorrectly inFour BWR Mark IIIs operate in the U.S. Nucleonics Week noted incorrectly inthe August 29 edition, page 6, that three Mark III model BWRs had beencompleted in the U.S. The listing omitted the fourth station, Gulf StatesUtilities' River Bend.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991Table: NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991 (This table is notavailable electronically. Please see the September 12, 1991 issue.)Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-28IA059-000325-B006-251http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey18.html 205.156.212.5 19970114233922 text/html 34995HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:37:28 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:56 GMTContent-length: 34808Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey18.html Sample Issue Copyright OCTANE WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES REGULATORY & LEGISLATIVE REPORT SEVERAL FUELS ISSUES REMAIN TIED-UP IN BUDGET DEBATE (1076 words) TOSCO BRACES ITSELF FOR COLD RECEPTION AT MARCUS HOOK (491 words) PIPELINES WARY ABOUT MMT BLENDS (308 words) ENERGY BIOSYSTEMS PATENTS DESULFURIZATION BREAKTHROUGHS (237 words) CHEVRON, VENEZUELA'S MARAVEN PARTNERSHIP TO PUSH ASPHALT (129 words) PARAMOUNT PETROLEUM CONTINUES DOWNSTREAM RESTRUCTURING (140 words) ASSESSING THE FUTURE OF CNG IN AN RFG WORLD (1035 words) INTERNATIONAL REVIEW SANCTIONS AGAINST NIGERIA COULD SEND OIL PRICES SOARING (387 words) ABB GROUP SCORES SUCCESSES IN FORMER SOVIET UNION (130 words) MARKET REPORT GASOLINE, HEATING OIL PRICES IMPROVE DESPITE INVENTORY BUILDS (443 words) CDTECH PIONEERS SAFER, SMARTER BENZENE UNIT FOR TEXACO (439 words) CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SEVERAL FUELS ISSUES REMAIN TIED-UP IN BUDGET DEBATE      A number of issues important to the refining and marketingindustry remain unresolved as Congress and the White House negotiatedover the budget and the federal government remained closed last week. The U.S. EPA remains unfunded, operating with a minimal staff, andofficials at the Agency warned that they're unable to enforceenvironmental statutes.      The Clinton Administration and Congressional Republicans appearto be far apart on a number of issues, including the taxable status ofkerosene for home heating and the depreciation schedule forconvenience stores operating in conjunction with gasoline stations.      Due to lack of appropriations for EPA, funds have also run outfor the Federal Leaking Underground Storage Trust Fund (LUST) and theSuperfund Trust Fund.  Below is a review of programs and tax issuesaffected by the Washington, D.C., stalemate, including federal motorfuels taxes as of Jan. 1 that may still be changed under final federalbudget programs.Clinton Seeks Tax On Kerosene For Home Use      One provision of a White House budget proposal would impose atax on kerosene mixed with heating oil.  Under the current law,kerosene is subject to the 24.4 c/gal diesel fuel tax when it is mixedwith dyed, on-road diesel fuel.  It is not subject to the tax when itis distributed to be used in home heating oil, as it is often in theNortheast to ensure that the fuel does not gel.      The White House is pursuing the change because "some wholesaledistributors of diesel fuel have not been paying the tax on kerosenethat they blend with diesel fuel for highway use," according to aWhite House memo.  "As a result, the government is losing tax revenuesand complying taxpayers are at a competitive disadvantage."      The Society of Independent Gasoline Marketers of America (SIGMA)concurs with the Administration on the kerosene tax.  "People areusing the kerosene for fuel, and that is a form of tax evasion -- andwe are always against tax evasion," said SIGMA counsel Tim Columbus.      Another gasoline marketer association, Petroleum MarketersAssociation of America (PMAA),  is "totally opposed to this," saidPMAA spokesman David Morehead.  "This is not something we want toallow to slip through."  PMAA is encouraging its members to contacttheir Congressmen on the issue.       House and Senate members from Northeast states have sent lettersto Senate Majority leader Bob Dole (R-KS), asking him to opposeClinton's proposal.  "This would be an extremely regressive tax thatwould have its greatest impact on low-income consumers of home heatingoil, many of whom live in trailer parks and cannot afford any increasein fuel costs," the House letter read.      "[The Clinton Administration] is charging that this is a tax-break for businesses. We think this is a good business deduction,"Morehead said.  "[Clinton is] taking the issue almost personally."       Taxation of aviation jet fuel also hangs in the balance.  OnOct. 1, 1995, the Treasury began to collect the 4.3 c/gal tax on jetfuel that had been exempted from the 1993 increase in the federalfuels excise tax.  Extension of that exemption was included in theCongressional budget bill that was vetoed last month, but it remainson the table as part of the budget negotiations.Congress Wants New Depreciation For C-Stores; Clinton Opposes      A provision in the budget bill passed by Congress and vetoed bythe president last month would give convenience store (c-store) ownersthat do more than 50% of their business in motor fuels and relatedservices the same 15-year depreciation schedule that gasoline stationshave.  Currently, those c-stores must use a 39.5-year depreciationschedule.      SIGMA, PMAA and the National Association of Convenience Stores(NACS) support quicker depreciation.  Acknowledging that the ClintonAdministration has opposed the new schedule, Lindsay Hutter, NACSspokeswoman, argues, "It has not been an issue of great contention inthe budget debate.      "We have had the commitment of the Republican leadership on thisissue," Hutter said.  "We continue to be very hopeful -- this is ournumber one issue."  Tax For LUST Fund Expires, Extension of Tax Unlikely      The 0.1 c/gal gasoline tax used to finance the LUST fund expiredon Dec. 31, and it appears no major effort is underway to restore it. Approximately $800 million is now in the trust fund, but it is notbeing properly disbursed for cleanups, according to PMAA's Morehead. "Money in the LUST fund is just sitting there --  it hasn't been spentvery vigorously," he said.      As for the tax, "we say 'let it expire' because the money is notbeing used for what it should be used for," said Morehead.  PMAA mightfavor restoration of the tax if the money was distributed to thestates, he said.        "SIGMA and NACS may try to reposition the LUST, but we wouldwant the federal government to give the money to the states, providedthey would use it for cleanup costs," concurred Columbus.Superfund Tax Expires;  Lack Of Appropriations Slows Cleanups      The tax collected for the Superfund Trust fund also expired asof Dec. 31.  The $9.7 c/bbl, or $0.0023 c/gal, tax is not currentlybeing collected, but it will almost certainly be re-imposedretroactively, according to Capitol Hill sources.      In the meantime, the Superfund program is undergoing a partialshutdown due to the lack of an EPA appropriations bill.  The trustfund currently has a surplus of $4 billion, but it is receiving no newrevenue, according to Paul Hirsch of the Chemical ManufacturersAssociation (CMA).      "Work is continuing at sites where construction has started,"Hirsch said, noting that there are two types of sites: those where thegovernment is performing the cleanup and those where the liableparties are cleaning the site.  Liable parties will continue theirclean-up efforts.      While some EPA Superfund employees are furloughed, the majorityof clean-up is performed by outside contractors, many of which arestill being paid through the trust fund, Hirsch said.  "The governmentisn't going to ask those contractors to pick up their shovels andleave," he said.  At sites that present an immediate threat to humanhealth, removal work will definitely continue.      EPA officials offer a less optimistic view, saying that the lackof funding will likey shut down most of the Superfund program.  Theagency is in the process of furloughing approximately 2,400 agencyworkers and 10,000 contractors in the program.  EPA officials didconfirm that cleanup will continue at approximately 100 emergencysites. Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996TOSCO BRACES ITSELF FOR COLD RECEPTION AT MARCUS HOOK      BP is shutting down shop at Marcus Hook, PA, after anoverwhelming 83% rejection last Thursday of new owner Tosco's proposedlabor contract by union workers; and now Tosco says the prospect ofrestarting the cold 185,000 b/d plant may prove too chilly tocontemplate.       Since buying the Marcus Hook plant and a retail system from BPlast November for $75 million, plus the $160 million value of theinventories, Tosco expects to assume a cold refinery Feb. 1, when ittakes possession of the plant.      "Since the union voted to reject the Tosco proposal, we arecontinuing plans to suspend operations at Marcus Hook beginning inmid-January and transferring the suspended operations over to Tosco onFebruary 1," said BP spokesperson Marian Lowes, declining to commenton the unit's current utilization.       "We failed to reach an agreement with the union," said JeffersonAllen, Tosco spokesman.  "Although that does mean we can now hire newemployees, it doesn't mean that we will open the plant ever.  Weexpected to acquire an operating refinery, but we must now reevaluatethe costs and benefits of running the plant."      For now, Tosco expects to use its 215,000- b/d Bayway, NJ,refinery to supply the retail system in the Northeast it will alsoacquire from BP.  "We've reached no conclusions about what we're goingto do," Allen added.       The plant's union, which represents 320 of its 520 employees,sharply criticized the Tosco proposal presented on Dec. 31, and deniedthat the company made any attempt to bargain.  "It has taken laborrelations back 30-40 years," charged Bob Burdick, International OCAWrepresentative.  "The document was not negotiated, it was issued bythe company.  Tosco refused to negotiate."       Nevertheless, the plant's union agreed to hold a secret ballotvote on the plan last Thursday, at Tosco's request.  Chief among theunion's complaints with the proposal is the inclusion of mandatedselective hiring, which would "totally negate seniority -- a veryimportant subject for unions," explained Burdick. Also, the plan wouldremove 30 positions from the union's collective bargaining group, layoff 65 hourly-wage union members,  and eliminate 654 salariedmanagement-type positions.  It would allow some supervisors and othersalaried employees to bid on union jobs.          After the union membership rejected the plan, with only 16.8%voting in favor of it, the shop steward said the negotiations are nowin Tosco's hands.  "The membership is not willing to go to work underthese conditions," said Cathy Brady, Marcus Hook OCAW shop steward.      Employees at two of Tosco's other three refineries are alsorepresented by OCAW, and Burdick contends Tosco's Marcus Hook proposalcompares unfavorably with the union-Tosco contracts at Avon, WA, andFerndale, CA.  "This contract is much different and much morestringent," he said.  "The management-rights clause in the Marcus Hookproposal gives Tosco almost unlimited power, which is not normal forsuch a clause.  Normally, the company is subject to the conditions ofthe union contract."Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PIPELINES WARY ABOUT MMT BLENDS      Though Ethyl Corp. has received regulatory approval to marketMMT in the U.S., pipeline operators have yet to embrace theintroduction of yet another fuel additive into an already-stressedtransportation system.  No pipeline has yet changed its gasolinespecification to accomodate MMT blends, though none have indicatedopposition to the additive, either.      Colonial Pipeline, the key mover of gasoline from the Gulf Coastto the East, has requested input from its shippers as to whether itshould develop a set of specifications for MMT-blended gasoline. "Some shippers have indicated to us that they are not interested inMMT," said William Copenhaver of Colonial.  "We're just trying to becautious."       Colonial is not suggesting that it has found technical problemsin shipping MMT-blended gasoline, said Copenhaver, only that it'strying to understand the needs of its market.  The pipeline systemwould allow a segregated shipment of MMT-blended gasoline now, butCopenhaver said he is unaware of any customer requests.      MMT, which can be blended only into conventional gasoline, willbe added at the refinery gate, according to Ethyl.  This creates a"Catch 22" situation: Getting the support of common-carrier pipelinesis essential to broad market acceptance of MMT, but those pipelinesmay withhold their support until the market demands the product.  Inresponse, Ethyl has contacted pipelines and supports the polling ofcustomers about their MMT plans and concerns, said Ethyl's TechnicalManger, Fuels, Don Hollrah.      Allowing MMT blends into the fungible system would requireColonial to add another entire set of gasoline grades, which it isloath to do on top of the series of gasoline and diesel grades createdin response to new environmental regulations since 1993.      Responses are due from shippers by Jan. 12, and Colonial willannounce its intentions "soon after," said Copenhaver.  This decisionwill set the tone for other pipelines, add industry sources.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ENERGY BIOSYSTEMS PATENTS DESULFURIZATION BREAKTHROUGHS       A breakthrough in Energy BioSystems Corp.'s development ofbiocatalytic desulfurization is bringing a six-to-eight-fold increasein specific critical intermediate reactions, the company reported,predicting it will be ready for commercial demonstration in early1996.  The Houston-based company also received two new process designpatents for its proprietary biocatalytic desulfurization systems (BDS)that use bacteria to remove sulfur from petroleum.       While Energy BioSystems scientists were experienced with theinterplay of three factors in the intermediate reactions,  the recentenhancements in the process reflect the company's greater mastery overa fourth factor discovered in September.   Company scientists are nowworking to determine what effect the more prolific reactions will haveon the overall sulfur yield.       More development is required on a final reaction to produce theprototype biocatalyst necessary for pilot plant demonstrations plannedfor middle distillate streams at one of Total Petroleum's refineries,the company said.  BDS will be later be applied to crude, naphtha andother gasoline components.       As for Energy BioSystems' newest patents, the first (U.S. No.5,472,875) claims a new reactor design by which air or oxygen-enrichedgas is introduced into the oil prior to treatment with thebiocatalyst.  The second patent (U.S. No. 5,468,626) claims a methodby which a biosorption agent preferentially absorbs sulfur-containingcompounds from petroleum.  Such a process design could reduce the sizeof the bioreactor by concentrating on those compounds requiringdesulfurization, thus reducing capital equipment costs, the companyreported. Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996CHEVRON, VENEZUELA'S MARAVEN PARTNERSHIP TO PUSH ASPHALT       Maraven S.A. and Chevron Corp. have formed a 20-year alliancethat will bring Chevron substantial crude supplies to run its threeasphalt-oriented refineries in the U.S. and expand its marketing ofasphalt products in the western U.S.  The U.S. partnership is namedChevron Ven Asphalt Alliance.      Under the agreement, Chevron will operate Maraven's property inVenezuela's Boscan oil field and Maraven will in turn supply crude oilto Chevron's asphalt refineries in Perth Amboy, NJ, Portland, OR, andRichmond Beach, WA.  "Boscan crude, with an API gravity of 10 degrees,is an excellent asphalt feedstock," said David O'Reilly, president ofChevron USA Products Co.       Chevron's investment in the heavy oil fields will improveproduction from 80,000 b/d today to 115,000 b/d, will reach about $2billion, the company estimates.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PARAMOUNT PETROLEUM CONTINUES DOWNSTREAM RESTRUCTURING      Paramount Petroleum launched the next phase of its operationsrestructuring to shift its emphasis away from light-end products toasphalt, jet fuel, diesel fuel and intermediate product refining.  Thecompany's latest efforts have idled certain downstream units, butParamount says it will retain the option of resuming hydro processing. "For now it is important that Paramount focus on its core business,and continue to provide high-quality products and customer service,"said Jerrel Barto, Paramount chairman.      Paramount's restructuring began last September when it acquiredEOTT Energy Corp.'s West Coast asphalt marketing operation, seniormanagement team and technical staff.  At the same time, Paramountterminated its processing agreement with EOTT, paid off its long-termdebt, entered into a long-term crude oil supply arrangement with EOTT,obtained long-term financing from Bank of Boston and received asubstantial capital investment from EOTT, Paramount reported. Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ASSESSING THE FUTURE OF CNG IN AN RFG WORLD      Compressed natural gas (CNG) has been studied and testedextensively as an alternative transportation fuel.  It has beeen usedin passenger car fleets, public transit vehicles and in some heavy-duty equipment with spark-ignition systems replacing diesel fuel.  Buteven so, the public understands the fuel characteristics of RFG anddiesel fuel far better than those of CNG.      Nevertheless, CNG must be considered as one of the backuptransportation fuels of the next century.  It has the support of theU.S. Department of Energy and is probably more compatible with the oiland automobile industries than battery power.  However, as long ascrude oil moves freely in commerce throughout the world, CNG vehicledevelopment will be slow.  Future RFG, along with advances inemissions control, can compete environmentally with CNG.Natural Gas As A Stable Energy Source: Economic Factors      As a fossil fuel, natural gas follows coal as the most plentifulenergy resource of the U.S.  Crude oil is in a distant third place,and the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on imports.  At thesame time, methane, the major constituent of CNG, can be generatedfrom coal, tar sands, crude oil and, to some extent, renewablesources.  It offers long-term stability as an energy source.      Today, the price of natural gas is set by competition withresidual fuel oil or coal as a burner fuel, and it varies considerablywith geography and season.  As a general rule, CNG is more economicthan RFG despite capital and operating costs for compression. Conversions to accomodate CNG are said to average about $4,000 perpassenger or van-type vehicle.      Fuel economy comparisons between CNG and RFG are confusing atbest.  On a theoretical BTU/gallon basis, CNG has much less to offerthan RFG.  On a BTU/lb of vapor basis, the heat content is morecomparable, but varies with individual CNG and RFG composition.  Onestudy with Caprice and Crown Victoria taxicabs conducted by Clean AirCab Co. indicated CNG "average fuel economy is equal to or better thangasoline."  The study also also indicated a 20-month payback onconversions.  Composition and Emissions Performance      In general, treated natural gas ranges from 80% to 98% methane,with varying amounts of ethane, propane, inert gases (carbon dioxideand nitrogen) and traces of heavier hydrocarbons.  EPA certificationfuel is specified at the bottom of Table I and is more restrictivethan some pipeline gas delivered for heating.  The heavierhydrocarbons are necessarily limited for CNG due to the danger ofliquid formation.      CNG's high methane content insures clean burning and a low levelof non-methane emissions.  Heavier hydrocarbons emitted, primarilyethane and propane, are low in photochemical activity.      Toxic emissions, such as benzene and 1,3 butadiene, are almostnon-existent, especially when catalytic converter controlled. However, the reactivity of emissions from compressed fuel can increaseif the C2 and C3 fractions contain olefins from refinery crackingoperations.  Olefin limits could be set on future CNG certificationfuel as an added environmental control.  (The California Air ResourcesBoard current limits the amount of propylene in LPG at 10 vol%, to bereduced to 5 vol% on Jan. 1, 1997.)Octane Quality      The octane quality of most CNG compositions exceeds 120 (R+M)/2. However, the inherent value of the excess octane is currently lostbecause vehicles converted to CNG are not designed with highercompression engines that could offer additional fuel economy orgreater performance.      An advanced natural gas vehicle developed by an industryconsortium, headed by Johns Hopkins University Applied PhysicsLaboratory, does incorporate a modified small displacement, high-compression engine.  The compact-sized, four-door sedan is said tohave a 315-mile driving range between refueling and fuel economy of 32miles per (equivalent) gallon.Fuel Tanks and Fueling      Two major disadvantages for CNG passenger cars are the largerspace needed for fuel tanks and the availability of compressed gas forfueling.  The Johns Hopkins prototype is said to retain 75% of theoriginal trunk storage space, which means that the rear has beenredesigned for fuel storage and lacks space for a spare tire and jack. Instead, the car is equipped with "run flat tires" which can be drivenup to 250 miles with no damage after puncture.      Fueling time and availability is a major problem that needsresolution before the average motorist can become serious about CNG,and limited fleet operations can be expanded.      Yet, in a world that would place a significant number of CNGvehicles on the road, solutions can be visualized.  For example,natural gas available through conventional systems for industrial andhome heating could be the fuel source.  Compression equipment andtankage could be installed at large service stations or vehicle repairshops.  Also, it is conceivable that compressors and small tanks couldbe installed in the home garage, assuming safety problems could beresolved.      However, in the home-supply case, the gas delivered through theheating system would need to meet CNG fuel specifications.  Naturalgas for home heating contains a minute amount of odorant, such asmercaptan sulfur.  The material is added to facilitate leak detectionand could probably be removed with a filtering device connected to thecompression equipment.Long-Range Outlook      Prospects are slim for a CNG share of vehicle transportationfrom the average motorist.  He or she is not likely to trade fuelingconvenience and trunk space for lower-cost mileage.  Further, theeconomic advantage for CNG over RFG would probably be lost (throughrising demand and added road taxes) if gas-powered vehicles weremandated in critical air pollution areas such as the Los AngelesBasin.  Also, as long as zero-emission vehicles are scheduled andmandated in California, the major emphasis of automakers will be ondevelopment of battery-powered cars.      Future RFG, along with more extensive catalytic conversion, isalso competition for CNG from the standpoint of cost-effectiveemissions reductions.      On the other hand, as long as fuel economics favor CNG andfacilitate a short-term payout of conversion equipment, as well asoffer long-term, low-cost mileage, compressed gas will be attractivefor fleet operation -- especially in critical air pollution zones. Therefore, CNG and CNG vehicles can be viewed as a niche market thatwill experience gradual growth.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SANCTIONS AGAINST NIGERIA COULD SEND OIL PRICES SOARING      Elimination of Nigeria's oil production from world marketsthrough a boycott would push oil prices sharply higher and have aparticularly severe impact on heating oil and diesel fuel because ofthe uniquely high distillate nature of Nigerian crudes, said CherylTrench, executive vice president, Petroleum Industry ResearchFoundation (New York, NY).  OECD countries, led by the U.S., would bemost affected, as they account for 90% of Nigeria's export market, ormore than 1.5 million b/d.      "As everybody is well aware, this is not an issue under hotdebate in the U.S. right now," said Trench.  "But it is underconsideration in the U.S. Congress and internationally."      With the world having perhaps 3.5 million b/d of spare oilproduction capacity today, two-thirds of that in Saudi Arabia, Trenchbelieves that prices would rise during the substantial time lag beforesupplies were redistributed around the world in accordance withdemand.  "Even if  it were, however, the incremental crude would notmatch the quality of Nigerian crudes, with their high yields of lightproducts in general, and particularly high yield of gasoil," shewrote.      The last time when light crudes were at a premium, during theU.S. Operation Desert Storm, refiners that had to use heavy crudeswound up increasing refinery runs to make up deficits -- and the samething would occur in this case.  "Uncertainty over the availability ofincremental supplies will encourage inventory holding, the phenomenonthat unbalanced markets in 1979," she added.      Even a unilateral embargo by only the U.S. would affect themarket noticeably, Trench predicted.  For one thing, U.S. East Coastgasoline and heating oil inventories are lower this year than in yearspast, so any production shortfall would be felt "quickly and stronglyin product prices."  The redirection of near-substitutes for Nigeriancrude (such as North Sea production) to the U.S. would change tradepatterns and contribute to a widening of crude-grade splits.      The impact of a boycott in the U.S. would falldisproportionately on several refiners, PIRF found: Sun, which is 100%dependent on Nigerian crude to run its Philadelphia refinery complex;BP, which relies on the crude for 70% of its feed at Marcus Hook, PA,a facility it is soon turning over to Tosco; and Hess, which useslarge volumes of Nigerian crude at its Virgin Islands complex.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ABB GROUP SCORES SUCCESSES IN FORMER SOVIET UNION      During the last few months, Switzerland's ABB Group moved aheadof other Western engineering companies backing the growth of therefining industry in the former Soviet Union.      In November, ABB Lummus Global, a division of ABB Group, helpedarrange a $96 million loan from the U.S. Export-Import Bank forfurther modernization of a refinery in Perm, Russia.  ABB Lummus willmanage the project, which will expand production of low-aromatics (10vol%) diesel fuel, increase yield of high-value products and reduce SO2emissions by 30%.  The refinery is already Russia's top producer oflubricant oils and has been making an all-unleaded gasoline slatesince March 1993.      Separately, ABB Simcon signed an agreement with Petrocom ofMoscow, to cooperate in supplying the refining industry withautomation systems, dynamic simulators and related services.  Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996GASOLINE, HEATING OIL PRICES IMPROVE DESPITE INVENTORY BUILDS      Fuel traders appeared to shake off American Petroleum Institute(API) data that indicated gasoline and distillate inventoriesincreased substantially in the last week of 1995, instead driving GulfCoast gasoline up nearly 4 c/gal since late December.  For the weekended Dec. 30, 1995, gasoline inventories incresaed 5.1 million bbl.      Distillate stocks increased 1.2 million bbl, but that wasentirely due to a rise in on-road diesel, as the cold weather took alarge bit out of heating oil inventories.  As a result, spot pricesfor high-sulfur diesel fuel ended last week even with on-road dieselat 61 c/gal in New York and 55.6 c/gal in Houston.      Concentrating on a huge drawdown in crude oil inventories of11.4 million bbl, traders said that the trends of higher productdemand are more important than a one-week fluctuation in productstocks at a time of year when inventories are sometimes manipulatedfor tax purposes.        News Friday morning that refinery workers at BP's Marcus Hook,PA, facility rejected the contract offer by Tosco helped gasolineprices in the East as the week ended.  If BP proceeds with itsdecision to close the refinery in the absence of a new contract whenit turns it over to Tosco on Jan. 31, product from the172,000-b/dfacility would come to a halt.  However, sources indicate that theplant has been running "at maybe half capacity" for a considerableperiod of time and that the new owner, Tosco, could increaseproduction at its Bayway, NJ, refinery to make up for any shortfallsfrom the Marcus Hook plant.      Also aiding the market late last week were stoppages in somecrude shipments  because of severe winter storms.  Coastal  announcedthat its Corpus Christi, TX, refinery was scaling back operationsabout 20% due to reduced crude shipments from the Gulf of Mexicobecause of the weather.  Shell reduced operations at Deer Park, TX, byan undisclosed amount for the same reason.      MTBE prices have stalled in the past several weeks, due to lighttrading interest and sufficient supplies, after performing strongly inthe first three weeks of December.  Spot Gulf Coast MTBE held at 92c/gal last week, said sources, who added that they do not see anyevents on the mid-term horizon that will affect prices.  Methanolcontracts rolled over unchanged from December to January at 42 c/gal,with spot prices at discounts of as much as 10 c/gal from thoselevels.      Ethanol prices were also unchanged at spot levels, though someMidwest marketers reported that rack rates increased by 1-2 c/gal in areflection of stronger rack gasoline prices.      Crude price gains were attributed to expectations of continuedstrong product demand.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996CDTECH PIONEERS SAFER, SMARTER BENZENE UNIT FOR TEXACO      CDTECH is licensing its first application of CDHydrosm for theselective hydrogenation of benzene in reformate feedstocks for TexacoRefining and Marketing Inc.'s Bakersfield, CA, plant to provide a lessexpensive way for the refiner to meet its CARB Phase 2 RFG gasolinerequirements.      The technology provides an economic way for Bakersfield toproduce a high-octane component, since it lacks a catalytic cracker. The plant has 16,000 b/d of low-pressure catalytic reforming capacity.      CDHydro technology, said to be the first of its kind, isdesigned to replace the standard fixed-bed hydrogenation andconventional distillation units in one single proprietary catalyticdistillation unit.  The Texaco contract will mark the first commercialuse of a combined, single-step reaction and fractionation of benzene,allowing cheaper, lower-pressure and safer operating conditions, saidTom Hickey, director of marketing and operations, CDTECH.        While gasoline benzene specifications continue to be morestringent worldwide, CDHydro hydrogenates benzene into cyclohexane,considered to be more environmentally innocuous.  The new technologyoperates isothermally, thus eliminating the concern of temperature-rise common in fixed-bed reactor systems.  Another advantage is thatthe technology utilizes commercially available catalyst.      Also,  standard fixed-bed units require a larger volume ofhydrocarbons in processing because they use more equipment forprocessing them.  CDHydro utilizes just one column already present inthe refinery eliminating the need for additional hydrocarboninventory.  "This reduces the ultimate residence time of the liquidand limits hydrocarbon holdup," Hickey said.      The technology has been commercially available since mid-1994,and may be installed either as a retrofit or a new column.  Althoughit may not be universally useful to all refiners, Hickey said, "weexpect to see a fair number of applications, but that really dependson a case-by-case basis.  However, 100%" of everyone that has to builda new reformate splitter can benefit.       "We will probably see wide utilization in Europe because of thestrict new environmental regulations on benzene," Hickey said.  "Manyrefiners will require new reformate splitters to remove benzene, andin those applications, CDHydro is a natural."       Texaco recently installed a new, 7,200-b/d reformate splittercolumn at Bakersfield to produce California Phase 2 RFG, which willutilize the CDHydro technology.  Currently, the 56,000-b/d refinerydoes not produce any RFG, either Federal or California.  Texacodeclined to comment on the projected savings it expects to glean fromthe CDHydro technology or the amount of RFG it plans to produce.  Theupgrade won't alter the plant's overall crude capacity, however.       Other options for eliminating benzene include pre-fractionationfor precursors, post-fractionation, removing the benzene for sale, andalkylation.  CDTECH developed the technology based on its similarapplications for butadiene hydrogenation for C4 streams.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-29IA059-000325-B006-303http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey04.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234014 text/html 107713HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:37:59 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:46 GMTContent-length: 107525Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey04.html Sample Issue Copyright OIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL OVERLOOK (811 words) ENERGY COMPANY ACQUISITIONS (631 words) PRODUCING PROPERTY ACQUISITIONS (2138 words) WORLDWIDE PRODUCING ACQUISITIONS (1720 words) OILFIELD ACQUISITIONS (2099 words) TAKEOVER ATTEMPTS (1243 words) RESERVES ON THE MARKET (463 words) MAJOR STAKES (555 words) BANKRUPTCIES AND RESTRUCTURINGS (1826 words) MERGERS AND JOINT VENTURES (1503 words) NEW COMPANIES, NAME CHANGES, MOVES (492 words) FINANCING AND REDEMPTIONS (2268 words) GAS PRICES (709 words) EDITOR'S COMMENTARY (247 words) CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL OVERLOOK     Independents still splitting and combining, some surprises, somesignificant deals in property acquisitions, majors stillrepositioning, usual yearend rush to buy and sell reserves.Canadian takeover market just keeps heating up, three or four majordeals.      In the oilfield sector, offshore rigs remain hot items as dopipelines. Government steps in against one major deal, another getsrespectable.      Another large independent hits the market; restructurings amongmajors still going strong; Mobil cuts more E&P. Execs are moving tonew jobs. Seismic related exploration JVs continue to proliferate.      Gas goes bonkers, if you are in the right place.In specific:      Tom Brown to acquire KN Production for common stock andconvertible preferred, sets up a gas services JV with KN Energy, willcontinue to try for Presidio. Key and Brock merge; PrimeEnergyto acquire Saratoga for stock; Sharpe acquires Figgie assets.      MCN makes a couple of big acquisitions for $120 millioncombined, principally coalgas. Plains      Resources to acquire Marathon Illinois Basin properties for $46million; KCS makes a production payment to Hawkins and picks upadditional reserves in the wells for a combined $31 million.      Whiting buys out Wainoco's Conroe interests for $19.5 million;Harken makes a $19.6 million buy in Texas Panhandle. Stocker removesChevron burr in California. Phillips sells a slew of Californiaonshore operated, also some in Oklahoma; buyers are Oakland andCalumet. Panaco agrees to buy Bayou Sorrel from Shell for $10.5million. Sonat group pays $29.25 million for Gary-Williams interestsin North Crowley and Rebel interests in Neale for $6.3 million. Callonbuys Amerada interests in Chandeleur 40 for $9 million, sells part toWilliam G. Helis. Energy Development sells mineral and royaltyinterests for $6.2 million. XCL, Arakis, Petrofina, Shell, Koch sell;Cody, American Resources, Forcenergy, McFarland, Fortune, PMC,British-Borneo, Continental, Empiric, Inland, Maynard, Oilex andChesapeake buy.      In Canada, Alberta Energy makes a C$1.1 billion bid for Conwest;Forest to acquire ATCOR Resources for C$186 million; Rigel bids C$380million for Inverness and Pembina makes a C$354 million hostile run atMark Resources. Lots of Canadian properties change hands, mostly insmaller deals this time. Texaco sells 15% of North Sea Captain fieldto Korea Petroleum for $210 million.      Other deals of interest. Shell sells out of E&P in Turkey.Diamond Offshore to acquire Arethusa Offshore for $516 million, addssix semis. FTC nixes sale of Tenneco's 50% stake in Kern River toQuestar in a testing flag floater, Tenneco salutes, torpedoes deal;Williams gets the other 50% for $205 million. Giant picks upfractionation plant from Meridian for $10 million. Williams Pipe Linejoins the Longhorn Partners to purchase the Exxon Baytown-to-Cranepipeline. M-I agrees to acquire Anchor Drilling Fluids for about $110million.      Panhandle picks up the other 50% in the cryogenic plant at PortArthur and two Permian Basin plants from Mitchell. CMS buys Petal fromChevron; El Paso buys Premier; Dresser buys Instech; TransCanada looksat Farmland refinery; Trident keeps buying. Oceaneering buys the M.T.Swift from Mobil for an FPSO at Zafiro. Stena to purchase two semisfrom Ben Line; Odjfell purchases a stacked semi. Other vessels sell.Franks buys Tubular Inspectors assets; Global acquires ROV.Environmental assets change hands; Caltex sells out of Nippon Refineryfor $2 billion. British utility assets still hot, updates.      Another try for Tesoro; Wells battle for First Interstate rageson, gets very bitter. Melrose Energy and Pentex merge. Talisman bidsfor Goal Petroleum. New bids in the services sector.      Public Service puts Energy Development and its 900 BCFGEreserves on the market. Enserch to sell Rockies; Parker & Parsley tosell Australia (didn't you know?); oilfield assets on the market.Snyder sells out of American Exploration; NAGIT sells out of Alliance;others just sell out.      Texaco E&P consolidates California operations in Bakersfield;Wainoco cuts out of Houston; Pennzoil Products goes to Hamburg andBarcelona. Coplex to float off Philippines assets.      PetroEcuador in a shakeup. Chevron restructures U.S. gasoline;Chevron Chemical reorganizes. Mobil cuts 500 more E&P jobs. Stocksplits. American Exploration JVs with Louis Dreyfus and Seisgen inLavaca Co. KCS JVs with Hawkins and Savoy execs on Shell Niagaranblock. Frontier looks for bright spots on vendor's data.SK and Hillman Company JV in East Texas. Other JVs report,      Pittencrieff disappointed. Forest looks at 470 feet of pay inGulf; Hunt, Mobil and PanCanadian cut a Newfoundland deal. NorthwestNatural and NIPSCO JV in Canada. Some scattering of foreign JVs.Panhandle Eastern now PanEnergy Corp. New offices and moves.Fortune, Forest, Seacor, Star Gas, Coastal Caribbean, TN, Harken,Snyder, Tatham and U.S. Energy place US equity and 28 Canadiancompanies offer equity. Tenneco, Saba, Vintage,Union Texas, UnitedCities, Apache, KCS, GATX, Star Gas, Clark, Norsk Hydro, Tullow andAlpine offer debt. New debt facilities. Gas spots hit $3.10; cashprices hit $3.50 at Henry. Houston area only $2.10 and Opal at $1.20.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ENERGY COMPANY ACQUISITIONS      Tom Brown Inc. (Midland) and KN Energy Inc. (Lakewood, CO) agreefor Tom Brown to acquire KN Energy's oil and gas sub, KN ProductionCompany, in exchange for 900,000 common shares and 1 million shares ofnew convertible preferred stock of Tom Brown. The preferred to have aliquidation value of $25 per share with a 7% coupon and be convertibleinto 1.666 shares of Tom Brown common per. Tom Brown currently tradesin the $15.675 per range, up from the $14.25 range before theannouncement. Tom Brown currently has about 16.153 million sharesoutstanding. Tom Brown and KN Energy will then form a new gas servicescompany, owned 55% by KN to provide gathering, processing, marketing,storage and field services to Rocky Mountain oil and gas producers. Itwill also pursue construction or acquisition of those type of assetsin areas where the E&P companies own reserves, principally portions ofthe Wind River Basin and areas of western Colorado and SW Wyoming. KNwill operate the new company and both will have equal representationon the managing operating committee. Tom Brown to dedicate gasproduction to the new company, combined reserves initially dedicatedwill be about 180 BCFGE.      KN Production has proved reserves estimated at 45 BCFGE (90% gasand 80% developed) located primarily in the Piceance Basin, WesternColorado and the Moxa Arch area of Wyoming. KNPC also holds about170,000 net undeveloped leasehold and mineral acres.       Tom BrownTom Brown has reserves estimated at 180 BCFG, 4.5 MMBOand 648,000 undeveloped acres. Tom Brown owns an average 28% WI in 800wells and a 45% interest in a JV with KN Energy that owns a 110-milegas pipeline and related gathering systems in North Dakota andMontana.Tom Brown also reports it intends to continue to pursue theacquisition of all of the assets of Presidio Oil Co.      Key Production Company Inc. (Denver) agrees to acquire Brock Exploration Corporation (New Orleans) by merger, offering one ofits shares for each 1.45 Brock shares. Key will open a regional officein New Orleans staffed by some of the Brock employees. Shareholdersmeetings to be held in February.      Sharpe Energy Company, a sub of Sharpe Energy & Resources Ltd.,(Toronto) purchases a major portion of the assets of Figgie NaturalResources (Wickcliffe, OH) from Figgie International. Sharpe acquiredproperties in Ohio, Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, New Mexico, North andSouth Dakota, Wyoming, Montana and Colorado.      Current production acquired was 300 to 350 BOEPD, 80% oil.PrimeEnergy Corp. (Stamford, CT) agrees to acquire the shares ofSaratoga Resources Inc. (Houston) in exchange for an undisclosednumber of PrimeEnergy shares. PrimeEnergy operates about 1,500 wellsin five states. Saratoga operates about 195 wells in the Gulf Coastand South Texas, with assets valued at $17 million.      Garnet Resources Corp. and Aviva Petroleum Inc. agree to mergesince they have mutual interests in Colombia. However, onDec. 5, they report they were unable to agree on terms for the merger.Aviva hires  Dillon Read to evaluate finding another merger partner orbuyer.      Hawkins Oil of Michigan (Tulsa) acquires Savoy Oil & Gas Inc.(Traverse City, MI) in a merger. No other details released.## UPDATES## DECEMBER Meteor Industries Inc. closes the acquisition of Capco Resources Inc.from Capco Resources Ltd. (Calgary) for 1.745 million, or 58% of itsshares.## DECEMBER AND SEPTEMBER Coda Energy Inc. and JEDI (an Enron affiliate) agreed to amodification of the merger agreement whereby JEDI acquires Coda.The new agreement removes the condition requiring the sale of Codasub, Taurus Energy Corp., and reduces the per-share merger price to$7.75 from $8 per share.## SEPTEMBERUtiliCorp reports it sold the assets of Aquila Energy ResourcesCorporation to Apache for about $205 million in cash.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PRODUCING PROPERTY ACQUISITIONS      MCN Corporation (Detroit) reports one of its subs agrees toacquire a 100% WI in 130 coalgas wells, and the rights to drill onapproximately 100,000 acres of Virginia coalgas properties from CONSOLCoal Group. Deal includes 80 miles of gas gathering lines and a 5%interest in a 40-mile transmission line. Part of the production hasSection 29 tax credits.      MCN Corp. also reports the sub agreed to acquire undefinedproperties in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado and North Dakota fromunspecified parties. Total costs of the deals, including the CONSOL Coal Group deal above, is $120 million. MCN to acquire provedreserves of 250 BCFG, 1.9 MMB of oil and probable and potential gasreserves of 250 BCF.      Plains Resources Inc. (Houston) agrees to acquire Marathon OilCompany's producing and non-producing oil and gas assets in theIllinois Basin for about $46 million, $5 million in Plains common andthe rest in cash. Deal includes three Marathon operated fieldsproducing 4,500 BOPD (4,200 BPD from the 1,100-well LawrenceField). Deal will make Plains the largest Illinois Basin producer.Plains in turn cuts a deal with Crete Oil Company, one of the fivelargest Illinois Basin producers, for Crete to perform dailyoperations on the properties and to form an AMI over parts of thebasin. No reserves reported.      KCS Energy Inc. (Houston) makes a volumetric production paymentdeal with Hawkins Oil of Michigan Inc. for 13.7 BCFG and 1.1 MMBO, tobe produced primarily from 89 wells in the Niagaran Reef Trend. Thesewells acquired by Hawkins in the merger with Savoy Oil & Gas Inc. Production to be delivered through January, 2006, at about 5.3 MMCFGPDand 630 BOPD. KCS also purchases escalating working interests in 30 ofthe 89 wells, rising from 10% at present to 30% around 1997. Reservesacquired in this deal estimated at 3.4 BCFG and 225,000 BO. Dealincluded an ORR in the related exploration JV. Consideration combinedin the two deals was $31 million.      Whiting Petroleum Corporation (Denver) agrees to purchase Wainoco Oil Corporation's (Houston) 18% WI in the Conroe Field Unit,Montgomery Co., Texas Gulf Coast, for $19.5 million in cash. Wainocoto use proceeds to pay off bank debt and reduce other debt.      Harken Energy Corporation (Dallas) agrees to acquire producingoil and gas properties in the Texas Panhandle. Reserves not reported,but 80% gas. Properties have "substantial" proved undeveloped reservesand deal includes a pipeline and gathering system. Gas currently sellsfor $3.30/MCF. In consideration, Harken to issue 2.5 millionrestricted common shares, $2.5 million in cash and a non-recourse notepayable to the seller for $13 million. That note repayable inrestricted common at the option of Harken. Total deal valued at $19.6million.      Stocker Resources, a Plains Resources Inc. sub, agrees toacquire a production payment held by Chevron Corp. on Stocker's LosAngeles Basin producing properties. The payment has a face amount of$30 million and comes due when California posted prices exceed $15/BO.Stocker also acquires a 15-year term mineral interest in certain ofits Los Angeles Basin properties and about 10 acres of surface feeland in Los Angeles County. In consideration, Stocker to forgivecertain funds due it, dismiss lawsuits and issue Chevron a $4.6million 10-year note. Deal includes deferment of plugging obligationsuntil 2000.      Phillips Petroleum Co. sells all its onshore owned-and-operatedproperties in California to Oakland Petroleum Operating Co. (Tulsa).The properties were in the Buena Vista and Midway-Sunset fields inKern County, the Monroe Swell Field in Monterey County and otherinterests in Madera County. Oakland estimates reserves purchased at2.5 MMBO. No consideration reported. Current production is between 325and 700 BOEPD. Deal leaves Phillips with non-operated interests in afew onshore fields and the offshore Point Arguello Field.      Phillips Petroleum also sells its interests in the Shilder,North Burbank, Cushing and other fields in Osage, Kay and Creekcounties, Oklahoma, to Calumet Oil Company (Tulsa). Current productionsold was about 1,000 BOPD. No reserves or consideration released.Beacon Exploration Company (Tulsa) purchases the interests of Ogle Production Corp. in two leases in the Yowlumne "B" Unit in thenorthwestern part of the Yowlumne Field. No reserves or considerationreported.      Panaco Inc. (Kansas City, MO) agrees to purchase a 100% WI from Shell Oil in the Bayou Sorrel Field, Iberville Parish, S. Louisiana,for $10.5 million. Field has production from 28 sands and 37reservoirs. Current production is from 31 wells, ranging indepth from 7,000 feet to 11,000 feet.      Sonat Exploration Company and partners, including TaurusExploration Inc., sub of Energen, purchase the working interests of Gary-Williams Production Co. in the 9,300-acre (1,300 developed) NorthCrowley Field in South Louisiana, for about $29.25 million. Reservesacquired estimated at 5.25 MMBO and 6.5BCFG, about 70% undeveloped. Taurus expects to spend about $4 millionadditional for its 40% stake to develop the proved reserves acquired.Taurus to also hold a 25% stake in future exploration on the tract. A3-D seismic survey has been completed over the acreage.      The Sonat group also purchases the 2,300-acre Neale Field inSouth Louisiana from Rebel Drilling Company for about $6.3 million.Reserves acquired estimated at 2.3 MMBO,about 80% undeveloped. About $6 million additional will be spent todevelop the reserves.      Taurus to have a 33% stake in this acquisition.      Callon Petroleum Company (Natchez, MS) purchases a 66.7% WI(55.5% NRI) in the Chandeleur Sound 40 Field from Amerada HessCorporation for $9 million in cash. In turn, sells a 22.2% interest inthe property to the William G. Helis InterestWilliam G. HelisInterest. The field has two wells, including one dual completion,producing 5.5 MMCFGPD. Callon estimates the field has remainingreserves of 27.9 BCFG (10.3 BCF to acquired interest after theresale). Deal ups Callon to 52.3% WI (43.6% NRI) in the field. Initialinterest was purchased from W&T Offshore in September 1994.      Energy Development Corp. sells a package of non-operatedproperties in late November, principally 55,000 acres of mineral androyalty interests in the White Lake/Lac Blanc area of SouthLouisiana, for $6.2 million.       Madison Energy Advisors provided technical and marketingservices to EDC. Purchaser not released.      XCL Ltd. (Lafayette) agrees to sell its Mestena Grande Fieldinterests in South Texas to Cody Energy Inc. (Denver) for $4.3 millionin cash. Deal to be effective September 1. Reserves not reported.American Resources of Delaware (Scottsdale, AZ) sub, Southern Gas Co.of Delaware Inc., agrees to purchase certain oil and gas assets of AKSEnergy Corp., an Arakis Energy Corp. sub, in Whitley and Claycounties, KY, and in Tennessee, for $3.6 million in cash, commonshares and stock warrants. Properties include producing properties inKentucky.      Deal also calls for the purchaser and seller to form anexploration JV on the remaining undeveloped acreage in the Enpro,Sugar Creek and SMEPA fields, whereby Southern can also earn a 50% WIin that acreage.      Forcenergy Gas Exploration Inc. (Miami) trades its interests inthe Eugene Island Block 24 Field to an unnamed major oil company forthat company's 30% working interest in Vermillion Block 261 and 100%working interest in the Vermillion Block 262 field. Forcenergyacquired operatorship of the blocks in the deal. Forcenergy alsopicked up another 20% WI in Vermillion Block 261 from anothermajor oil company for an undisclosed amount of cash, bringing itsinterest in the block to 75%. Forcenergy estimates it acquired provedreserves in the two deals of 6.8 BCFGE for about $2.45 million.Current production acquired is 184 BOPD and 1.9 MMCFGPD.      McFarland Energy Inc. (Santa Fe Springs, CA) agrees to acquireinterests in 19 oil wells in Santa Barbara County, CA, for $3.4million in cash. Reserves and seller not reported, but currentproduction acquired is about 250 BOPD.      Fortune Petroleum Corp. (Agoura Hills, CA) acquired a 16.67% WI(12.5% NRI) in the 5,000-acre South Timbalier Block 76, offshoreLouisiana, from Petrofina SA for $2.9 million. Deal effective July 1,1995. Fortune offers an unnamed private company an option to acquire a4.167% WI in the block for about $790,000. The block has oneproducing well on a platform with a transmission line as part of thedeal. The well has already produced 30 BCFG and 2 MMBO and iscurrently producing 16 MMCFGPD and 1,150 BOPD.       CNG holds 50% WI in the block and operates while Oryx Energyholds a 33.33% WI.      PMC Reserve Acquisition Co. (Dallas) and its institutional andutility partners, which includes Taurus Exploration Inc., with a 18.7%partnership interest, complete two acquisition deals.      PMC purchases the Meridian Oil Inc. interests in 18 fields, orunits, principally in the Permian Basin for $5.74 million.      PMC also purchases the interests of American Exploration Companyin four wells and surrounding acreage in the Elm Grove Field,Bossier Parish, Louisiana, for $375,000. The two deals representreserves of about 6.95 BCFG and 560,000 BO, nearly all developed.Columbus Energy Corp. (Denver) agrees to acquire additional workinginterests in 107 producing gas wells (6.23 net wells), which itoperates in several fields in Webb and Zapata counties, SouthTexas, for $2.63 million. Sellers and reserves not reported.British-Borneo Petroleum Inc. acquires the operatorship and a 100%working interest in Ewing Bank Blocks 921, 964, 965, the Klamath orMorpeth Field, from Shell Offshore. British-Borneo agrees to drill athird well on the prospect for about $10 million in 1996. The fieldlies in about 1,650 feet of water and has reserves estimated from theinitial wells at 50 MMBO and 50 BCFG. Shell to retain a net profitsinterest and the right to recover the tracts if British-Borneo doesn'tdrill the well or complete drilling up the field.      Continental Resources (Enid, OK) purchases all of KochExploration Company's operated oil and gas properties in Harding Co.,South Dakota and Bowman Co., North Dakota. Deal involves 154 activewells, 144 in four air injection/in-situ combustion units. Reservesacquired are estimated at 8 MMBO from the Red River "B" zone. Noconsideration reported. Deal makes Continental the fifth largest oilproducer in North Dakota.      Enex Resources Corp. and its Enex Program 1 Partners LP fundsold a portion of their interests in the HNG properties for acombined $1.136 million.      Empiric Energy Inc. (Dallas) agrees to acquire producing oil andgas properties in Jack and Clay counties, west Central Texas, from Taureaux Corp. In one deal, Empiric will acquire a 20% NRI in twowells and an option to increase its WI in surrounding areas. In theother deal, Empiric to acquire a 60% NRI in a 1,240-acre tract withone producing well and 11 shutin wells. Empiric to pay an undisclosedamount of cash, shares and a short-term note.  Inland Resources Inc.(Denver) acquires an option from its major shareholder, Randall D.Smith, to purchase oil and gas properties in Utah. The properties wereacquired by Smith in a farmout agreement. Option to be exercised byInland prior to March 10, 1997, for about $5.3 million of itsstock or about 10.6 million shares. Smith already controls about 20.6million shares, or 50% of Inland equity.      Parker & Parker & Parsley Petroleum Co. (Midland) agrees toacquire certain undefined oil and gas properties from Wallace Oil &Gas for 214,339 of its shares. If certain title defects are corrected,the price will rise to 314,070 of its shares.      Chesapeake Energy Corp. (OKC) purchases Union Pacific Resourcesinterests in 19,500 gross acres in the Navasota River area of thedowndip Austin Chalk play in Texas for $3.9 million.       Belco Oil and Gas Corp., its partner in the area, takes a 30%stake in the deal for $1.7 million.      Maynard Oil Company (Dallas) agrees to purchase the interest of Energy Development Corp., sub of Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.,in 250 producing wells in Garza County, West Texas.      Consideration and reserves not released, but current productionacquired is about 775 BOPD.      Oilex International Investments Inc. (Houston) agrees to acquire100% of the mineral rights to 83,751 acres in Greenbriar andPocahontas counties, West Virginia, for 1.256 million of itsrestructured common, valued by Oilex at $1.256 million.      Kish Resources PLC reports agreeing to sell its Irvine Furnaceoil leases in Kentucky to an unnamed buyer. No other details released.## UPDATES## DECEMBERThe minerals purchased from Petro-Corp. Inc. by Panhandle RoyaltyPanhandle Royalty and Farmer's Union were in 13 states butconcentrated in the Anadarko and Arkoma basins and had 174 producingwells (five with working interests) on the acreage, representing about10.8% of the package, which produces about $420,000 per year inincome. Total price was near $4.23 million.## DECEMBERDelta acquired interest in six wells in the Moneta Hills Unit inFremont County, Wyoming.## DECEMBER Panaco Inc. cancels its deal to acquire properties from Gulfstar.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996WORLDWIDE PRODUCING ACQUISITIONS## CANADAAlberta Energy Company Ltd. cuts a good deal to acquire ConwestExploration Company Ltd., offering either 1.25 AEC shares or C$28.00in cash per Conwest share, up to 24.2 million shares and C$361 millionin cash. Total deal valued at C$1.1 billion. Deal would create thesecond largest, publicly traded, upstream oil and gas company inCanada. Conwest has reserves estimated at 920 BCF (601 BCF proven and319 probable), 45 MMBL (27 MM proven), 800,000 acres of explorationproperties and C$500 million in tax pools.Conwest produces some 14,000 BPD of liquids and about 185 MMCFGPD.Deal boosts Alberta Energy's gas reserves by 49% and conventionalliquids reserves by 110%, gives it twomillion net acres of undeveloped lands and defers its taxable positionby about three years.      Alberta Energy proposes to sell off all of Conwest Exploration'snon-oil and gas assets, which include an investment portfolio, a zincmine and small hydroelectric plants; total value about C$165 million,or about 75% of Conwest's total debt.      Three of Conwest Exploration's directors will join the Alberta Energy board and key Conwest execs will join AEC management.As reported last month, the  ATCO Group was negotiating to sell itsATCOR Resources Ltd. sub.       Forest Oil Corp. (Denver) agrees to offer C$4.88 for each classA non-voting share and class B common share, or about C$186 million.ATCO and its other subs hold 29.4% of the class A shares and 85.9% ofthe class B shares of ATCOR. Forest to fund the acquisition with thesale of its equity to the market.      ATCOR has proved net reserves of 13 MMBL and 132 BCFG, nearlyall developed. Current production is about 4,000 BO and 46 MMCFGPD. Italso owns gas processing and gathering facilities in most of itsfields and 253,000 acres of undeveloped leases, as well as interestsin 441,000 gross acres of frontier lands, which include interests in22 significant discoveries. ATCOR also markets an average of 800MCFGPD for itself and third parties. As part of the deal, ForestOilForest will sell back certain assets to the controllingshareholders of ATCOR for C$22 million.      These include 50% of ATCOR's Beaufort Sea assets and 50% of itsoffshore Sable Island properties, 54% of its 33.33% interest in a 315MMCFPD ethane extraction plant in south Edmonton and a 50% interest inthe remaining frontier lands.      Forest Oil also completes the acquisition of a 56% controllinginterest in Saxon Petroleum Inc. in a deal first reported in theNovember issue. Saxon will sell the 5.3 million Forest shares itacquired in the deal as part of Forest's registration of 60 millionshares.      Rigel Energy Corp. agrees to acquire Inverness Petroleum Ltd.,offering .625 of its shares for each Inverness share, or about C$7.73per share, in a deal valued at C$380 million, including debtassumption. Deal subject to 66.67% acceptance, but Rigel has alreadylocked up Inverness board approval and 35% of its shares.      Inverness would also have to pay Rigel about C$5.35 million ifthe deal falls through.      Deal ups Rigel Energy to 8,400 BLPD and 91 MMCFGPD, a 74% and144% increase respectively. Deal ups gas reserves by 79% and liquidsreserves by 58%, and gives it 1.4 million net undeveloped acres, a140% increase.       Nesbitt Burns will act as dealer/manager.In relation to a report above, Conwest Exploration sells its 2.67million shares of Asquith Resources Inc. to United Reef Ltd. forC$100,000. Shares represent a 51.34% stake in Asquith. United Reef, inturn, trades 1.002 million Asquith shares for the equity of 1153731 Ontario Inc., a mining company, which holds C$135,828 ofAsquith debt.      Clayoquot Resources Ltd. and Newgate Resources Ltd. terminatetheir merger discussions. Alberta Oil and Gas Ltd. and partnersacquire various working interests in several properties inthe east central area of Alberta. AOG itself pays C$10 million forproduction of 242 BOPD and 3.2 MMCFGPD with proved and probablereserves of 1.36 MMB and 12.4 BCFG. AOG also acquires33,000 net acres of undeveloped leases. AOG takes over as operator of90 wells and two gas plants.      Pengrowth Gas Income Fund agrees to acquire a 2.785% WI in theHanlan Swan Hills Pool Gas Unit No. 1 for C$9.7 million from Beau Canada Exploration Ltd. Deal subject to right of first refusal bythird parties.      Olympia Energy Inc. purchases properties in the Bottrel,Winchell Coulee and Wild Cat Hills areas of Alberta for C$3.85 million(C$2.58 million net). Included in the deal are two producing gaswells (1.139 net), one dual zone well and two shutin wells. Productionis currently 560 BOEPD. Deal includes 41,600 gross acres (27,900 net)in the Bottrel area.      Cirque Energy Ltd. acquires an additional 29% WI in the BattleCreek Field in Saskatchewan from Minorca Resources Inc. (Toronto) forC$1.04 million in cash, 700,000 of its shares and 350,000warrants. Deal ups Cirque to an 84.5% WI in the property and adds 150BOPD.      New North Resources Ltd. agrees to acquire properties in fourareas of Alberta from Alberta Gas Products Ltd. for C$443,700.Brigdon Resources Inc. purchases reserves and exploration acreageinterests in the Buffalo Lake, Alberta, area, raising its reserves by32%.      Best Pacific Resources Ltd. acquires a majority interest in anoil field in the Richdale area of east central Alberta for C$462,800.Property produces 22 BO and 235 MCFGPD.      Panatlas Energy Inc. acquires a 70% WI and operatorship of anoil field at Whitebear, Saskatchewan. Deal includes 2,400 acres witheight wells. Current production is 38 BOPD.Spire Energy Ltd. acquires interests in the Abee area of Alberta forC$700,000. Deal includes a 35% WI in 18,720 gross acres, a 43% WI infour gas wells and 35% interest in the 11 MMCFPD Abee Gas Plant.Scarlet Exploration Inc. agrees to trade its interests in the Helmetarea of British Columbia to Beau Canada Exploration Ltd. for BeauCanada interests in the Sullivan Lake Gas Unit and theCainwood Cardium Oil Unit in Alberta.      Deep Basin Energy Inc. picks up minor interests in itsproperties at Clive in Alberta and Weyburn in Saskatchewan frompartners and acquires a 21.63% WI in the Workman Frobisher VoluntaryUnitNo. 1.Rosebay Resources Inc. acquires interests in 48 properties forC$980,000.New Energy West Corp. sells its entire interest in one property in theLloydminster area of Alberta.Southlake Energy Inc., sub of NIPSCO Energy Services Inc., acquiresoil and gas properties in south central Alberta from Gentra One Resources.## UPDATES## DECEMBERThe Lateral Vector Resources Inc. acquisition of International PedcoEnergy Corporation is defined. Each Pedco share to receive .994 sharesof LVR, or .6959 LVR shares and the equivalent of C$.418 per.## DECEMBERPanCanadian will acquire over C$200 million in tax losses with theacquisition of Lasmo Nova Scotia Ltd.## NOVEMBERCimarron Petroleum Ltd. closes its acquisition of Canadian PioneerEnergy Inc.## OCTOBERThe merger of Dalton Resources Ltd. and Piper Petroleums Ltd. isapproved by shareholders.## NORTH SEA AREAHolland Sea Search Holding NV, a Cairn Energy PLC sub, picks up anadditional .69% WI in Dutch North Sea license P/12,increasing its interest to 6.94%.Oryx Energy Co. completes its previously announced sale of its 33.6%WI in UK Block 48/15a to PowerGen PLC for $120 million.Texaco Ltd. agrees to sell a 15% interest in its UK North Sea Captainoilfield, UK Block 13/22a, for $210 million to Korea PetroleumDevelopment Corp. Texaco retains 85% interest. Field is expected tocome on stream late in 1996 at 60,000 BOPD. Field reserves estimatedat 300 MMBO.Neste Oy agrees to sell its 50% interest in Sovereign Exploration Ltd.to Northgas Ltd., a Northern Electric PLC sub. Northern owns theremaining 50% of Sovereign.## LATIN AMERICA## UPDATES## DECEMBERVintage Petroleum Inc. closes the acquisition of a 35% WI in sevenconcessions in the southern flank of the San Jorge Basin, Argentina,from Astra Compania de Petroleo SA for $17.85 million, and a 65% WI inthe same properties from Shell's Argentine sub, for $32.8 million incash and a $5.9 million note. Properties produce 3,960 BOPD withestimated proved reserves of 22.6 million BO.## SE ASIA AREAAmpolex Ltd. sells its interests in the Lufeng 22-1 oilfield, offshoreChina, to Statoil for an undisclosed sum, probably between A$6.7million and A$14.4 million.  Ampolex gets approval to sell a 40% stakein the Wandoo oilfield, offshore Western Australia, to aJV of Mitsui subs and Indonesia Petroleum Ltd. Ampolex holds theremaining 60% interest.British Gas PLC and the Coplex/Cophill-Pacrim JV cut a new deal for BGto acquire interest in the Manila Bay, Philippines, JV. BG topay an additional $500,000 to extend its option to 60 days beyond theredrill and fund 47.5% of the costs of a work program to earn a 25%working interest.Reportedly, the Cophill group also puts Oriental Petroleum & MineralsCorp. in default for failure to pay $700,000 to cover its 25%share in the costs of the project so far. Claims right to acquire theinterest.PT Medco Energy Corp. purchases all of the equity of PT StanvacIndonesia, the oldest oil company in the country. Stanvac waspreviously owned by Mobil Oil and Esso Oil, an Exxon sub. Stanvacoperates the Kampar concession in central Sumatra, Indonesia, and theRimau and Pasemah exploration licenses in north Sumatra. Areascurrently produce 13,000 BOPD and 40 MMCFGPD.  Southern PacificPetroleum NL and Central Pacific Minerals NL acquire the remaining83.67% interest in the Yaamba oil share venture near Rockhampton,Queensland, Australia, from Acadia Resources Ltd. in trade for theirinterest in the Yaamba magnetite JV.## UPDATES## DECEMBERAmerican International drops out of the Lapangan Hargeulis part of thedeal with P. T. Pelangi Niaga Mitra. However, will pay $300,000front-end and fund about $3 million for the development of theLapangan Pamanukan Seletan Field, West Java, Indonesia. Field reservesestimated at 20 BCFG.## OTHER AREASShell Petroleum NV agrees to sell its upstream activities in Turkeyand its stake in NV Turkre Shell, which operates 27 fields insoutheast Turkey to Perenco, formerly Kelt Energy. Production to besold is about 13,400 BOPD.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996OILFIELD ACQUISITIONSDiamond Offshore Drilling Inc. (Houston) agrees to acquire Arethusa(Offshore) Ltd. for about $516 million in its stock, offering .88 ofits shares for each Arethusa share. Arethusa will pay a 25-cent pershare dividend prior to closing of the offering.Arethusa has 13 offshore rigs including six semis and ranks as theworld's third largest in that category. Diamond has 22 semis and ranksfirst. Diamond's total fleet is 47 units, 14 jackups, onedrillship and 10 land rigs. Arethusa's major shareholders, Alphee SA and Forvaltnings AB Ratos, had put the company up for sale.Agreement calls for exclusive negotiations. Arethusa had revenues forthe first nine months of $93 million.Tenneco Energy and Questar Corp. call off the sale of a 50% interestin Kern River Gas Transmission Co. to Questar after the FTC sued tostop the sale, citing decreased competition in the Salt Lake Cityindustrial sales market. "It's a victory for thecustomers," reports the FTC. Of course, it's a defeat for freebusiness, but we know how the Clinton Administration feels about that.At press time, Tenneco Energy accepts the offer of the  Williams Cos.(Tulsa), its 50% partner in Kern River, to buy Tenneco's stake for$205 million, $20 million less than the QuestarQuestar offer. Tennecoreported it wanted to complete the sale before yearend. Effective dateof sale will be Dec. 31, which means Tenneco will recoup $10 millionin earnings since the Questar closing date of Sept. 1. Williams alsoto purchase Tenneco's parntership interest rather than its stock inKern River, which will save Williams money on the deal.Giant Industries Inc. (Scottsdale, AZ) agrees to purchase the 25,000BPD Wingate gas liquids fractionation plant and associated pipelineand storage facilities from Meridian Oil Production Inc. for $10million plus the cost of inventories. The plant is located10 miles from Giant's Ciniza refinery in Gallup, NM. Deal includes 200miles of pipelines transporting feedstock and 115,000 barrels ofstorage.Longhorn Partners Pipeline L.P. (Dallas) agrees to purchase the450-mile, 18-inch Crane, TX, to Baytown, TX, crude pipeline from Exxon PipelineExxon Pipeline Co.. Longhorn plans to reverse the flow,construct an extension of the line to El Paso and modify the line forrefined products transportation. The system should be able totransport 100,000 to 120,000 BPD of products from Gulf Coastrefineries to terminals near Austin, Midland/Odessa and El Paso.Longhorn consisted of the Axis Gas Corp. (Dallas) and the Beacon Group Energy Investment Fund LP (NYC). Now Williams Pipe LineCo. joins the group and will take over operation of the pipeline. Noconsideration reported.M-I Drilling Fluids LLC (Houston) agrees to purchase Anchor DrillingFluids A/S from Transocean A/S for NKr 695.75 million, or about $110million in cash. The deal will give M-I about a 40% to 45% share ofthe worldwide market. Anchor had 1994 revenues of about $144million, principally from North Sea and Malaysian sales. It employsabout 517 worldwide.Transocean and M-I agree to enter into future cooperate agreements,including integrated contracts. M-I is owned 64% by SmithInternational and 36% by Halliburton.ANGC Corp. (Associated Natural Gas), a sub of Panhandle Eastern Corp.(Houston), purchases the remaining 50% interest in its 150-MMCFGPD,cryogenic gas-processing plant in Port Arthur, TX, and a 100% interestin two 40-MMCFPD plants in Eddy County, NM, (Pecos Diamond and DaggerDraw) from Mitchell Energy and Development Corp. for $13 million.Kaneb Pipe Line Partners LP acquires seven petroleum productsterminals and the pipeline and associated tankage serving Andrews AirForce Base from Steuart Petroleum Co. and its affiliates for $68million. Deal includes 9 MMB of storage capacity, the largest at PineyPoint, MD (5.5 MM) and Jacksonville, FL (2.1 MM).Phoenix Energy Services Inc. (Houston) acquires SlimDril InternationalInc. and BecField Drilling Services (Houston). BecField also has anoffice in Hanover, Germany.BecField specializes in short-radius horizontal drilling services.TransCanada Pipe Lines Ltd. (Calgary) is negotiating to acquire a 50%interest in the 75,000-BOPD refinery in Coffeyville, KS, from Farmland Industries Inc. Farmland to increase capacity to 125,000BOPD. TransCanada and Alberta Energy Co. Ltd. are partners in the$530-million, 170,000-BPD Express oil pipeline from Alberta toWyoming. CMS Gas Transmission and Storage Co., sub of CMS Energy (Dearborn, MI)agrees to acquire Petal Gas Storage Co. from Chevron USA ProductionCo. As part of the deal, Chevron to retain storage services fromPetal. The company owns a 3.2 BCFG peaking facility in Forrest County,MS, with a 320 MMCFGPD withdrawal capacity. The facility is connectedto two major interstate pipelines. No consideration reported.The DMD division of Dresser Industries acquires the business of Instech, Ltd. (Hamble, UK). Instech designs, produces and manufactureselectronic instrumentation and communication equipment for the gastransmission, distribution and petrochemical industries. Noconsideration reported.McJunkin Appalachian Oil Field Supply Co. purchases Target OilToolsTarget Oil Tools (Kalkaska, MI). Renames unit MCA Oil Tools Inc.El Paso Natural GasEl Paso Natural Gas Co. and its Eastex Energy Inc.sub purchase 100% of the equity of Premier Gas Co. (Tulsa). Premiermarkets about 435 MMCFGPD to utilities in the Great Lakesarea and industrial and commercial customers in the Mid-Continent.Premier to continue as a separate marketing sub of El Paso.TridentTrident, sub of NGC Corp. (Houston), purchases the 180-mileO'Keene gas gathering system from ONG Gas Gathering Co., a sub of Oneok Inc. The system gathers 18.5 MMCFGPD, extending across fourcentral Oklahoma counties. Trident will install compression facilitiesto reduce line pressure and consolidate the purchase with its othersystems in the area.Oceaneering International Inc. (Houston) sub purchases the 268,191 dwtVLCC oil tanker, M. T. Swift, from Mobil Shipping and TransportationCo. Oceaneering will convert the tanker to a FPSO system in a $70million conversion. The FPSO will be the second largest in the world,with storage capacity of 1.2 MMBO. The production process trains willhandle 80,000 BOPD. The vessel, renamed Zafiro Producer, will beinstalled in 600 feet of water offshore Equatorial Guinea, inWest Africa, over Mobil's Zafiro Field. Deal calls for Mobil to have athree-year option to repurchase the vessel.Stena Drilling Ltd. (Aberdeen), sub of Stena AB, reports plans topurchase two semi-submersibles from Ben Line for SKr 585 million.Stena to also take over management responsibility for threeoffshore rigs currently managed by Coflexip.Odjfell purchases the semi, La Muralla, from Daysland Inc. The semihas been stacked in Mexico for over a year. No consideration, butreports are that the unit has a contract to drill for StatoilStatoilin the North Sea. Odjfell will rename the unit the Deepsea Trym. Gulfshore NS Ltd., sub of Gulfmark International Inc., agrees toacquire the supply vessel, Atlantic Warrior. Consideration notreleased.Global Industries Ltd. (Lafayette) purchases the heavy-lift derrickbarge, Hercules, for $10.9 million from J. R. McDermott.Shell Expro sells its multi-purpose vessel, Stadive, to Safe Jasnienia (Grand Cayman).Frank's International (Houston) acquires certain inspection assets of Tubular Inspectors Inc. and Thread-Tech Inc. No other detailsreleased.Global Industries Ltd. also acquires ROV Technologies Inc. ROVspecializes in deep water projects and offers intervention and ROVconsulting services. The unit will operate off of Global's new SWATHvessel.CogniSeis Development acquires the equity of Photon Systems (Calgary).Photon develops and markets seismic and geological interpretationsoftware. Appoints Diana McSherry as president and CEO.Cooper Cameron Corp. sells its Wheeling Machine Products division(Pine Bluff, AR) to Nassau Holding Corp. for $15 million. Wheelingmanufactures threaded couplings for tubulars.The crane barge, Noble Lifter, sold at public auction in December bythe U.S. Marshall's office in New Orleans. The unit was owned by Glenway Americas before being seized by creditors.  Trinity IndustriesInc. acquire certain assets of the inactive Chicago Bridge and IronCo.'s shipyard in Pascagoula, MS. Facility gives Trinity some 21 GulfCoast shipyards. Trinity to upgrade and expand the 88.5-acre facilityon Bayou Casotte Channel.  No consideration reported.McDermott International Inc. sub, Babcock & Wilcox Power GenerationGroup, purchases the assets of Joy Environmental Technologies Inc.from Harnischfeger Industries Inc. No consideration reported.Fluor Daniel Inc. reports agreement to recapitalize GroundwaterTechnology Inc., acquiring a 54.51% stake in GTI. Fluor to merge itsenvironmental services unit into GTI, renaming the entity FluorDaniel/GTI Inc.  Fluor to contribute $33.35 million in cash and itsunit to GTI. Current shareholders of GTI to receive $8.62 per share incash and exchange each share for .5274 per of the new company.Core Laboratories Inc., sub of Core Laboratories NV (Amsterdam),acquires the assets of four environmental testing laboratories in theEastern U.S. from Pace Inc. (Minneapolis) for an undisclosed amount ofcash. The labs have revenues of about $10-$12 million per year. Dealgives Core 11 environmental testing labs to go along with its eightcore testing labs.Arkla Inc., sub of NorAm Energy Corp., agrees to purchase a 3,200customer gas distribution system in southwest Arkansas and NorthwestLouisiana from Louisiana-Nevada Transit Co. The system principallyserves Hope, AR, and nearby towns.Gulfside Industries Ltd. (Somerset, TX) sells its gas distributionassets to Entex Inc., also a sub of NorAm, for more than $2 million.United Cities Propane Gas of Tennessee Inc., sub of United Cities GasCo., agrees to acquire the propane assets of Duncan Gas Service for$4.337 million, acquiring 2,000 customers in the Johnson City, TNarea.  In the energy banking area, Norwest Corp.Norwest Corp. agreesto acquire Victoria Bankshares (Victoria, TX) for 1.05 of its sharesfor each Victoria share.Caltex Petroleum Corp. agrees to sell its 50% interest in NipponPetroleum Refinery Co. to its partner, Nippon Oil Co., for 200 billionyen (about $2 billion). NPRC operates refineries in Nigishi andMuroran, Japan, with a total capacity of 255,000 BOPD. As part of thedeal, Caltex agrees to continue to supply certain types of crudes tothe refineries. Caltex wanted out, and Nippon reluctantly agreed tothe deal.Westcoast Energy Inc. will purchase the outstanding 50% interest in Pacific Coast Energy Corp. from Alberta Energy Co. as part of acomplex deal with the British Columbia government. PacificCoast operates the Vancouver Island gas pipeline project.Pennzoil Products Co. purchases a 45% equity share in Isopetrol SA(Lima, Peru), a lubricants marketing and manufacturing company.Mobil Oil Australia purchases the Amgas service station and wholesaledistributor business in Western Australia. Amgas owns 46service stations and six wholesale distributors. Amgas holds 8% ofPerth's gasoline market.Barrington Petroleum Ltd. (Calgary) agrees to sell some of its gasprocessing plants for C$10 million. Barrington to continue to operatethe plants for a fee.Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. sells a gas plant at Okotoks,Alberta, to Continental Waste Conversion Inc. Consideration notreleased.Mission EnergyMission Energy, an SCE Corp. sub, acquires First Hydro Co. from the National Grid Company PLC (UK) for about $1billion. First Hydro consists of the pumped storage business of NGC,principally two stations in North Wales, which have 10 units with acombined capacity of 2,088 MW. For those of you unfamiliar with pumpedstorage, it consists of units whereby water is pumped to a higherreservoir during low electric demand periods and released throughgenerating turbines during peak demand periods. Mission financed thedeal with $400 million of equity and $600 million of non-recourse debtunderwritten by Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd.## UPDATES## DECEMBERWilrig AS sells its semi, Treasure Searcher, to a JV of Deep TechInternational, Highwood Partners LP and Deepwater Drillers LLC. Unitto be renamed FPS Bill Shoemaker after minor modifications andthe addition of a Varco top-drive system.## DECEMBERDiamond Shamrock Inc. completes the takeover of National ConvenienceStores Inc. under the terms reported after 94% of NCS shares weretendered to its offer.## DECEMBERAmerican Western Refinery LP, which purchased assets of the IndianRefinery from Castle Energy for $3 million in cash and a $5 millionnote, was set up by Gadgil Western Corp. American assumed theenvironmental obligations of Indian Refinery and purchased therefinery's platinum catalyst for $500,000 in cash and a $1.8 million,8% note.  Proceeds of the sales to repay creditors of Indian Refinery.## NOVEMBERDresser Industries' instrument division completes the acquisition ofthe product lines and assets of the Weksler Instrument Co. (Freeport,NY).## OCTOBER AND AUGUSTWeatherford Enterra Inc. completes the acquisition of the Energy Industries gas compression division from Zapata Corp. for about$130 million and the assumption of certain current operatingliabilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TAKEOVER ATTEMPTSTakeover mania continues unabated outside our borders. Internally, somany companies and/or oil and gas divisions are being placed on themarket, hostile efforts are usually not necessary.Of course there are exceptions. A group of dissident shareholders tryfor the umpteenth time to unseat the Tesoro Petroleum board. Thegroup, which includes Kevin Flannery, James Stone, GeorgeBaker, Alan Kaufman and Robert Washburn, own about 5.7% of the Tesoroshares. Group files a 13-D with the SEC notifying it that the groupwill mail a proposal to shareholders to elect its slate of five boardnominees, which include Gale Galloway and Douglas Thompson. Groupproposes to sell the Alaskan refinery and other assets, possiblyincluding all of Tesoro.  The takeover battle for First InterstateBancorp continues to rage on.  After Wells Fargo increased its offerto .667 share for each First share, and First had rushed into thearms of First Bank Systems (Minneapolis), Wells reported a plan topurchase up to 5% of First's shares.First Bank reported Wells couldn't do that under takeover laws. Thatpoint is still up in the air.Meanwhile, the market price of Wells shares keeps rising, making theiroffer even higher, up to $1 billion more. Wells to ask Firstshareholders to reject the First Bank offer and accept its offer. Thewhole deal may still come down to whether the SEC allows First Bank touse the pooling accounting treatment of its merger with First ratherthan the purchase accounting treatment, which Wells has to use. As oflast word, the SEC accountants hadn't decided, but heavy-dutyanalysts argue both sides of the proposal. Near press time, FirstInterstate sues Wells in Delaware court, charging securities lawsviolations.Other bank mergers include Fleet Financial Group's $3 billion offerfor the U.S. commercial banking unit of Westminster Bank PLC. Dealmakes Fleet the eighth largest in the U.S. The Royal Bank of Scotlandwill merge its U.S. unit, Citizens Finance Group, with First NH Bank,the third largest in New England and a sub of Bank of Ireland, givingRoyal Bank of Scotland a 76.5% share in the combined bank.## UPDATES FROM NORTH OF THE BORDERThe Murwell Resources Ltd. board recommends acceptance of the takeoveroffer from Icon Energy Ltd. of two Icon shares for each Murwell commonas reported last month. Offer mailed early in December.Other takeovers reported herein include the C$380 million Rigel offer for Inverness the merged company to have reserves of 572BCFG and 58.9 MMBL; the C$1.1 billion offer by Alberta Energy for Conwest Exploration; and the C$186 million offer by Forest Oil for ATCOR Resources.Another new takeover attempt that turns hostile is made by aconsortium of a Canadian energy company, a pension fund, a Canadianbank and a U.S. investment firm. On Dec. 17, Pembina AcquisitionCorp., which is owned 51.5% by Pembina Resources Ltd., 30% by the Ontario Teacher's Pension Fund, 10.8% by Allen & Company Inc., and7.7% by T D Capital Group Ltd., an affiliate of the Toronto-DominionBank, reports its intention to offer C$7 per for the shares of Mark Resources Inc. Hints at a possible higher offer. The groupcurrently holds 2.88 million Mark shares, or about 5.2%. Deal subjectto review of financial data and 66.67% acceptance.  Asks Mark for alist of its shareholders. Group retains T D Securities Inc. and RBCDominion Securities to act as financial advisors. Deal currentlyvalued at C$354 million.  By next day, Mark shares trade above theoffer price at C$7.125 per. On the 19th, Mark board calls the offertoo low and approves a shareholders rights antitakeover plan with a20% trigger. Mark hires CIBC-Wood Gundy Securities as financialadvisor. Pembina reports disappointment with the board maneuvers,plans to proceed with the offer. Analysts expect a higher offer, up tothe C$8 range. Mark acquired Hillcrest Resources in a hostile takeoverearlier in 1995 and was expected to be a target.Pembina is privately owned by the Mannix family of Calgary.Pacalta Resources Ltd. offers C$.55 per for shares of Trax PetroleumLtd. Trax board sets up committee to review offer and hires CIBC WoodGundy Inc. as financial advisor.  In the UK, Melrose Energy PLCcontinues its takeover offer for Pentex Oil PLC. Melrose offers 81 newshares for every 20 Pentex shares, or about $31.2 million, based oncurrent market prices. Deal would give Pentex shareholders a 29.5%stake in Melrose. Melrose to also issue a rights offering to raisecapital for the group, offering one new share at 34 pence for eachfive shares held. Pentex board approves the deal.  Basically PentexOil management (Pentex has 67 employees) will take over management ofMelrose Energy. Pentex chairman, Henry Cameron, will become chiefexecutive and Pentex managing director will take the same job atMelrose. Robert Adair, a geologist who owns 60% of Melrose, will seehis stake reduced to 40% and will take the deputy directorship and CFOjob.  Melrose has few employees, but manages oil and gas interests inTexas, New Mexico and Wyoming.  Pentex produces 6,000 BOPD from itsinterests in two North Sea fields and produces about 500 BOEPD from 12onshore UK fields.In other European news, Statoil extended its offer for Aran EnergyAran Energy after receiving only 83.78% of Aran shares byDec. 6 in response to its 76 Irish pence per offer. By the 13th,Statoil had received 85.43% and declared its offer unconditional.Talisman Energy Inc. (Calgary) makes a takeover offer for GoalPetroleum PLC (London). Offers 97.5 pence in cash per share, or aboutC$275 million, and agrees to assume about C$40 million of Goal debt.Institutional investors holding 45.5% of Goal agree to tender theirshares to the offer. Goal has 20 employees with production of about20,000 BOEPD from a 5% interest in the Wytch Farm, 32% in Blenheim,2.5% in Mangus and interests in 47 other British and Dutch licensesand fields. Proved and probable reserves estimated at 31.1 MMBO and83.9 BCFG. Deal gives Talisman 49,000 BOEPD from the North Sea andquadruples its exploration acreage there. Talisman to borrow the C$315million from the Royal Bank of Canada.Central and South West Corp. extends its offer for shares of Seaboard PLC to January 11 after receiving only about 44.42% ofSeeboard shares, or 109 million shares to its offer. Including sharesit held, that gives CSW about 74.31% of Seeboard.Abbot PLC, parent of KCA Drilling (Aberdeen) makes a $8.25 milliontakeover offer for OIS International Inspection (Aberdeen). OISservices the oil, gas and petrochemical industries.Kvaerner A/SKvaerner A/S makes a hostile takeover offer of 100 penceper for Amec PLC, which is involved in the development of the NatunaField, offshore Indonesia.In other areas Fletcher Challenge Ltd. ups its ownership of SouthernPetroleum NL to 98.6% with responses to its new NZ$.75 per offer.## POISON PILLSHartwell Petroleum Ltd. (Calgary) adopts a shareholder rights planwith a 20% trigger.NUI Corporation adopts a plan with a 15% trigger.  LyondellPetroChemical Co. adopts a plan with a 15% trigger.And in a series of plan renewals: McDermott International Inc. adoptsa new plan with a 15% trigger.Sonat Inc. adopts a replacement plan with a 15% trigger.Mobil Corp. updates its plan with a 15% trigger replacement.Halliburton extends its current plan for another 10 years with a new15% trigger.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996RESERVES ON THE MARKETPublic Service Enterprise Group Inc., in lockstep with other utilityholding companies, decides to sell off its Energy Development Corp.,one of the largest independents. EDC has been selling someproperties already in anticipation of the divestiture. EDC operates in13 states, in the Gulf of Mexico, and onshore and offshore in the UK,Argentina, Senegal, Tunisia and China. Net reserves estimated at 900BCFGE, 67% gas. EDC has 230 employees. Morgan Stanley hired to do the deed.  Enserch Exploration Inc. hires Chemical Securities Inc. to assist in the sale of its Rocky Mountainarea properties, acquired earlier this year in the Dalen Corp.acquisition.Parker & Parsley Petroleum puts its Parker & Parsley Australia unit onthe market. P&P hasn't decided whether to float out the company orsell it directly. The assets were initially acquired in the Bridge Oilhostile takeover, but have been enhanced by additional capital anddiscoveries since.  Expected price is around A$200 to A$300 million.The unit has assets in the Surat Basin in Queensland, the Cooper Basinin South Australia, the Ottway Basin and Gippsland Basin in Victoriaand the Barrow Basin in Western Australia, along with a 22.5% interestin permit ZOCA-13 in the Timor Sea, on which the Bayu discovery wasmade. The last time I checked, it also had substantial interests inthe Harriet Oilfield, offshore Western Australia.Alliance Resources PLC reports plans to sell off its U.S. oil and gasproperties.Equis Energy Corp. hires Peters & Co. Ltd. to find a merger partner oracquirer after its bank puts it into default under its creditfacility.Aviva Petroleum hires Dillon, Read & Co. to find a merger partner orbuyer.Talisman Energy Inc. plans to sell off 100 to 125 of its properties topay down debt.## OILFIELD ASSETS ON THE MARKETTotal Petroleum North America puts its 56,000 BOPD refinery in ArkCity, KS, on the market.  Hires Smith Barney Inc. Reports it willclose the refinery if it cannot find a buyer. That would be thefifth refinery to close in Kansas in the last 10 years. The refineryemploys 200.Texaco Inc. reports it is still looking at downstream asset sales,mergers and joint ventures.Helmerich & Payne Inc. hires Smith Barney Inc. to consider the sale ofits chemical operations, Natural Gas Odorizing Inc. (Baytown, TX).Hanson PLC reports it will sell 62%, or about 18.8 million shares, of Suburban Propane it acquired in the 1993 acquisition of QuantumChemical. Suburban to restructure as Suburban Propane Partners LP.Suburban to also issue $425 million of debt. Hanson figures togain about $771 million in the two deals.Ecopetrol plans to sell its stakes in eight gas, petrochemical andthermoelectric plants to raise about $250 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MAJOR STAKESCentennial Associates LP, Centennial Associates and Joseph H. Reich &Co. sell 97,000 shares of Abraxas Petroleum Corp. on Nov. 27 and 28 at$6.597 to $6.625 per, reducing their stake to 265,700 shares, or4.59%.Trinity 1 Fund purchases 303,700 shares of Kirby Corp. for $16.56 to$17.56 each in November, raising its stake to 2.187 million shares, or8.3%.Snyder Oil Corp. sells its remaining 916,040 shares of AmericanExploration in early December at $10.075 to $10.70 per.Gamco Investors group purchases 304,700 shares of National ConvenienceStores in late November at $26.76 to $26.88 per, giving it a 5% stake.MacKenzie Financial purchases 416,000 shares of Serenpet on Nov. 30for $2.72 per, giving it 1.19 million shares, or 5.4%.Gordon Barry sells 453,525 shares of Breakwater Resources Ltd. inAugust, reducing his stake to 11,975 shares.Murray Edwards sells 70,000 shares of Canadian Natural Resources Ltd.,reducing his stake to 2.3 million shares held indirectly.Richard Bonnycastle sells 50,000 shares of Gulfstream Resources CanadaLtd. for C$5 per, reducing his stake to 150,000 shares heldindirectly.Woodland Venture Fund group sells 80,000 shares of TN Energy ServicesAcquisition at $5.20 per, reducing its stake to 4.8%, or 90,000shares.FMR Corp. purchases a net 689,500 shares of Renaissance Energy Ltd.for $21.99 to $23.44 per, raising its stake to 12.9 million shares.Heartland Advisors Inc. ups its stake in International Colin EnergyCorp. by 1.1 million shares through mid-October at $5 to $5.675 per,giving it 2.39 million shares, or 18.5%.A group of nine buyers purchased 2.475 million common and 98,000preferred shares of Eagle Energy Corp. from two directors andofficers. Common represented about 33% stake in Eagle.Conwest Exploration Co. Ltd. purchased 203,000 shares at C$1.75 toC$1.80 per of Paragon Petroleum Corp. to raise its stake to 5.3million shares.Trimark Investment Management Inc.-directed funds purchase 1.25million shares of and Tarragon Oil and Gas Ltd., raising their staketo 4.26 million shares, or about a 10.2% stake.The British government sells its remaining 101 million shares of British Petroleum PLC, a 1.8% stake, to the market through SBC Warburg, receiving  5.08 per.  CMB NV trades its 26% stake in Arethusa (Offshore) to Diamond Offshore Drilling for a 7% stake inDiamond.North American Gas Investment Trust PLC sells its entire 63.035million share stake (19.45%) in Alliance Resources PLC on Nov. 29 to Trans Arabian Energy Ltd. for 2.5 pence per. Trans Arabian is aconsortium of Middle East investors led by Patrick Maley, ex-Mobil andTransworld exec. Maley takes over as executive chairman of Allianceand a new managing director is appointed.Terry Alexander, president of Arakis Energy Corp., sells 198,387shares of the company in August, acquiring same from options at C$4.71per and selling next day, August 4, at C$9. per (some otherinteresting maneuvers by other directors at the same time).Boral Ltd. continues to lower its stake in Magellan Petroleum Corp.,selling 297,848 shares between Nov. 22 and Dec. 6 at $2.31 to$2.82 per, reducing its stake to 1.42 million shares, or 5.8%.Banco Bilbao Vizcaya SA ups its stake in Repsol SA from 4.5% to 5%.The consortium of Agip, Shell and Conoco finally is assigned the 49%stake in Czech Refinery Co. it negotiated for some months ago.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BANKRUPTCIES AND RESTRUCTURINGSDiamond Trading and Pipeline Corp. takes Chapter 11 bankruptcy inDallas.Yancey Bit & Tool Inc. takes Chapter 11 in Houston.BVM Corp., dba BV Oil Tool, takes Chapter 11 in Denver.Polaris Resources Inc. takes Chapter 7 in Denver.Basic Earth Science Systems Inc. (Denver) reports that due tounscheduled shutdown of several of its wells and an unsuccessfulworkover of another, it failed to satisfy the liquidity covenant inits loan agreement with its bank. Doesn't expect to satisfy thatcovenant until the end of March at the earliest.Kish Resources PLC (Ireland) has been suspended from trading, pendingclarification of its financial position. Kish is negotiating withlenders and creditors to restructure loans and trade debt.  HuntwayPartners LP misses a debt payment on its debentures and is placed indefault on Nov. 30, 1995.## RESTRUCTURINGSTexaco E&P Inc. reports it will consolidate its Bakersfield Division,which operates its Kern River Field, with the West Coast Business Unitof its Denver Division, which operates the rest of itsCalifornia properties, in Bakersfield under Stephen Hadden. AlanKleier is appointed assistant division manager to lead the WesternCalifornia Business Unit. About 35 Denver employees will be offeredtransfers to Bakersfield. (I personally like both places, but expectsome cries of anguish.)Wainoco Oil Co. begins a corporate office reorganization. Willeliminate all remaining oil and gas personnel in the Houston office,transfer corporate accounting and tax responsibilities to its Calgaryoffice and move the few remaining Houston employees to smaller officesafter the sale of its Conroe Field property.Pennzoil reports all European operations of Pennzoil Products Co. willbe managed from new offices in Frankfurt, Germany. Newwarehousing and sales offices will be built there and an increasedsales staff will be hired. In addition, a third European division willbe created, the Eastern Division, to handle opportunitiesin the former Soviet Union. Pennzoil to also consolidate all of itsproduction facilities in Europe to its plant in Barcelona, Spain. Willclose its plant in Zaandam, Netherlands.Denison Mines Ltd. shareholders approve a restructuring of its shares.New common shares will be issued to existing shareholders on the basisof one common share for each existing class A and classB share and 25 new common shares for each existing preferred share.Corporate and mortgage lenders to also receive 18% of the new commonshares and promissory notes aggregating C$38.6 million,interest free until July 2000.Coplex Resources NL (Australia) will float off its Philippines assetsthrough a new company, Coplex Energy Corp. Inc., which will list onthe Philippine exchange. The new company will pay A$40 million for thecurrent assets; money to be raised in a public offering in 1996.Coplex hires Belson-PrimeEast Capital Asia Inc. and Shadforths Ltd. toimplement the float. Coplex to acquire a 25% to 40% stake in Capital Drilling Ltd., which owns the semi, Pioneer Driller, and willtransfer that interest to CEC in the future.Ecuadorian President Sixto Duran orders a total restructuring of PetroEcuador and accepts the resignations of its president and all ofthe managers of its subsidiaries. Appoints General Patricio Lopez aspresident of the state company.Potomac Electric Power Co. and Baltimore Gas and Electric Co. announcethe organizational structure and senior execs of the combined company,Constellation Energy Corp., to be formed after regulatory approvals ofthe merger, probably in 1997. Gas functions and electric functions ofgeneration, transmission and distribution will be separated intodistinct units. A special District of Columbia unit will handle all ofthe peculiarities of that location.San Diego Gas and Electric execs report formation of a holding companycalled Enova Corp. for SDGE and its unregulated subsidiaries. Alsoannounce new executive management for both companies. Enova will havefive unregulated subs: Enova Energy Management, Enova Financial, Enova Technologies, Califia and Pacific Diversified Capital. StephenBaum, exec VP, will take the jobs of president and CEO ofEnova Corp. Executive VP Donald Felsinger will become president andCEO of the utility.Chevron to restructure its U.S. gasoline marketing business. Willcombine its 210-employee SanRamon, CA, office into the 155-employee La Habra, CA, office, forminga Western Sales office to handle the West Coast, Nevada, Arizona, NewMexico and West Texas. Will combine its Houston andAtlanta offices in Atlanta to form a new Eastern Sales Center.Headquarters and specialized support will remain in San Francisco. Thenew reorganization will be titled Retail Marketing. Approximately130 positions will be eliminated, about a 6% cut. Operations, businessservices and station development will be consolidated and managed on anationwide basis. Some of the 150 employees in the San Franciscooffice to be transferred.Chevron Chemical Corp. also will be reorganized. Two Houstondivisions, Aromatics and Olefins, will be merged into one about 240employees affected to create a U.S. Chemical Division.Some job cuts to be experienced. The Oronite division to remain in SanRamon. A new international group will be formed in San Ramon to focuson marketing products worldwide.Conoco Inc. will merge its worldwide upstream and downstream businessdevelopment units under Michael Stinson as VP.Xavier Mines Ltd. registers with the SEC to transfer its incorporationfrom Ontario to Delaware.Bounty Group Inc. shareholders to vote on whether to take companyprivate, becoming a wholly-owned sub of Norse A/S, sub of BountyFinance A/S, which owns 68 of Bounty Group.Energen will float off 45% of its E&P division, half to be sold inSouth Africa and half to be sold internationally. New company to benamed Energy Africa Ltd.## IN A LITTLE NEWS ABOUT EMPLOYMENTThe American Management Association reports in response to a recentlyconducted survey, large and medium-size companies report plans forsome hiring, and half of the survey's respondents plan tocut some staff. Jobs to be created require less supervisory andmanagerial expertise (less money), but require a more technicalknow-how. Middle managers continue to feel the brunt of the cuts,amounting to 15% to 20% of total cuts. However, professional andtechnical employees account for 22% of the planned cuts, while 32% ofnew jobs created are in the professional and technical areas.In a bit of a surprise to unions worldwide, West Australian PetroleumPty Ltd. negotiates an agreement with its unions to revise paymodels. Pay raises to be based on individual employee performancetogether with a company-wide productivity bonus. Agreement runs forthree years. Unions cautious.Shell induces a profit-related bonus scheme for the top 1% of itsstaff worldwide. Payments worth up to 20% of salary for about 1,000senior execs. In addition, execs get share options.MobilMobil Corp. plans to cut an additional 530 jobs, about 500 from Mobil E&P USMobil E&P US and the rest at Mobil Drilling. Cutsrepresent a 16% reduction. Cuts on top of recent announcements.Occidental PetroleumOccidental Petroleum cuts at Oxy USA give Tulsaemployees of at least five years with the company a severance packageof up to 72 weeks of pay based on years of service. Oxy to pay out theseverance over a series of months, continuing the savings plan,retirement plan and medical benefits while the checkscontinue.HS Resources Inc. plans to cut 40 jobs.Shell Chemical to cut 700 jobs over the next two years.Scottish Power PLC will cut 350 jobs at its new Manweb utility sub. Cosmo Oil Co. will cut 700 employees, or about 19% of its staff, by1999.## STOCK CHANGESInput/Output Inc. board authorizes a two-for-one split of common.Chesapeake Energy Corp. board declares a three-for-two stock split.The Madison Gas and Electric Co. board authorizes a split of itscommon, in the form of a one share dividend for each two shares held.Concord Energy Inc. announces a one-for-five reverse split.Hallwood Energy Partners LP declares a dividend of one new Class Cunit for each 15 HEP units currently held. Units will tradeindependently from current units and will have a set distribution of25 cents per.Forest Oil Corp. announces a one-for-five reverse split of its commonfollowing its 60 million share offering.## EXEC GYRATIONSCanadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. president and CEO, BernardIsaultier, resigns "to pursue other interests," principally a newconsulting company. Board elects David Hentschel, formerly vicechairman to the job.Tom Brown Inc. welcomes back William R. Granberry into the fold,naming him president and COO. Company also names exec VP Peter Schereras CEO of its Retex Gathering Company Inc. sub, and William Munn IIwill serve as president and COO of Retex.Phillips Petroleum Co. announces the retirement of Sr. VP and generalcounsel, Bill Paul, and exec VP of E&P, John Whitmore. Bryan Whitworthappointed to the former job and Knut Aam, currently president of Phillips NorwayPhillips Norway, will assume the job of Sr. VPworldwide E&P. Bill Parker promoted to Aam's old job, and LaveleFrantz, formerly operations manager in Norway, takes over as VPworldwide drilling and production.John Whitmore immediately moves over to be named chairman and CEO of Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc., succeeding Clark Johnson, who isretiring.Continental Land & Fur Co. Inc. (New Orleans) appoints R. PaulLoveless as general manager of exploration and development, primarilymanaging its oil and gas working interest activities.Company has about 80 MMCFGEPD net production, with working interestsin 70 platforms and 300 wells, principally in the Gulf.Valero Energy Corp. moves Joe Becraft up from exec. VP to Presidentand COO.James Hackett, Sr. VP of NGC Corp. and president of its Trident NGLTrident NGL, resigns, takes over as exec VP of businessdevelopment and strategic planning for Panhandle Eastern. BruceWithers Jr., chairman and CEO, will assume the jobs until areplacement is found.Hawkins Energy Corp. (Tulsa) chairman, John Hawkins, resigns theposition to study international projects for Hawkins Oil & Gas Inc.Thomas Ostrye, president, also takes the chairmanship.Arakis Energy Corp. chairman and president, Terry Alexander, resigns.John McLeod was named president and CEO. Arakis also will moveincorporation from BC to Calgary, Alberta (bet you canfigure this out easily).Pennzoil Co. ups titles on three execs. Thomas Hamilton promoted fromgroup VP of the oil and gas division to exec VP. David Alderson, groupVP of finance and treasurer, to group VP finance, accounting andtreasurer. Linda Condit, corporate secretary, to VP and corporatesecretary.Eastern Group (Alexandria, VA) announces promotions. Clifton A. Brownto exec VP, directing the E&P business unit. Mark Eisenhower to execVP, head of Power Systems business unit. BenMescher to Sr. VP of Power Systems; Michael Decker to VP, industrialmarketing of the energy marketing unit. Ben Hadden to VP of themarketing unit. Directors appoint for various units are RonaldCoe for info technology, John King to gas trading, Charles Schultz toassociate general counsel and Lisa Yoho to regulatory affairs.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MERGERS AND JOINT VENTURES## JOINT VENTURESAmerican Exploration Co. (Houston), Louis Dreyfus Natural Gas Corp.and Seisgen Resources LLC form an exploration JV for Wilcox prospectsin Lavaca Co., Texas Gulf Coast. American has leased or acquiredseismic options covering 20 Upper and Lower Wilcox prospectsidentified with 2-D seismic data. The JV will begin a 137-square mileproprietary 3-D seismic survey in early 1996 and plans a drillingprogram after interpretation is completed.American to hold a 52.5% WI in the JV; Louis Dreyfus, 35% and Seisgen,12.5% (that's a lot of dough for seismic). American and Dreyfus arealready drilling Wilcox shots in nearby areas.Petrobank Energy and Resources Ltd. (Calgary) acquires a seismicoption on the 16,350-acre McGill-Stewart Ranch in Kenedy County, SouthTexas Gulf Coast. No wells have been drilled on the ranch since the1970s. Petrobank will pay $50,000 in cash for the option and commit toa seismic acquisition and reprocessing program estimated at $150,000.By March 20, 1996, the company must exercise its option to take a1-year, 74% NRI lease for $150,000 in cash and 400,000 of its sharesand commit to a 9,000-foot depth or greater well. Lease has asix-month continuous drilling clause.KCS Energy Inc. (Houston) joins a three-year exploration JV with Hawkins Oil of Michigan Inc. (Tulsa) and the former principals of Savoy Oil & Gas Inc., who retained the rights to explore on150,000 gross acres (56,250 net) acquired from Shell in the heart ofthe Niagaran Reef fairway in the northern part of Lower Michigan, andthe rights to 17,000 miles of Shell proprietary seismic data. Savoyreports plans to redrill the State Kalkaska H 1-3 near Shell'sabandoned 1-3 well.Frontier Natural GasFrontier Natural Gas Corp. (OKC) reports anagreement with a "sizable" seismic vendor to reprocess and interpretover 1,100 line miles of 2-D seismic data over the Breton andChandelier Sound areas of the Gulf of Mexico. Frontier is looking forbright spots.SK Resources and The Hillman Company form a JV, Broughton Associates,to explore in the hot East Texas patch reef play. SK has reportedlyaccumulated some 30,000 acres in the play. Acreage prices in the playarea are going through the roof; some talk of $1,500 per acre offers.Delhi Gas Pipeline Corp. plans a 275 MMCFGPD expansion of its EastTexas pipeline system to accommodate the production from the aboveplay. Delhi will construct 85 miles of 20-inch pipe and8,000 hp of compression and increase the capacity of its existing Akerand Teague treating facilities.Texaco reports it will spend $20 million for its share of the355-square mile 3-D seismic exploration JV with LL&E Exploration inthe Terrebonne Bay area of South Louisiana. Expects results of thesurvey by mid-1997.United Petroleum (Knoxville, TN) sub, Jackson-United Petroleum Corp.,forms a JV to farm out acreage from Penn Virginia Oil & Gas Corp., subof Penn Virginia Corp. Jackson-United to drill three wells on PennVirginia leases in Pike Co., KY.Deal includes an option to extend the JV for three additional wells.Penn Virginia keeps rights to purchase the gas produced from thewells.Equity Oil Co. reports the first three wells in the exploration JVwith Slawson Exploration Inc. based on the 41.5-square mile 3-Dseismic survey in the Orion area of the Sacramento Basin of northernCalifornia were all successes. Two of the wells tested over 3MMCFGPD. Twenty anomalies were defined by the survey.The Flextrend Development Co. and Tatham Offshore Inc. JV on theformer Tatham Gulf properties found 100 feet of vertical pay at4,800 feet in the Viosca Knoll 817 A-1 well. The high angle well isproducing 30 MMCFGPD.3DX Technologies Inc. reports that the Yearwood No. 1 Frio test flowed1.15 MMCFGPD with a FTP of 1,600 psi. The well is the fifth completionin the 3-D seismic JV led by Cox & Perkins in the Texas Gulf Coast.Cox & Perkins holds a 55% WI in the well while 3DXholds a 17.5%.Pittencrieff Resources reports disappointment with the results ofdrilling in the Flour Bluff-Pita Island fields near Corpus Christi. InAugust, the Newsletter reported that Pittencrief had put its NorthAmerican assets on the market. The Netherland, SewallNetherland,Sewall & Associates engineering estimate cut proven reserves by over50%, to 17 MMBOE. Chief Executive Officer Heneaghan blames the Corpusproperties for the majority of the drop. Pittencrieff sets up a 3-Dseismic study of the fields to try to better develop remainingreserves and will halt drilling until the results of the survey arestudied. No comment from the other 50% partner, Fletcher Challenge,which purchased its interest from Enron for $45 million late lastyear.Forest Oil Corp. reports that the West Cameron Block 615 wildcat found333 net pay in the vertical hole and 472 TVT feet of pay in thesidetrack. Forest holds 25% WI in the block, having soldanother 25% to Santa Fe Energy Resources after the block was acquiredin the 1995 lease sale. Forest has a 50% WI in two adjoining blocks:West Cameron 616 and 617. Plans a 3-D survey on those tracts.Alberta adopts a uniform province royalty on all oilsands projects.All projects to pay a minimum royalty of 1%; after companies haverecovered all costs, including a return allowance equal to thefederal long-term bond rate, the royalty rises to 25% based on netproject revenues. The revision to be phased in over 10 years. Provincehopes the change will kickstart new projects.The Hunt Oil Co. Inc. and PanCanadian Petroleum Ltd. JV, along with Mobil Oil Canada Ltd., cut a deal with the Canadian and Newfoundlandgovernments to combine the four exploration licenses they hold inoffshore and onshore Western Newfoundland and to extend their rightsthrough January, 2000 four years beyond the original term of two ofthe licenses. The JV has drilled on one of its two licenses from anonshore location in extreme southwestern Newfoundland and by allreports has discovered major reserves. The JV then farmed-in the Mobilblocks and currently is drilling a deviated hole from a land locationat the extreme northern tip of the Port au Port Peninsula. The JV hasalready committed to drilling another well in 1996, probably offshorefrom its first well using Rowan Company Inc.'s Gorilla IV jackup. Thegroup commits to at least four wells to get the consolidation.The above has set off a frenzy of activity in the area, includingseismic and drilling plans.Talisman Energy farms into the 178,000 hectare block owned by Vinland Petroleum Inc. and plans a directional well from an onshorelocation in the near future. Oilexco Inc. reports cutting a deal with Vinland to hold a 25% WI inthat well. All that activity causes the Newfoundland government to putup 1 million hectares of its western onshore acreage for bid. Acreageto be divided into 31 parcels and bids due in March 1996.Northwest Natural Gas Co. (Portland, OR), through its Canadian E&Psub, Canor Energy Ltd., and NIPSCO Energy Inc.'s Canadian affiliate,Southlake Energy Inc., form a JV to develop oil and gas properties inWestern Canada. Canor will manage the properties and both parents willinject additional capital with the objective of combining their subsinto a new company by the end of 1997.Circle Energy Inc. joins United Compass Resources Ltd. in a JV programin SE Saskatchewan to earn a 50% WI in several thousand acres byexploration and exploitation drilling.According to the Rocky Mountain Oil Journal, TransTexas has changedits mind about shooting a major 3-D survey on its 110,000 acres in theLodgepole trend that it acquired in a JV with Phoenix Energy Co. TheRMOJ reports TransTexas has hired First Union Corp. to find a buyerfor the block.Shell Offshore, Amerada Hess and Pennzoil pool assets and plandevelopment of five Garden Banks block discoveries. Shell's Enchiladasub-salt discovery in Block 128, along with its discoveries in Blocks83, 84 and 127, and Amerada's discovery in Block 172 will be developedtogether, with platforms in Block 128and later in Block 172. Shell will operate the project, which isexpected to produce about 300 MMCFGPD and 40,000 BLPD when fullydeveloped.Mike Baugh, president of BHP's Australia/Asia region, reports in anarticle in the December Journal of Petroleum Technology thatgovernment takes of discoveries vary widely in the region. Malaysiaand Vietnam have about 15% to 20% higher takes than the ZOCA areabetween Australia and Indonesia, and 30% higher than Australia proper,35% higher than the Gulf of Mexico and 60% higher than inthe U.K. He gives an example of net cash flow to companies fromproduction from a 160 MMB field in 300 feet of water is about $300million in Australia, $200 million in Papua New Guinea,$100 million in China, less than $80 million in Thailand, Indonesiaand the Philippines and about $50 million in Malaysia.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996NEW COMPANIES, NAME CHANGES, MOVESThe Williams Companies Inc. and Panhandle Eastern Corp. (now PanEnergyCorp.) form a new company, Altra Energy Technologies LLC, to combinePanEnergy Information Services Co. and the energy networks, electronictrading system and energy information management systems operated byWilliams Information & Trading Systems Co. Headquarters will be inHouston. David Tolson will be president and CEO.Doug Rosentreter forms The Phoenix Center to provide seismic dataprocessing services in Houston. Phone is 713-974-6907.Hydro Texaco Holdings A/S and OK Petroleum AB form a new company,Scanlube, to supply lubricating oil to Scandinavia andthe Baltic states. Hydro Texaco is a JV of Norsk Hydro A/S and Texaco Inc. Scanlube to be headquartered at the old OK Petroleum plantat Gothenborg. Hydro Texaco to phase out its plant in Copenhagen.Clearwater Inc. (Pittsburgh) forms a new division to specialize in gasprocessing, to develop, manufacture and market chemicals and productsfor gas processing. New division under Matthew Vavro as generalmanager.Panhandle Eastern Corp. changes name to PanEnergy Corp. Its pipelineunits will retain their names while unregulated units will adopt thenew name.Smalls' Oilfield Services Corp. changes name to Superior EnergyServices Inc. after the merger with the Superior Group.The merger of Public Service Co. of Colorado and Southwestern PublicService Co. will create New Century Energies (give me a break!).Dawson Geophysical Co. sets up a new district office in Houston underMike Pruitt.Unit Drilling Co. opens a new office in Houston under Dennis Brandl asVP and operations manager. Unit operates three rigs in South and EastTexas and Louisiana and plans to expand into the market for deeperdrilling rigs. Unit also has offices in Tulsa and Moore, OK.NorAm Energy Corp. opens a new office in Tulsa, operated by NorAm Field Services Inc. under Kevin Holder.Equitable Resources Inc. opens a Washington DC office to coordinatedealings with federal agencies and legislators.Chevron's Natural Gas Business Unit opens a new marketing office inBirmingham, AL under Joe MacLean.The Expro Group establishes a new U.S. operating arm, Expro AmericasInc., in new regional offices in Houston under Sandy Hunter.GeoQuest moves its data management engineering group from CorteMadera, CA, to Houston.Shell Oil Co. will cause construction of a 30,000-square footbuilding, Shell Learning Center, taking a four-year lease.Exploration Technologies Inc. leases 8,188 square feet in theWestchase Business Center in West Houston.Woodside Petroleum board bows to pressure and approves a move ofcorporate headquarters from Melbourne to Perth, Australia. Only abouthalf of its 50 employees expected to accept transfer.Chevron renews its lease on 242,000 square feet in 2 and 4 HoustonCenter, downtown Houston.Enron Corp. renews its lease on 235,000 square feet in 3 Allen Center,downtown Houston.OxyChem will relocate 60 employees from Niagara Falls, NY, to itsoffices in 5 Greenway Plaza, West Houston, renewing its lease thereand upping space to 120,000 square feet.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FINANCING AND REDEMPTIONS## EQUITYFortune Petroleum Corp. private places approximately 628,000 shares ofits common stock to finance its acquisition offshore Louisiana fromPetroFina S.A.Forest Oil Corp. files to offer 69 million shares of its common stock,including 54 million offered by the company, 5.3 million sharesoffered by Saxon Petroleum and 9 million shares subject tounderwriters' overallotment options.Vintage Petroleum, Inc. sold 2.79 million common at $21 per. Vintageplans to use the net proceeds of approximately $49.6 million to fundits acquisition of producing oil and gas properties in Argentina.Seacor Holdings, Inc. sold 3.162 million shares at $24.25 per. Seacorplans to use part the net proceeds of approximately $37 million tofund a part of its acquisition of five vessels from CompagnieNationale de Navigation.General Public Utilities Corporation sold 4 million shares of commonat $32.875 per, resulting in net proceeds of $127.9 million.Star Gas PartnersStar Gas Partners offers 2.6 million units via Lehman BrothersLehman Brothers.Coastal Caribbean Oils & Minerals files to offer 4 million commonshares to the company's shareholders. The price per share and otherterms are not determined. Coastal Caribbean plans to use the proceedsfrom the sale for general corporate purposes and to continuelitigation against the state of Florida.TN Energy Services Acquisition Corp. files to offer 3.9 million sharesof common stock and 781,255 shares of preferred stock.Harken Energy Corp. files to offer 1 million shares of common stock.Snyder Oil Corp. files to offer $1.567 million in common stock.Tatham Offshore, Inc., a sub of DeepTech International Inc., offersrights, exercisable to purchase a warrant at $0.50 per.U. S. Energy Corp. files to offer 893,486 shares of common stock,valued at $3.4 million.## WORLDWIDE EQUITY## CANADANufort Resources Inc. private places flow-through shares with netproceeds of C$300,000. Funds will be used for two drilling projectsOntario, Canada.Deep Basin Energy Inc. private places 1.125 million common shares atC$0.70 per. Each share has a one-year hold on trading and included awarrant for option to purchase a share at $0.90 per before Oct. 30,1997. Funds from the sale will be used for drilling and seismic work.United Tri-Star Resources Ltd. private places 4.09 million commonshares at C$1.50 per. Oban Petroleums Inc. private places 2 million shares to 667349 AlbertaLtd. for C$200,000. Shareholders of Oban to sell additional shares to667349 to give it a 50.1% stake in Oban.Barrington Petroleum Ltd. private places C$5 million in flow-throughcommon stock.Search Energy Inc. private places 233,337 units for gross proceeds ofC$140,000, or C$0.60 per.Each unit is one common and one-half purchase warrant. One wholewarrant entitles holder to purchase an additional common share at C$1per until Nov. 30, 1997.Baytex Energy Ltd. sold 1.428 million units for gross proceeds ofC$4.998 million. Each unit consisted of one flow-through class A shareand one-half class A share purchase warrant. Each warrant convertibleto class A share for C$3.75 until Dec. 1, 1996.Abacan Resource Corp. files to offer 11 million common shares atUS$2.4375 per via Oppenheimer & Co. and Howard Weil LabouisseFriedrichs. Plans for US$36.6 million gross proceeds from the saleinclude funding an exploratory well on concession Block 309 in theBenin basin region in western Nigeria.Grad and Walker Resources Ltd. private places 2 million specialwarrants, exercisable to Grad and Walker Energy Corp. common shares atC$7.75 per. Also offers 2 million warrants exercisable into a treasuryGrad and Walker share at C$7.75 per.Claude Resources Inc. sells C$3 million worth of treasury units atCC$2.15 per. Each unit was one common share and one-half sharepurchase warrant exercisable for two years at C$2.50 per share.Pursuit Resources Inc. to issue 3 million common shares at C$0.62 per,725,000 share purchase warrants and a C$2.25 million, 6.75%convertible subordinated debenture. Share purchase warrantsentitle holder to acquire common shares at C$0.75 per until March 1,1999. The debenture is convertible into 3 million common shares atC$0.75 per.Pengrowth Gas Corp. files to offer trust units via RBC DominionSecurities Inc. Pengrowth to use proceeds from proposed offering topurchase working interests in oil and gas properties in Alberta.Cephalon Resource Corp. private places 2 million flow-through commonshares at CC$0.20 per.Blue Range Resources Corp. private places C$2.9 million flow-throughshares, and may offer an additional C$1 million of flow-throughshares.Startech Energy Inc. to issue 1 million special warrants at C$6.25per. Each warrant entitles holder to one common share. Plans for theproceeds from the offering include funding an acquisition insoutheast Saskatchewan.Camberly Energy private places up to 1 million flow-through commonshares at C$1.25 per, for gross proceeds of C$1.25 million.Torrington Resources Ltd. private places 652,000 flow-through sharesat C$3.65 per for proceeds of C$2.38 million.Golden Trump Resources Ltd. increases its private placement offeringto 1.5 million units, up from 1 million units, at C$0.35 per, insteadof C$0.50 per. Each unit consists of one common share andone non-transferable share purchase warrant, convertible to one commonshare at C$0.35 per until the end of 1996.Gothic Resources Inc. private places 2 million warrants at C$1 per.Each warrant is one common share and one-half of a non-transferablecommon share purchase warrant. Each full warrant convertibleto one common share at C$1.25 per during a one-year period.Tappit Resources Ltd. sells 815,290 units consisting of 4.07 millioncommon shares, 1.6 million purchase warrants convertible to commonshares and 407,645 agent's warrants. Gross funds raisedwere C$978,348.Transwest Energy Inc. private places C$2.7 million flow-through commonshares at C$1.09 per.Proceeds to be used for its oil exploration program in the Provostarea of Alberta during the next three months.First Star Energy Ltd. private places 1.07 units at C$0.15 per for netproceeds of C$161,500.Each unit is one class A common and one warrant convertible to a classA common share at C$0.20 per before Dec. 15, 1996.Elk Point Resources files to offer 3.3 million flow-through common at C$0.47 per via James Capel Canada Inc. and FirstEnergy Capital Corp.## WORLDWIDE EQUITYCairn Energy PLC places 4.37 million ordinary shares at 111.5 penceper.Northern Petroleum private places $1.5 million worth of shares.Stolt Nielsen SA files to offer 7.475 million class B shares,including 975,000 shares subject to underwriters' overallotmentoptions, Lazard Freres & Co., NatWest Securities Ltd., Smith BarneyInc., Fearnley Fonds A/S and Pareto Fonds AS.Coplex Resources N.L. private places 23 million shares at A25 centseach.ENI S.p.A. (Italy) offers American Depositary Shares, eachrepresenting 10 ENI shares via Morgan Guaranty Trust Co.Sands Petroleum (Sweden) issues shares, raising net proceeds of SKr176 million. Sands to use proceeds to finance its acquisition of NorthSea oil assets from Finland's Neste group.## DEBTTenneco issues $600 million in long-term debt to refinance theshort-term debt it took on in its $1.27 billion purchase of the MobilMobil Corp. plastics division. The offering includes $300 millionof 6.5%, 10-year notes and $300 million of 7.25%, 30-year debentures. Saba Petroleum Co. offers $11 million of 9% convertible seniorsubordinated debentures due Dec. 2005 via Van Kasper & Co. Debenturesconvertible to common stock at $8.75 per.Vintage Petroleum, Inc. offers $150 million of its 9% seniorsubordinated notes due 2005, with net proceeds of $145.3 million.Union Texas Petroleum issues $100 million in medium-term notes withterms of seven and twelve years and interest rates varying from 6.51%to 6.81%. Proceeds to repay outstanding debt. Ohio Resources Corp. announces that a financing agreement with C. M. Oliver and Co. has been terminated.Apache Corp. registers $250 million in remarketed notes. Terms andtime of sale to be announced.Xavier Mines issues C$29 million in non-guaranteed corporate bonds dueNov. 17, 1997 at an interest rate of 12%.GATX Capital issues $300 million in notes via Salomon Brothers.Enron Corp. issues 10.5 million exchangeable notes at % for $21.75per via Goldman, Sachs & Co., Merrill Lynch & Co. and Salomon BrothersInc.Star Gas Propane, L.P. offers $85 million of first mortgage notes due2009 via Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette and Lehman Brothers.KCS Energy Inc. private places $150 million aggregate principal ofsenior notes, due 2003.United Cities Gas Co. issues an aggregate of $22 million inmedium-term notes at rates ranging from 6.2% to 6.67% with varyingmaturity dates via Smith Barney, Paine Webber and AG Edwards.Clark USA, Inc. places $175 million of 10 7/8% 10-year senior notes.Norsk Hydro files shelf for $650 million in debt securities.The sub of Tullow Oil PLC (Dublin), Tullow Pakistan (Developments)Ltd., issues $10 million of convertible loan notes.Alpine Oil Services Corp. signs a letter of intent to issue up to $3million of convertible, redeemable subordinate debentures with afive-year term at 9% and convertible into common shares at$1 per.## CREDIT FACILITIESOilex International Investments, Inc. terminates its letter of intentwith Northridge Capital to raise $1 million, because it needs a largerfacility.Plains Resources Inc. finances its acquisition of all of Marathon Oil Co.'s upstream oil and gas assets in the Illinois Basinwith a $42 million loan from Internationale Nederlanden (U.S.) CapitalCorp. It also ups its revolving credit facility to $75 million from$65 million. The banking group for the revolving credit facility isINCC as agent, Den norske Bank AS, First Interstate Bank of Texas,N.A., The First National Bank of Boston and Texas Commerce BankNational Association.Reading & Bates Corp. gets a five-year revolving credit and letter ofcredit line of $55 million with Christiania Bank. It also sells aten-year lease of semi MG Hulme Jr., with a provision to buyback therig at the end of the lease. Some proceeds from both transactions tohelp repay loans with Internationale Nederlanden Bank N.V.Universal Seismic Assocs. Inc. gets a $7 million financial packagefrom Resources Investors Management Co.Geokinetics Inc. gets approval for a 10-year, $5 million debtfinancing for its wholly owned Quantum Geophysical, Inc. sub.Purcell Energy Ltd. gets a C$1.8 million revolving credit facility torepay its C$1.02 million convertible debenture. It also acquired allits 1.2 million common shares allowed under its normal course issuerbid, at an average of C$0.32 cents per.The Islamic Development Bank backs $30 million worth of crude oilimports to Morocco from Saudi Arabia and $15 million to Pakistan fromSaudi Arabia.NorAm Energy Corp. closed two credit facilities totaling $550 million,including an amended $400 million revolving credit facility and a $150million term-loan facility.PanAtlas Energy Inc. converts its remaining debenture into 750,000common shares, and issues 1.2 million common shares on all outstandingshare-purchase warrants, for proceeds of C$372,000.Ultra Petroleum Corp. to conclude negotiations for mezzanine andproject financing for development of its South Ceder Creek Field.LaTex Resources Inc. retains Rauscher, PierceRauscher, Pierce andClark to develop and implement a consolidated financial plan.Triton Energy gets an extended comprehensive loan guarantee to supportabout $45 million from the Export-Import Bank of the U.S. and fundedby NationsBank N.A. United Cities Propane Gas of Tennessee, Inc.places a $5 million term loan through NationsBank of Tennessee.Lomak Petroleum Inc. increases its credit facility to $250 millionfrom $150 million, gets its interest rate lowered and has somecovenants favorably amended with future borrowings on an unsecuredbasis.Oil Capital (New York), with a consortium, gets $2 billion infinancing to fund the construction of a 930-mile oil pipeline fromBaku in Azerbaijan to Yumurtalik.Columbia's state oil company, Ecopetrol, signs a $566 million loanwith 26 foreign banks to help finance construction of a pipelinelinking Cusiana and Cupiagua oil fields in the eastern plains with theCaribbean coast.Saudi-based oil company, Nimir, gets a $150 million, seven-year termloan from Chase Manhattan for oil purchases from Colombia. Repaymentschedule based on cash flow from oil reserves, with an approximatefour-year average life.Natural Gas Corp. (New Zealand) $174 million revolving credit facilitywith Westpac.## REDEMPTIONSMichigan Consolidated Gas Co. redeems its outstanding redeemablecumulative preferred stock, $2.05 series at $25.5125 a share.Midas Resources Ltd. buys up to 282,188 of its common shares, or 5% ofoutstanding.Cliffs Drilling Co. to redeem all of the issued and outstanding sharesof $2.3125 convertible exchangeable preferred stock on January 17,1996, for $25.69 per plus $0.218403 per in accrued and unpaiddividends.Edisto Resources Corp. to repurchase up to 1 million shares of itscommon stock from time to time on the open market. Edisto has 12.95million outstanding shares. Also, Edisto retains investment bankingfirm James D. Wolfensohn Inc.Quanex Corp. offers to buy 10.77% senior notes at 107.5% of par valueplus accrued interest.National Power PLC to buy back up to 57 million shares in the market,representing approximately 4.4% of its outstanding shares.Panatlas Energy Inc. converts $174,375 debenture into 750,000 commonshares, resulting in the issuance of 1.2 million common shares for$372,000.Kaneb Services Inc. to redeem on January 26, 1996, all of the 989,162outstanding shares of its 12% convertible class A preferred stock,series D at $8.33 and accrued and unpaid dividends.Nabors Industries to buy back up to $40 million of its common stock.## ISSUER BIDSBallistic Energy Corp. files for a normal course issuer bid underwhich Ballistic can buy back up to 1 million common shares, or about5% of its outstanding common shares.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GAS PRICESWell gas prices did some mighty strange things in December. The coldweather in the Northeast caught everyone by surprise and pipelinesupply just wasn't enough to keep up with demand. The bottleneck atthe Henry hub appears to be the main culprit as producers in Texas andthe Rockies were unable to get enough gas through that interchange,while Louisiana and SE state producers opened the taps wide.Therefore, as pressure mounted for more gas to fight the cold, theshort players had to scramble to cover their positions. The capacityrestraint, the short positions and the perceived low storage levelsdrove eastern U.S. and local city gate prices through the roof. Somecity gates hit $6 in the crunch. Meanwhile, the Midwest states,although just as cold, were able to draw down their more-than-adequatestorage volumes instead of bidding in the market. Thus Chicago gatesdidn't get much above $2, although that began to change at month-end,rising to about $3.50.The overall effect was to raise prices, but expect the effect to betemporary. Everything depends on the weather, of course, after theshort-players get covered.Delivered-to-pipeline spots started December in the $1.85 to $1.90range in Oklahoma, about 25 cents to 30 cents higher than last monthand last December. By January 1, prices had moved up only slightly asOklahoma gas was squeezed out of the rush to the east. Prices rose tothe $2 level on an average.Texas Gulf prices didn't fare much better. Prices started the month inthe $2.05 range, up 40 cents from last month and 45 cents to 50 centsfrom last year. By January 1, prices at some points had actuallyslipped to the $2 range as Texas gas also got squeezed out. Even asthe pinch got worse in early January, Texas Gulf prices only increasedabout 10 cents.However, Louisiana spots were a different game. At the start ofDecember, Louisiana spots were in the $2.20-$2.25 range, up 45 centsto 50 cents from last month and 55 cents to 65 cents from last year.By January 1, prices varied widely from the Koch Gateway in the $2.60range to most other points paying $3.30 to $3.55. The Henry hub saw$3.50 in early January.West Texas prices mirrored the rest of the middle states. The Waha hubsaw early prices in the $1.75 to $1.80 range, up 25 cents from lastmonth and 15 cents from last year. By month-end, prices had edged upto the $1.90 to $2.05 range.Rockies prices couldn't even see the rally. The Opal hub started themonth in the $1.30 range, up 5 cents from November and down 30 centsfrom last December. By month-end, prices had actually slipped about 5cents. In the southern Rockies, prices weren't much better, hitting$1.30 to $1.35.California border prices went nowhere, ending the month in the $1.50range.Canadian border spots stayed in the $1.10 to $1.25 range in the Westand soared to the $2.85 to $3.50 range in the East.Appalachian fared better naturally, rising to the $3.70 to $3.85 rangeby month-end.Futures prices were a different story. Early December quotes forFebruary delivery were in the $2 to $2.15 range. By late month, thathad soared to the $2.05 to $2.35 range and by early January, futureson the NYMEX hit the $3 to $3.10 range for February deliveries.Gas storage volumes, of course, began to plummet. On December 1, theAGA estimated storage at 83% full with 2.66 TCFG, down 9% from lastDec. 1, some 73 BCFG pulled out in the last week of November. By theend of the third week of December, storage had dropped to 70% ofcapacity, after 154 BCF was pulled the week before, down 15% from lastyear. No later figures were in, but you can bet Northeast storagevolumes were hitting rock bottom.The above classically illustrates the dangers of speculative tradingin gas futures. It also dramatically puts the finger on problem areasthe Henry hub and the still low volume of peaking gas storagefacilities in the Northeast. This is one time when the LDC buyers gotcaught short trying to drive down gas prices.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996EDITOR'S COMMENTARYInteresting article in the December JPT called "Heterogeneity,Geostatistics, Horizontal Wells and Blackjack Poker," by DennisBeliveau dealing specifically with horizontal wells, but moreparticularly about predicting outcomes when dealing with wells andreservoirs.I see a study of average annual pay for various industry groups inHouston listed oil and gas extraction workers at $35,848/year.Security brokers led the list at $87,747 followed by electric, gasand sanitary services at $42,052 (!). Transportation equipment workerscame in at $37,765 per.Louisiana reports monthly state employment in oil and gas extractionaveraged about 48,100 workers over the first nine months of 1995, upfrom 44,700 in 1994. Experts expect that to increase to about 50,000in 1996.The Oklahoma Geological Survey reports that half of the state's gas isproduced by 3,200 small operators from leases that produce less than 1MMCFGPD.Exxon to help pay for an equipment upgrade on Sonat Offshore'sDiscoverer Seven Seas and has contracted the drillship for deep waterwells worldwide over the next two years.The deepwater royalty relief in the recently signed bill endingAlaskan crude export restrictions is a nice boon to Gulf producers.All new leases in waters of 200 meters or better qualify. No royaltydue on first 17.5 MMBOE in depths of 200 to 400 meters, on the first52.5 MMBOE between 400 and 800 meters and on the first 87.5 MMB deeperthan 800 meters.And, where do these utilities get these new names? Yikes!Back to Headline List WT03-B35-30IA059-000325-B006-327http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey22.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234113 text/html 14507HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:39:11 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:58 GMTContent-length: 14320Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey22.html Sample Issue Copyright OPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNet JANUARY 16, 1995 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ENERGY: UP-TO-DATE OPEC PRODUCTION AND SUPPLY DATA -- DEC. 1994 (93 words) ENERGY: OPEC BASKET PRICE RISES TO $16.34 (151 words) ENERGY: CRUDE OIL PRICES END LOWER ON WORLD MARKETS JAN. 13 (271 words) ENERGY: IRAN-PARTICIPATED GAS PIPELINE PROJECT MAKES PROGRESS (321 words) ENERGY: CONOCO EXECUTIVES VISIT VENEZUELA (200 words) ENERGY: NORWEGIAN ENERGY MINISTER CONCLUDES GULF TOUR (89 words) ENERGY: OCCIDENTAL INKS BANGLADESH PRODUCTION-SHARING CONTRACTS (163 words) ENERGY: WORLD BANK APPROVES $150 MILLION LOAN TO ALGERIA (198 words) ENERGY: OIL PRICES SUFFER LOSSES IN ASIA, MIXED IN LONDON (199 words) CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  UP-TO-DATE OPEC PRODUCTION AND SUPPLY DATA -- DEC. 1994   VIENNA, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Production and supply data for themonth of December 1994 received to-date by the OPEC Secretariatfrom member countries is as follows (in 1,000 b/d):COUNTRY           PRODUCTION           SUPPLY-------           ----------           ------Algeria             751.0                750.0Indonesia         1,328.9              1,329.8Iran              3,595.0              3,595.0Iraq                775.0                775.0Kuwait            2,007.2              2,005.3Libya             1,393.0              1,403.0Nigeria           1,785.6              1,860.5Qatar               381.3                378.9Saudi Arabia      8,246.3              8,000.0UAE               2,192.7              2,190.3Venezuela         2,396.0              2,371.2   Supply, as defined by OPEC, is calculated as domesticconsumption, plus net export sales of crude and products, pluswithdrawals of stocks held outside national boundaries.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  OPEC BASKET PRICE RISES TO $16.34   VIENNA, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- The price of OPEC's basket of sevencrudes improved to $16.34 a barrel last week, compared with $16.22in the first week of January.   According to figures released by the OPEC secretariat heretoday, the price of the basket so far this year (up to Jan. 12)has averaged $16.28 a barrel.   For the month of December, the basket price stood at an averageof $15.83 a barrel, as opposed to $16.72 in November and $16.13 inOctober.   For the fourth quarter of 1994, the basket price averaged $16.27a barrel, as against $16.68 in the third quarter.   For 1994 as a whole, the price of the basket averaged $15.53 abarrel, compared with $16.33 the previous year.   The OPEC basket comprises Algeria's Saharan blend, Indonesia'sMinas, Nigeria's Bonny light, Saudi Arabia's Arabian light, Dubaiof the United Arab Emirates, Venezuela's Tia Juana and Mexico'sIsthmus crude.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  CRUDE OIL PRICES END LOWER ON WORLD MARKETS JAN. 13   VIENNA, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Energy futures prices ended mostlylower in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) onJan. 13.   West Texas Intermediate (WTI), the American benchmark crude,lost 20 cents to close at $17.52 per barrel for February delivery,while the March contract stood at $17.46, down by 18 cents.   Refined petroleum products finished mixed with February homeheating oil dropping by 1.17 cents to rest at 46.68 cents pergallon, while unleaded gasoline for the same month added 0.08 centto end at 55 cents.   NYMEX natural gas for February delivery lost two cents to finishat $1.32 per 1,000 cu. ft. of gas.   Traders attributed the weakness in the energy market tounusually higher temperatures in the northeast and mid-west of thecountry.   They said the weakness was led by the home heating oil andnatural gas markets.   On the United States Gulf Coast spot market on Jan. 13, WTI was20 cents down at $17.50 a barrel, while on the New York Harbor spotmarket, unleaded gasoline improved by 0.08 cent to 51.50 cents.   In European spot market trading on Jan. 13, the United ArabEmirates' Dubai light crude lost 35 cents to settle at $15.65 abarrel, while Britain's North Sea brent crude stood at $16.35, aloss of 25 cents.   On the London-based International Petroleum Exchange (IPE),brent for February delivery was lower by 25 cents at $16.38 abarrel.---------------------- OPEC BASKET PRICE -----------------------   The price of the OPEC basket of seven crudes stood at $16.32 abarrel on Jan. 13, compared with $16.54 the previous day, accordingto OPEC secretariat calculations.----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  IRAN-PARTICIPATED GAS PIPELINE PROJECT MAKES PROGRESS   NEW YORK, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- The pipeline project to export gasfrom Turkmenistan to Europe via Iran and Turkey has made progress,according to China's news agency Xinhua.   It said a meeting held to discuss the project would be chairedby Turkmen President Saparmurad Niyazov and attended by the oil andenergy ministers of Turkmenistan, Turkey, Iran, the RussianFederation and Kazakhstan.   It is reported that representatives at the meeting will discusswhether to join a company to build the 845 km pipeline, estimatedto cost $2 billion.   As there are some problems in the gas transportation through theRussian pipeline to Europe, Turkmenistan initiated a project to laya pipeline as an alternative export route for it to sell its gasto Europe.   It is estimated that Turkmenistan has gas reserves of 21trillion cu. meters, the third largest in the world. But its gasexports to Western Europe have fallen from 11 billion cu. metersin 1992 to almost zero now.   Turkey and Turkmenistan signed a natural gas transportationaccord in May 1992 and Ankara is interested in the project as itis greatly in need of gas to meet domestic consumption.   It is believed the financing of the ambitious project will befinalized at talks in the Turkish capital, starting today.   The Itar news agency confirmed that the meeting was alsoexpected to fix the date to begin construction of the pipeline.   Turkmen President Saparmurad Niyazov will meet Turkish PresidentSuleyman Demirel to discuss mutual seller-buyer guarantees.   "A managerial body capable of mastering substantial financialand technical resources to implement the pipeline project will beset up," according to Khekim Ishanov, the Turkmen minister for oiland gas.   "The Turkmen transcontinental pipeline will be able to transportfrom 15 billion to 28 billion cu. meters of gas a year. Itsconstruction is expected to begin next may after the package offinancing documents is signed," he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  CONOCO EXECUTIVES VISIT VENEZUELA   CARACAS, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- High-ranking executives from Conocoof the United States have made a two-day visit to Venezuela toanalyze progress in a joint-venture association with Maraven, aPetroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA) affiliate.   The delegation met with Maraven president Emilio Abouhamad andother board members to monitor progress in the association for thedevelopment, production, transportation and upgrading ofextra-heavy crudes from the Orinoco oil belt.   The Maraven-Conoco strategic association is aimed at producingsome 120,000 b/d of nine degrees api extra-heavy crude, which willbe transported along a 210 km pipeline to installations at Jose,Anzoategui state for upgrading.   These installations include a delayed choking plant, designedto produce some 113,000 b/d of upgraded 20 degrees api crude thatwill be shipped to Conoco refineries in the U.S.   The delegation included Conoco's executive vice president ofcorporate strategy, Robert E. Mckee, vice president for businessdevelopment and exploration and production resources MichaelStinson, vice president of business development and optimizationDonald Unruh and the association project manager, David Griffith.   The group also met with Petroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA)president Luis Giusti and PDVSA vice president Claus Graf.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  NORWEGIAN ENERGY MINISTER CONCLUDES GULF TOUR   RIYADH, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Norwegian Energy Minister JensStoltenberg yesterday wrapped up his a tour of gulf oil producersthat took him to the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and lastly SaudiArabia.   Stoltenberg met leading government officials and oil companyexecutives in the countries visited and discussed ways to furtherbilateral energy cooperation.   Saudi Arabia's Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources,Hisham M. Nazer, said the topics he discussed with Stoltenbergincluded the potential threat posed to the oil industry by energytaxes in the major oil-consuming nations.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  OCCIDENTAL INKS BANGLADESH PRODUCTION-SHARING CONTRACTS   NEW YORK, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Occidental petroleum has announcedthat it has signed production-sharing contracts with Petrobangla,the state oil company of Bangladesh, to explore a 3.4 million acrearea in the gas-producing region of northeastern Bangladesh and toappraise a large gas discovery made in 1989 by another operator.   During the initial exploration period, Occidental will conducta 1,250 km seismic program, beginning this year, and will drilltwo exploratory wells.   The contracts are the first to be signed under the country's newpetroleum laws, which recently were changed significantly.   The exploration area is composed of blocks 12, 13 and 14, whichare served by a pipeline system with sufficient capacity for newdiscoveries.   More than 25 trillion cu. ft of natural gas has been discoveredin 17 fields in Bangladesh, which has a growing need for the fuel.   Currently, gas production is around 600 million cu. ft per day.Occidental is operator with 100 percent of the contractor'sinterest.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  WORLD BANK APPROVES $150 MILLION LOAN TO ALGERIA   ALGIERS, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- The World Bank has approved a $150million loan to Algeria, the Algerian News Agency (APS) hasreported quoting a World Bank statement.   The loan would offer support to financial reforms and social aidprograms in Algeria, the statement said.   Algeria was currently facing economic stagnation, a populationgrowth rate of 2.5 percent per year, a fall in its per capitaincome of 25 percent, and an unemployment rate close to 25 percent,the statement added.   To counteract these problems, the government had undertaken astabilization program aimed at stimulating and transforming theeconomy with support from the International Monetary Fund, itnoted.   Inflation was currently under control and the budget deficit wasscheduled to be reduced from nine percent to three percent of grossdomestic product in 1995.   The World Bank loan is repayable in 17 years, including afive-year grace period, under usual World Bank conditions.   Additionally, the African Development Bank has granted an 83.57million loan to the Algerian firm Sonelgaz (electricity and gas).   The loan will finance electricity projects, notably connectingsome 350,000 new users.   Since 1971, the African Development Bank has financed 22Algerian projects worth $1.4 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  OIL PRICES SUFFER LOSSES IN ASIA, MIXED IN LONDON   SINGAPORE, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Fuel oil prices on the SingaporeInternational Monetary Exchange (Simex) closed on a slightly softernote today, unflattered by the firmer tones adopted by domesticbunkering trade.   Traders here said the market was mostly cautious with thefront-month February fuel oil contract being discussed between alow of 95.60 dollars a ton and a high of 96.40 dollars.   Fuel oil futures trade was mostly under the influence of weakcrude and mixed prices on the International Petroleum Exchange(IPE) in London today.   The Simex February fuel oil contract settled the day at 96.20dollars for a loss of 10 cents, while the March position fell by50 cents to 94.50 dollars.   Trading volume was a mere 165 lots, based on initially computedfigures.   In bunkering trade, cst 180 was still maintaining a higher moodat 103 dollars a ton, while cst 380 was in the 93 dollar range.   Meanwhile, in early trading on the IPE, Britain's north seabrent crude for March delivery was fetching 16.14 dollars a barrel,up by one cent from Friday's close.   However, gasoil on the exchange for February was being quoted1.25 dollars lower at 140.75 dollars a ton.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-31IA059-000325-B006-366http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey19.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234153 text/html 34245HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:39:58 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:56 GMTContent-length: 34058Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey19.html Sample Issue Copyright OXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES OXY-FUEL NEWS MARKET REPORT DROPPING ETHANOL INVENTORIES SIGNAL TIGHT SUPPLY, SAYS MARKETER (339 words) INDUSTRY GEARS UP FOR INTRODUCTION OF CARB PHASE 2 RFG -State Tests Show No Problems in Vehicles or Off-Road Equipment- (528 words) SOUTH AMERICA RANKS IMPORTANT IN GLOBAL METHANOL MARKET -Region Will Be 30% of World Trade in 1998- (479 words) SOUTH DAKOTA ETHANOL SUPPORTERS CONSIDER YEAR-ROUND OXYGEN (236 words) API PETITIONS EPA TO REPEAL NOx REDUCTIONS IN PHASE II RFG (598 words) GOVERNORS' ETHANOL COALITION SUPPORTS RFG IN ATTAINMENT AREAS (234 words) THIRD QUARTER MTBE, METHANOL PRODUCTION OUTPACED 1994 RATES (149 words) ALTERNATIVE FUELS UPDATE E-95 SHOWS "SIGNIFICANT REDUCTIONS" IN TAILPIPE EMISSIONS, SAYS STUDY (234 words) PITTSBURGH COMES CLEAN BY JOINING DOE PROGRAM (141 words) AGENCY EXPLORING WAYS TO CONTINUE FEDERAL FLEET PROGRAM (235 words) ASSOCIATION CHARTS EV RECHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE (235 words) ENVIRONMENT CANADA TO EXPAND ECOLOGOtm PROGRAM FOR OXYGENATES (904 words) CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996DROPPING ETHANOL INVENTORIES SIGNAL TIGHT SUPPLY, SAYS MARKETER      Fuel ethanol stocks across the U.S. have been dropping sinceSeptember, and marketers believe that the decrease in inventories isan indication of supply tightness throughout the system.  Ethanolstocks at the end of November were about 2.1 million barrels,according to the latest Energy Information Administration (EIA)report.  This is only a  slight decrease from last year's level of 2.3million barrels, but a substantial drop from the 4.2 million barrelsEIA reported in September 1995.      MTBE stocks have also dropped in the last few months, but thedecrease is not as dramatic as that seen in ethanol.      While EIA does not show a dramatic decline in ethanol productionsince September, marketers say ethanol is beginning to show the signsof a tight supply market.      "A lot of the tightness has to do with the amount of supply thathas been removed from the market," said one ethanol marketer.  Fourethanol plants have been closed due to poor production margins earlierin the year and others have cut back fuel ethanol production, he said. "Right now we are in the middle of a heavy demand period, with theoxygenated fuel seasons, and we are faced with a contraction of supplybut demand is still at about normal levels -- leaving a definitetightness in the market."      Ethanol prices continued to respond to the tightness last week,with prices increasing 1-2 c/gal.  Gulf Coast spot ethanol traded at$1.18/gal and export was in a range of $1.18-$1.22/gal.      However, the current price support is expected to be short-lived.  "We have about 30-40 days of strength left in this market,"noted the marketer.  "The demand will begin to fall off in mid-February, and prices should fall as well."      After a strong showing in December, MTBE prices seemed to havestabilized, according to traders.  Gulf Coast spot MTBE remained in arange of 92-93 c/gal.      Methanol prices also remained steady last week, though there wassome speculation in the market that contract list prices may increaselater in the month. Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996INDUSTRY GEARS UP FOR INTRODUCTION OF CARB PHASE 2 RFG-State Tests Show No Problems in Vehicles or Off-Road Equipment-      With less than two months until the production of CARB Phase 2RFG is required in California, refiners, oxygenate producers and stategovernment officials are reporting no problems with the implementationof the program.   Supplies of CARB RFG and the oxygenates required toproduce it are expected to be sufficient to meet demand.      The start of the California Phase 2 RFG program will be the lastbig regulatory boost for oxygenates, according to Jim Thomas, vicepresident of market analysis for Bonner and Moore Associates, Inc. "After CARB Phase 2 begins, oxygenate demand will only grow with thenormal growth rate of gasoline -- which is usually not very large," hesaid.      MTBE will be the oxygenate of choice for most refiners producingCARB Phase 2 RFG, predicted Thomas, though some ethanol, TAME and evenETBE will be used to meet the increased demand for oxygenates.      Demand for MTBE will gain an additional 40,000 b/d for the lastsix months of 1996, when CARB Phase 2 RFG is required at the retaillevel, said Thomas.  "If you look at the average annualized demandincrease in 1996, it is about 20,000-25,000 b/d," he said.      Oxygenate supply should be sufficient to meet the new demand,and non-U.S. suppliers will be aggressively seeking their share of thenew business, Thomas said.  "There is a lot of volume available thatcan be moved around," he said.  "There are new plants coming online inKorea that will help, and product is available from Brazil, SaudiArabia and Europe."      Oxygenate pricing should strengthen due to the greater demandstructure and remain strong until the market adjusts to the newdemand, Thomas said.  However, large price spikes, like thosepreceding the start of the federal RFG program, are unlikely sinceMTBE contract pricing is now more closely tied to market factors, hesaid, adding that such spikes are very difficult to predict.      Many refiners are already beginning to stockpile MTBE for use inCARB RFG, said Thomas.  "Some of the current strengthening in MTBEprices is a reflection of that inventory building," he said.State Tests Show No Vehicle or Equipment Problems      CARB's test program, done in conjunction with some of thestate's key refiners, gave Phase 2 RFG a clean bill of health, saidCARB officials recently.  The tests involved 829 vehicles in eightprivate and government fleets that drove about five million miles onPhase 2 RFG from February through August 1995.      "There was no meaningful difference between the frequency offuel-system problems in vehicles using cleaner-burning gasoline andthe pre-1996 (conventional) gasoline," CARB Chairman John Dunlapannounced.  "Cleaner-burning gasoline has been thoroughly tested andhas broad-based support within industry."      The few problems noted were on vehicles with mileage above theaverage of the fleet (95,000 miles) or vehicles that used anespecially low-aromatics fuel Texaco developed but does not intend tosell commercially.  Separate, smaller tests on various off-roadconstruction vehicles, lawnmowers and farm equipment found noperformance problems, Dunlap added      Mileage for the Phase 2 vehicles was about 1% less than FederalRFG now sold in Southern California and 3% below conventional gasolinesold in the state, CARB found.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SOUTH AMERICA RANKS IMPORTANT IN GLOBAL METHANOL MARKET-Region Will Be 30% of World Trade in 1998-      While demand growth for methanol in South America is notexpected to be great through the end of the century, growth in theregion's production capacity is projected to be one of the largest inthe world, according to experts.  "The South American region is one ofthose strategic offshore locations on which increasing emphasis mustbe placed if any realistic prognosis of the future direction of the[methanol] industry is to be made," said Rampersad Motilal, divisionalmanager of manufacture and marketing for the Trinidad and TobagoMethanol Co. (TTMC).      South America's share of world methanol export trade continuesto grow, making it even more critical to the global methanol industry. "At present, the South American net share of world trade is close to2.5 million metric tons, which represents approximately 20% of theworld total," Motilal told attendees of CMAI's World MethanolConference in Phoenix.  "By 1998, South America will account for closeto 4.4 million metric tons of world trade -- over 30% of the worldtotal."      With a capacity growth rate of more that 18% from 1989 through1995, South America led other regions of the world in productionincreases, Motilal said.  From 1995 through 1998, the region'sproduction capacity is expected to grow another 16.5%, he said.      The five largest methanol-producing countries in South Americaare almost all expected to see continued growth in production capacitythrough the end of the century.  At the same time, demand for methanolis not expected to keep pace, leaving more product available forexport.      Chile and Trinidad & Tobago will be doubling or nearly doublingtheir production capacity between 1995 and 1998, according to Motilal. Methanex is constructing a second methanol plant in Chile.  The926,000-metric-tons-per-year plant is expected to be online late in1996.  Trinidad & Tobago is expecting the addition of three newproduction facilities -- making it the largest methanol producingcountry in the region with 2.1 million metric tons per year ofcapacity.  Methanex, TTMC and Saturn Methanol are all planing to buildfacilities in the island nation.      Brazil and Venezuela lead the region in methanol demand.  Mostof Brazil's demand comes from its national fuel alcohol program, whileMTBE production dominates Venezuelan demand.Region Offers Producers Several Advantages      Low feedstock costs are one of the advantages of methanolproduction in many South American countries, said project developers. However, it is not the only advantage the region holds.  For example,Trinidad & Tobago "not only offers competitive natural gas prices, butalso skilled labor, logistical advantages and duty-free access to bothEurope and U.S. markets and has the needed infrastructure available,"said Deo van Wijk, president of Saturn Methanol Co.  Saturn announcedplans for the construction of a 2,500-metric-tons-per-day (287-million-gallons-per-year) facility to be located in Point Lisas,Trinidad & Tobago.  The plant is expected to be on-line by late 1997  Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SOUTH DAKOTA ETHANOL SUPPORTERS CONSIDER YEAR-ROUND OXYGEN      Ethanol proponents in South Dakota are considering their optionsto add a year-round oxygen requirement to the state's gasoline.  Whilean exact course of action has not yet been devised, a bill may beintroduced as early as this session.      "A year-round oxygen content has a lot of merit," said TrevorGuthmiller, executive director of the American Coalition for Ethanol(ACE).  "The question is, can we educate legislators on the issue intime to pass it this year?  The lawmakers we have discussed the ideawith so far do seem positive."      The South Dakota Corn Growers Association (SDCGA) have alsoshown support for such a move, said Jane Heenen, program coordinatorfor SDCGA.  The group passed a resolution to support legislation "thatwould require the sale of gasoline that contains at least 2.7%oxygenates such as ethanol" and "encourage South Dakota's governor andlegislators to take the lead in getting all PADD II states to havesimilar oxygenated fuel standards."      However, both ACE and SDCGA were quick to note that a year-roundoxygen requirement should not come at a cost of the state's otherincentives for ethanol.  "We don't want to lose the incentives wealready have in place," said Heenen, noting that almost 50% of thestate's gasoline already contains ethanol.  "This may not be the yearto proceed."      Minnesota begins its state-wide oxygen requirement in 1997, andNebraska is also considering such a move.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996API PETITIONS EPA TO REPEAL NOx REDUCTIONS IN PHASE II RFG      In the first attempt to amend Federal Phase II RFGspecifications, the American Petroleum Institute (API) has filed apetition with U.S. EPA seeking  a repeal of the agency's requirementto reduce summertime NOx emissions.  "This move is an attempt toformalize the complaint we have had with the NOx reduction regulationssince the rule was promulgated," said API spokesman Chris Kelley.       Oxygenate producers worry this move may be the first in a seriesof attempts to change Phase 2 specifications, including one to removethe oxygenate requirement.      In the petition, API argues that NOx reduction is not a cost-effective way to control summertime ozone and in some cases mayactually exacerbate the problem.  EPA estimates NOx reduction costs atabout $5,000/ton while API maintains that the cost is closer to$10,000/ton.        "API remains convinced that EPA's estimates of gasolinedesulfurization costs and the cost-effectiveness of NOx reductions arefar too low because of flawed refinery modeling assumptions," thepetition states.  "Because consumers would be faced with the highercosts of Phase II RFG, API's petition urges EPA to repeal the NOxreduction requirements, which would require refiners to makesignificant capital investments.      Phase I of the federal RFG program calls for no increase in NOxemissions from gasoline, while Phase II RFG, which takes effect in2000, calls for a 5% to 7% reduction in NOx emissions.      Since the 1994 promulgation of the RFG rule, EPA has grantedseveral state waivers from certain stationary source NOx reductionrequirements, API noted.  The foundation of these waivers stems fromthe "undisputed fact that NOx reductions in many areas do not help andmay even hinder some areas in their progress toward complying withfederal ozone pollution standards," the petition said.        Like VOCs, NOx emissions are widely believed to be a precursorto ozone.  However, some studies have shown that in a few cases, NOxmay actually serve to break down ozone and that NOx reductions couldwork to increase urban ozone concentrations, depending on the VOC- to-NOx ratio.  Across-the-board RFG NOx reductions are not warranted,"especially when other, more cost-effective and more targetablecontrols are available," API wrote.      API called for a prompt rulemaking on its request to repeal theNOx reduction requirement, asking EPA to suspend the requirement until"a more comprehensive assessment of the NOx control strategies and anevaluation of EPA's overall nitrogen oxides control strategy can beperformed."      With EPA closed temporarily, there has been no recent movementon the issue, noted a source at the National Petroleum RefinersAssociation (NPRA).  "There was a meeting but it was nothing more thana formality," said the source.  "We had discussions with EPA that thecost and the effectiveness of a NOx control strategy has not beenproperly analyzed."      While no studies on this issue have been performed recently,"work was done earlier in conjunction with the RFG regulations andother work on sulfur issues," said the NPRA source.Oxygenate Sources Call the Change A "Mistake"      "We are concerned about any of these changes to RFGspecifications," said Douglas Durante, executive director, Clean FuelsDevelopment Coalition.  "To suspend NOx reduction or any otherrequirement without indisputable data and a consensus of stakeholderswould be a mistake," he said.      While agreeing that fuel science is constantly evolving, Duranteshowed concern over proposed changes to RFG specifications every timenew data appears.  "There needs to be a better process for dealingwith changing data," he said.      "At this time API is not looking for any other changes in thePhase II RFG regulations," said Kelley. Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996GOVERNORS' ETHANOL COALITION SUPPORTS RFG IN ATTAINMENT AREAS      Even as the U.S. EPA is on the verge of finalizing its rule onRFG opt-outs, the Governors' Ethanol Coalition (GEC) is adding itssupport to the growing list of those urging the agency to allow ozoneattainment areas to join the federal program.      "Allowing ozone attainment areas to participate in the RFGprogram at the request of a state governor will provide states withanother strategy with which to combat air pollution and achieve CleanAir Act goals," wrote Govs. Ben Nelson (D-NE), Tommy Thompson (R-WI)and Mel Carnahan (D-MO) in a Dec. 15 letter to EPA Administrator CarolBrowner.      Allowing attainment areas to opt-in to the program isappropriate for several reasons, according the governors:* RFG has made a measurable contribution to air pollution control, is   highly cost-effective and safe;* Participation in the program may help areas in attainment avoid   slipping into nonattainment;* RFG would assist downwind areas to reach attainment through reducedpollution transport; and* Once in nonattainment, control measures required in an area wouldlimit industrial expansions and consumer freedom.      "While the Clean Air Act establishes a number of mandatorycontrol strategies, the Act still demonstrates a clear commitment toallowing states the flexibility to determine the appropriate mix ofmeasures needed to meet air quality goals," wrote the governors. "Voluntary participation by attainment areas in the reformulatedgasoline program is just such a measure."Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996THIRD QUARTER MTBE, METHANOL PRODUCTION OUTPACED 1994 RATES      Production of both methanol and MTBE in the third quarteroutpaced the same period in 1995, says the International TradeCommission's (ITC) Preliminary Report on U.S. Production of SelectedSynthetic Organic Chemicals.      MTBE far outpaced increases of other key octane boosters,growing 273,884 metric tons, or 9.46%, from third quarter 1994 ratesto 3.169 million metric tons.      During the same period, methanol production also inched up,rising 60,955 metric tons, or 1.69%, to 3.667 million metric tons.      Benzene, which is limited to 1.0 vol% in RFG, fell 95.066million liters, or 17.84% from the same time last year to 5.738billion liters in the third quarter.  However, production of the twoother major aromatics used in gasoline blending -- toluene andxylene -- made year-to-year gains on the strength of petrochemicaldemand.  Toluene production advanced 1.21%, or 21.014 million liters,while xylene production rose 9.23%, or 313.383 million liters.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996E-95 SHOWS "SIGNIFICANT REDUCTIONS" IN TAILPIPE EMISSIONS, SAYS STUDY      While E-95 surpasses premium gasoline in reducing carbonmonoxide, hydrocarbon and oxygen emissions, carbon dioxide emissionsare slightly increased, reveals a newly released study from MankatoState University (MSU) in Minnesota.        The study compared the fuel efficiency, tailpipe emissions, fueleconomy, horsepower and drivability of E-95 (a blend of 95% ethanoland 5% unleaded gasoline) to that of conventional premium unleadedgasoline in a 2.5-liter, four-cylinder General Motors engine.      Test results show significant reductions in tailpipe emissions,as well as increases in fuel efficiency and horsepower with E-95 fuel,researchers said.  However, the test vehicle's fuel economy decreasedwith E-95 due to the lower energy density of ethanol.      The study, which primarily involved laboratory testing forhorsepower and emissions, also included some road testing,particularly for fuel economy.  It ran from January 1994 through June1995, according to Fred Kuzel, director of the Great Lakes RegionalBiomass Energy Program, which supplied funding for the study.Additional funding was received from MSU and the Minnesota CornProcessors Association.       The vehicle used in the study was one of several test vehiclesdesigned and built by senior automotive engineering students at MSU. The fuel and ignition systems of a Recycled Automotive Design vehicle,developed by MSU students in 1991, were modified to run on thealternative fuels.      For information about the study, call Associate Professor BruceJones, MSU College of Science, Engineering and Technology, at (507)389-6700.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PITTSBURGH COMES CLEAN BY JOINING DOE PROGRAM      Pittsburgh has become the latest addition to the U.S. Departmentof Energy's Clean Cities program, marking the second designation forPennsylvania.  Philadelphia earned designation in 1993.  Pittsburgh'saddition brings the program's year-end total to 43 Clean Citiesnationwide.      Pittsburgh has more than 650 compressed natural gas (CNG)vehicles fueling at 23 public stations in the area.  The stakeholdersinvolved in planning Pittsburgh's Clean Cities program expect to addanother 1,650 alternative fuel vehicles -- mostly CNG, with someelectric -- by the year 2000.  They also plan to add 40 fuelingstations.      The program will get local support from the University ofPittsburgh, with its Natural Gas Vehicle Technology AssistanceProgram, to research the operation of NGVs.  The $1.13 million programis being funded through Congestion Mitigation and Air QualityImprovement grants, Pennsylvania's Alternative Fuels Incentive GrantProgram, and Equitable Gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996AGENCY EXPLORING WAYS TO CONTINUE FEDERAL FLEET PROGRAM      While Congress struggles to pass a 1996 fiscal year budget,others are looking for ways to ensure the federal government continuesadding alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) to its fleet despite budgetcutbacks.        Since the Energy Policy Act (EPACT) established federal fleetAFV requirements in 1992, much of the incremental costs have been paidfor by the U.S. Department of Energy.  This year Congress nixed DOE's$20 million request for 1996 after rescinding funds in 1995.      Without DOE funding, many doubt that federal agencies willpurchase AFVs in substantial numbers.  So DOE proposed an executiveorder requiring that agencies meet EPACT's AFV mandate by paying forit themselves.  The requirement stipulates that AFVs comprise 25% of1996 federal fleet purchases, an estimated 12,500 vehicles.  Theproposed executive order has been supported by the natural gas andelectric vehicle industries, which have expressed concerned that EPACTrule delays and Congressional funding rescissions are sending themessage that AFV program support is waning.      The proposed executive order, which is expected to be reviewedby the White House as early as next week, would also require that eachalternative fuel comprise at least 10% of the federal fleet's annualAFV purchases, depending on commercial availability of fuels andvehicles.      So agencies with aggressive AFV programs would not be penalized,the proposed executive order would direct the General ServicesAdministration to average the incremental costs across the entirefederal fleet.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ASSOCIATION CHARTS EV RECHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE      There are 888 non-residential electric vehicle charging outletsacross the United States, according to a survey released by theElectric Vehicle Association of the Americas (EVAA).  Of those, only43 of the 219 charging locations are at public stations.  Most (72%)are located in California, with Georgia having the second highestconcentration.      Conductive charging sites account for about 90% of thoseavailable.  Conductive charging utilizes a standard plug outlet withmetal-to-metal contact and will be used by Ford and Chrysler electricvehicles.  General Motors announced it will produce its vehicles to becharged inductively, which transfers power through a magneticconnection with no direct contact.      "This is an emerging transportation technology, and we are nowseeing only the very first commercial stages of vehicles andchargers," said EVAA's executive director Robert Hayden.  Theassociation plans to release a site directory and will continue toannually track infrastructure development.      The EV industry is working to make greater inroads in charginginfrastructure.  The Electric Transportation Coalition's "EV MarketLaunch" begins this year with workshops in 10 cities selected tobecome "EV-Ready":  Los Angeles; Sacramento; Atlanta; Washington,D.C.; Phoenix; New York City; Richmond; Boston; Detroit; and Ft.Lauderdale.  The program will focus efforts in those areas to addressissues such as local, state and federal building codes, safetytraining, fleet acquisition and charging availability.  Thecoalition's goal is to place 5,000 new EVs on the road by 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ENVIRONMENT CANADA TO EXPAND ECOLOGOtm PROGRAM FOR OXYGENATES      Environment Canada is reviewing the possible expansion of itsautomotive fuels category beyond just ethanol to consider granting avariety of oxygenates and alternative fuels EcoLogotm status, whichwould likely boost their sales.      The government is considering opening the status to more thanjust ethanol, for possible inclusion of MTBE, ETBE, TAME, propane,methane, natural gas and low-sulfur diesel.  The group will considerall types of automotive fuels, including those intended for use inmodified spark-ignition engines, such as compressed natural gas andpropane, as well as modified compression ignition engines.  Additionalcategories may be added later.      The EcoLogo status, part of Canada's Environmental ChoiceProgramtm, signifies the government's endorsement of the fuel asenvironmentally responsible.  The EcoLogo appears on wholesale andretail packages, and the government provides incentives to fleetowners who use the recognized fuel.  Ethanol is the first and onlyfuel granted EcoLogo status, but a routinely scheduled review is nowalso underway to determine if it will retain its status.  The programis revised every three years.      "It's pretty safe to assume that ethanol will remain in theprogram," said Kevin Gallagher, Marketing and Customer Relations forTerraChoice Environmental Services, Inc., administrators of theEnvironmental Choice Program.  "In fact, it's just beginning to takeoff in Canada."  One company he cited has enjoyed 20% sales increasesin the last year and a half, since it was granted the status.       Preliminary testing conducted on ethanol reveals it comes closeto meeting the tentative draft standards.  A final determination isexpected by June 1996.  Ethanol blends of 5% or higher qualify for theEcoLogo label at this time.  Canadians use 35 billion liters ofgasoline annually.      To earn the status, Environment Canada will review currentlyavailable life cycle information to determine if the fuel reducestoxic emissions, global-warming substances and tropospheric ozone orsmog.  The fuels will be compared with an established matrix, andscored for each of its stages against pollutant standards.  However,the fuels won't be compared with each other, Gallagher explained.SPOT MTBE -  cents/gal ($/metric ton)World Markets   1/4/95              12/21/95                ChangeNew York, NY    98.00 (347.90)   95.00 (337.25)      0.00 (0.00)Houston, TX     92.00 (336.60)   89.50 (317.73)      0.00 (0.00)Los Angeles, CA  98.00 (347.90)  95.50 (339.03)      0.00 (0.00)Rotterdam       86.76 (308.00)   85.92 (305.50)     +0.84 (+2.50)Singapore       74.37 (264.00)   73.94 (262.50)     +0.43 (+1.50)                                        Marketer Margin ImprovementFUEL ETHANOL        Terminal                W/ Ethanol per gal                    Mkt Price    Change    R.U.    M.U.         P.U. Key Ethanol Markets($ Gallon)                   ($ Gallon) Chicago, IL         1.20-1.25     0.00    0.0042  0.0380     0.0488 Decatur, IL         1.19         +0.01    0.0071  0.0346     0.0608 Pekin, IL           1.18         +0.01    0.0085  0.0451     0.0646 Indianapolis, IN    1.17         +0.01   -0.0062  0.0305     0.0518 Bettendorf, IA      1.20         +0.01    0.0024  0.0356     0.0514 Cedar Rapids, IA    1.20         +0.01    0.0028  0.0609     0.0498 Kansas City, KS     1.19          0.00   -0.0082  0.0280     0.0376 Wichita, KS         1.19          0.00   -0.0084  0.0399     0.0363    Minneapolis, MN     1.23         +0.01    0.0144  0.0409     0.0580 Cincinnati, OH      1.22         +0.01    0.0052  0.0356     0.0596 South Point, OH     N/A           0.00    N/A     N/A        N/A Houston, TX         1.18         +0.01   -0.0070  0.0308     0.0550Gulf Coast Export   1.18-1.22     0.00    N/A     N/A        N/ALos Angeles, CA     1.28         +0.03   -0.0134  0.0314     0.0622 San Francisco, CA   1.28         +0.03   -0.0122  0.0338     0.0606 Denver, CO          1.25          0.00   -0.0078  0.0205     0.0372 Seattle, WA         1.28          0.00    0.0208  0.0746     0.1083     * Note: The Chicago ethanol price is now being listed as a rangebecause transactions are being based both on MTBE and gasoline prices.  GASOLINE GULF COAST SPOT  - ( per gal.)            1/4/95    12/21/95    ChangeRegular:    50.80        46.95    +3.85Midgrade:   52.05        48.03    +4.02Premium:    53.90        49.65    +4.25METHANOL GULF COAST - ($/gallon)            1/4/95    12/21/95    Change      Spot:       0.32          0.32     0.00Contract:   0.42          0.42     0.00SPOT AROMATIC PRODUCTS - ($/gallon)             1/4/95                    12/21/95   ChangeBenzene:       0.88                       0.88      0.00       Toluene:       0.77                       0.77      0.00Xylene:        1.02                       1.02      0.00ADDITIONAL ETHANOL MARKETS                                                      Marketer Margin Improvement                                         W/ Ethanol per gal                Mkt Price    Change    R.U.     M.U.       P.U.                ($ Gallon)                    ($ Gallon) TerminalPensacola, FL    N/A          0.00     N/A      N/A        N/A Tampa ,FL        N/A          0.00     N/A     N/A          N/ARichmond, VA     1.22        +0.01    -0.0130   0.0210      0.0464 Louisville, KY   1.22        +0.01    -0.0054   0.0316      0.0506 Lexington, KY    1.20        +0.01    -0.0072   0.0309      0.0469 Detroit, MI      1.18         0.00    -0.0059   0.0314      0.0501 Niles, MI        1.18         0.00    -0.0057   0.0290      0.0497 Lincoln, NE      1.19        +0.02     0.0130   0.0440      0.0591 Omaha, NE        1.19        +0.02     0.0128   0.0438      0.0590 Upstate NY       1.25        +0.01    -0.0084   0.0613      0.0812 Fargo, ND        1.22        +0.01    -0.0078   0.0548      0.0444 Walhalla, ND     N/A          0.00     N/A       N/A        N/A Memphis, TN      1.18         0.00    -0.0089    0.0314     0.0551 Nashville, TN    1.20        +0.02    -0.0076   -0.0030     0.0256 Birmingham,AL    N/A          0.00     N/A      N/A        N/A New Orleans, LA  1.23        +0.01    -0.0154    0.0198     0.0404 Albuquerque, NM  1.29        +0.01    -0.0113    0.0302     0.0478 Phoenix, AZ      1.29        +0.01    -0.0056    0.0414     0.0688 Boise, ID        1.27         0.00    -0.0206    0.0145     0.0409   CASH GRAINS PRICES (USDA) - ($/bu)       Corn:          1/4/95       12/21/95            ChangeK.C.:          3.7700        3.5850              +0.1850Chicago:       3.7000        3.4600              +0.2400Wheat:Kansas City:   5.5000        5.4750              +0.0240Sorghum:Kansas City:   3.5748        3.5168              +0.0580CO-PRODUCTS  Illinois Points: ($/Ton)                                        1/4/95   12/21/95   ChangeDist. Dried Grains:                     141.00    134.50     +6.50Corn Gluten Feed:                       119.00    117.00     +2.00Corn Gluten Meal:                       340.00    330.00    +10.001  Indicates blending price (750-800 gallons).  All other ethanolprices are transport (7,500-8,000 gallons).  Estimated  by InformationResources, Inc. Source for gasoline prices: Computer Petroleum Corp.,St. Paul, MN.NOTE: During the oxy-fuel season, large differences sometimesdeveloped between contract and spot prices.  The price estimated byIRI reflects the average spot traded in the terminal region duringlast week.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-32IA059-000325-B006-391http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey20.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234225 text/html 37921HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:40:26 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:57 GMTContent-length: 37734Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey20.html Sample Issue Copyright PETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MAJORS TURN TO JOINT VENTURES, ALLIANCES TO FINANCE OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT (412 words) BROCK'S MERGER INTO KEY MAY BE FIRST OF MANY AMONG SMALL INDEPENDENTS (614 words) NEW FINANCINGS NORAM ENERGY COMPLETES TWO BANK CREDIT FACILITIES TOTALING $550 MILLION (252 words) TENNECO WILL OFFER DEBT FOLLOWING ACQUISITION OF MOBIL PLASTICS (105 words) FOREST OIL REGISTERS TO OFFER $6 MILLION OF COMMON STOCK (83 words) AMOCO, UNOCAL EMPHASIZE OVERSEAS PROJECTS IN 1996 E&P SPENDING PLANS (847 words) TENNECO, QUESTAR CANCEL KERN RIVER DEAL AFTER UNFAVORABLE FTC RULING (286 words) PARKER DRILLING WILL BECOME FIRST U.S. LAND DRILLER IN VIETNAM (134 words) LYONDELL PETROCHEMICAL ADOPTS POISON PILL THAT PARTIALLY EXCLUDES ARCO (115 words) INPUT/OUTPUT INC.'S COMMON STOCK SPLITS TWO-FOR-ONE (236 words) WHO'S WORRIED ABOUT DEREGULATED ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPETITION? NOT ATMOS (764 words) LYONDELL-CITGO REFINING APPOINTS TENNECO GAS EXEC AS ITS NEW PRESIDENT (115 words) VALERO ELEVATES ITS NATURAL GAS AND NGL CHIEF TO COMPANY PRESIDENCY (131 words) PHILLIPS E&P EXEC WILL BECOME CHAIRMAN OF UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM (92 words) DEBT RATINGS DUFF AND PHELPS, FITCH TAKE POSITIVE VIEWS TOWARD ENRON FOR DIFFERENT REASONS (641 words) CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996MAJORS TURN TO JOINT VENTURES, ALLIANCES TO FINANCE OVERSEASDEVELOPMENT      Major oil companies are emphasizing joint ventures and alliancesas they move to develop overseas projects. Leading U.S. producers haveworked with foreign entities since oil first was discovered outsidethe United States. But the new agreements include financing by non-U.S. participants that effectively makes them fuller partners as theworld oil industry continues to evolve.   The most recent agreements include a $210 million investment byKorea Petroleum Development Corp. (PEDCO) in exchange for a 15% stakein Texaco Inc.'s Captain field in the British North Sea, and a multi-faceted alliance between Chevron Corp. and Petroleos de Venezuela S.A.subsidiary Maraven S.A. to develop the Boscan field in Venezuela andsupply heavy crude to Chevron in the United States.   Chevron's arrangement makes it the first publicly traded multi-national oil firm since 1975 to be responsible for such a high levelof Venezuelan production. It expects to spend $2 billion over a 20-to-30-year period in the heavy oil field. The San Francisco-based companywill be responsible for Boscan operations and production (which itplans to increase from 80,000 barrels per day to 150,000 b/d over thenext three years), while Maraven will handle marketing.   The alliance, which covers an initial 20-year term with a 10-yearextension option, will make Maraven Chevron's joint venture partner ina West Coast asphalt business, the Chevron Ven Asphalt Alliance."Boscan crude, with an API gravity of 10 degrees, is an excellentasphalt feedstock," notes Dave O'Reilly, president of subsidiaryChevron USA Products Co. Maraven also will supply crude to Chevron'srefinery at Pascagoula, Miss., and its asphalt plants at Perth Amboy,N.J.; Portland, Ore., and Richmond Beach, Wash.   Texaco, which previously owned 100% of the Captain field, willcontinue to be its operator. It expects 60,000 b/d of initialproduction, beginning in 1996's fourth quarter. Since a portion of theproject's expenditures will be lease-financed, PEDCO will assume a 15%obligation for the financing. The companies expect to complete theirtransaction during 1996's first quarter.   "In addition to acquiring an investment partner with this alliance,Texaco gains an important business relationship with PEDCO -- one thatwill provide access to market opportunities in the Far East and inother potential project developments," maintains York LeCorgne,managing director of exploration and production at affiliate TexacoU.K. Ltd. "The formation of strategic alliances is an importantelement in Texaco's plan for growth and allows the company to expandits core oil and gas activities worldwide."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996BROCK'S MERGER INTO KEY MAY BE FIRST OF MANY AMONG SMALL INDEPENDENTS   By Wall Street's standards, Key Production Co. Inc.'s approximately$13 million all-stock acquisition of Brock Exploration Corp. isrelatively minor. But it could signal a consolidation among smallerpublicly traded independent producers every bit as intense as thesales of domestic production properties and formation of jointventures by major oil companies, a leading oil analyst contends.   "It could take place across the board. People who had good years in1992 and 1993 following 10 years of the natural gas `bubble' arebeginning to say, `Never again!' after several warm winters," saysJoseph Culp of A.G. Edwards and Sons Inc. in St. Louis. "Just as themajors are amalgamating their domestic assets, the smaller producersare doing the same thing, only with stock because they don't have asmuch financial leverage." Key Production and Brock will structuretheir merger as a tax-free exchange, with Brock shareholders receivingone Key common share for every 1.45 Brock share. Key also intends toopen a regional office in New Orleans that will be staffed by severalemployees who previously worked for Brock.   Brock Exploration's sale has been expected since the New Orleansindependent producer issued its 1994 annual report with a front coverfeaturing Lawrence E. Brock, the chairman and founder, posing with hiswife, Lorena, who was corporate secretary, standing on a Gulf ofMexico beach alongside the words, "We toiled for 28 years! We left ourtracks! It's time to go! Adios, Amigos!" Brock is in his early 80s.His wife is about 10 years younger.   What took some observers by surprise was Denver-based KeyProduction's role of purchaser. "It obviously brings it onto the GulfCoast. But it's a big move for Key beyond its Rocky Mountain andCalifornia bases that I frankly didn't expect because I haven'tfollowed the company that closely," says one analyst who asked not tobe named.   Culp, who does track Key, says that the deal makes perfect sense."It apparently is a combination of someone who probably said, `Mybetter days in the oil business are behind me,' with someone else whosaid, `I'll let you ride a little bit on my coattails, but I also wantto diversify my assets,'" he tells Petroleum Finance Week. "Key hasbeen a financially sound company all along that's been able to acquireproperties and then aggressively exploit them. Apparently, it was ableto strike an all-stock deal based on its record of being able to dosomething positive with its assets. It's going to be able to pay forthis because its recent acquisitions in California are beginning tobear fruit."   Key Chairman Francis H. "Mick" Merelli and Brock say that theybelieve the combined companies will be more efficient and strongerthan either one was by itself. The merger has to be approved by bothcompanies' shareholders, who will vote on the proposal at specialmeetings in February. Key intends to file the necessary registrationcovering the new shares it intends to issue with the Securities andExchange Commission as soon as possible. The companies expect thecombination to be complete this spring.   Culp considers Key a relative sleeper among small independents andMerelli "a well-respected guy who walks in the circles of the largeindependents. He can get an audience and do deals that surprise somepeople. But he has always been very good at being conservative and nottaking big drilling risks. He also has made some good strategicacquisitions. The company tends to hide its light under a bushel,preferring to let its actions speak louder than its words. If peopleunderstood the kind of value it offered, it would have a much highershare price."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NORAM ENERGY COMPLETES TWO BANK CREDIT FACILITIES TOTALING $550MILLION   NorAm Energy Corp. completed two bank credit facilities totaling$550 million with a group of 22 banks. The facilities are a $150million term loan and an amended $400 million revolving credit, whichwill allow NorAm to release two pipeline subsidiaries that itpreviously provided the banks as security and provide the integratednatural gas company financing at a lower price and with reducedborrowing fees. CitiBank was agent for both facilities. Bank ofMontreal and NationsBank of Texas were lead managers of the revolvingcredit, the terms of which were extended to December 1998.   The $150 million term loan is a five-year facility, which willgenerate proceeds for NorAm to redeem $150 million of 8% notes dueJanuary 1997, which it called at par on Nov. 22, 1995, and redeemed onDec. 22. This facility, as well as the revolving credit, includes apricing grid where the facility and borrowing codes are reduced oncedebt rating services Standard and Poor's Corp. and Moody's InvestorsService upgrade specific assessments.   "These two facilities were well received by the banking community,with both being well over-subscribed," notes NorAm Chief FinancialOfficer Michael B. Bracy. "The improved terms in the revolving creditreflect NorAm Energy's continuing improvement in credit quality,reflected by debt reduction and improved results from operations. Therelease of the security previously provided by [pipeline subsidiariesNorAm Gas Transmission Co. and Mississippi River Transportation Corp.]to the banks is another step toward management's goal of returningNorAm Energy to an investment grade."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TENNECO WILL OFFER DEBT FOLLOWING ACQUISITION OF MOBIL PLASTICS   Tenneco Inc. will offer $600 million of long-term debt to refinanceshort-term debt incurred with the Houston diversified company'sacquisition of Mobil Corp.'s plastics division by subsidiary TennecoPackaging Co. The offering will include $300 million of 6.5% 10-yearnotes due Dec. 15, 2005, and $300 million of non-callable 7.25% 30-year debentures due Dec. 15, 2025. Morgan Stanley and Co. is leadmanager for the notes and debentures. C.S. First Boston Corp., LehmanBrothers Corp. and Salomon Brothers Inc. are co-managers for theoffering of 10-year notes, while Merrill Lynch and Co. and J.P. MorganSecurities Inc. are co-managers in the 30-year debentures offering.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FOREST OIL REGISTERS TO OFFER $6 MILLION OF COMMON STOCK   Forest Oil Corp. registered with the Securities and ExchangeCommission to offer 60 million shares of common stock, priced at 10cents per share par value. The Denver independent producer will usesubstantially all of the proceeds to finance its acquisition ofCanadian producer Atcor Resources Ltd.. Salomon Brothers Inc., MorganStanley and Co. Inc. and Chase Securities Inc. are lead underwritersof the syndicate that will handle the offering, which is scheduled tobegin sometime after shareholders' meetings planned for Jan. 9.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996AMOCO, UNOCAL EMPHASIZE OVERSEAS PROJECTS IN 1996 E&P SPENDING PLANS      -- Pennzoil's '96 Outlays Will Slightly Exceed 1995 Level --   Continuing a well-established trend among major U.S. oil companies,Amoco Corp. and Unocal Corp. each emphasized overseas exploration andproduction prospects as they announced capital spending plans for1996.   Chicago-based Amoco announced a capital spending and explorationbudget of $4.7 billion, a 12% increase from the $4.2 billion approvedfor 1995. The rise follows an increase last year of 31% from 1994's$3.2 billion, "a pattern of strong re-investment" that compares withaverage annual spending of $3.4 billion during the 1990-94 period.   "The continued growth in our spending is a clear indication of thesuccess of our 1994 restructuring," Amoco Chairman H. Laurance Fullersays. "That restructuring has allowed us to reduce costs, acceleratedecision-making and empower our business groups to more quickly bringforward projects that we believe will provide profitable growth. Infact, additional funds above the $4.7 billion level could be madeavailable to take advantage of other opportunities. For example, wecurrently are negotiating the purchase of Albemarle Corp.'s olefinsderivatives business, the cost of which is not included in thisbudget."   Of the $2.8 billion that Amoco has budgeted for 1996 explorationand production outlays (about 60% of the total), overseas projectsaccount for $1.4 billion, up from $1.15 billion of the nearly $2.68billion E&P total in 1995. Significant projects include constructionof a liquefied natural gas plant in Trinidad and a program of highlyfocused exploratory drilling. Startup of crude oil and natural gasproduction in China and gas production in China and continuation ofEgyptian and North Sea programs also are included. U.S. E&P spendingwill fall to an even $1 billion from nearly $1.08 billion in 1995,while outlays in Canada will decline by $50 million, year-to-year, to$400 million in 1996.   The company expects to spend $525 million for refining andmarketing improvements ($450 million in the United States and $75million overseas), principally to upgrade gasoline marketingoperations. In 1995, it spent $600 million downstream ($575 million inthe United States and $25 million overseas).   Amoco has budgeted $1.25 billion in chemical outlays for 1996, $875million of which is planned for the United States and $375 millionslated for overseas, where new facilities or expansions are under wayin Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Belgium. In 1995, its chemicalspending totaled $900 million, with $575 million spent in the UnitedStates and $325 million spent overseas.With Downstream Outlays Essentially Complete, Unocal Turns itsAttention Upstream...   Unocal budgeted $920 million, or 68% of its forecast $1.25 billioncapital spending total, for exploration and production, a 10.8%increase from the $830 million it spent on E&P in 1995. The 1996 totalis slightly below the estimated $1.4 billion that Unocal spent overalllast year. "We have significantly reduce the capital allocated to ourdownstream segment now that we've completed the refinery modificationsto manufacture California-mandated reformulated gasoline," UnocalChairman Roger C. Beach says. "This frees capital for new projects inSoutheast Asia, particularly Myanmar, Thailand and Indonesia, as wellas the oil project in Azerbaijan that will create significant valuefor the company."   Approximately $530 million of the $920 million budgeted for E&P isearmarked for overseas oil and gas activities, up 43% from anestimated $370 million in foreign upstream outlays during 1995.Domestic E&P spending is budgeted at $390 million this year, down from$460 million in 1995. Some 64% of the U.S. upstream budget is slatedfor development of key natural gas projects in Louisiana and the Gulfof Mexico.   Unocal earmarked another $240 million for worldwide exploration,$170 million, or 71%, of which will be spent for projects nearexisting operations that the company believes have a high potentialfor success.   Planned expenditures for Unocal's 76 Products Co. division, whichencompasses its West Coast refining and marketing holdings, are $230million for 1996, a 41% drop from 1995's $390 million. About $100million is designated for marketing, principally the addition of quickservice restaurants, convenience stores, car washes and other newprofit centers to existing retail sites. Another $90 million isplanned for Unocal's California refineries on projects to enhanceprofitability and meet environmental regulations.   Spending for geothermal and power projects are expected to nearlydouble to $110 million in 1996 and focus on projects in Indonesia.Diversified businesses (agricultural products, carbon and mineralsoperations, pipelines and real estate development) will receive $50million, a 29% drop from 1995's $70 million when Unocal started up anammonia and urea manufacturing plant in Finley, Wash.   Another integrated U.S. oil firm, Pennzoil Co., announced a 1996capital budget totaling $474 million, up from the approximately $472million that it expects to spend in 1995. The Houston company willspend $233 million on oil and gas exploration, $214 million on motoroil and refined products operations and $27 million on franchises andother operations. The company also announced that it has hedged asubstantial portion of its 1996 oil and gas production as part of arisk management program that it established in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TENNECO, QUESTAR CANCEL KERN RIVER DEAL AFTER UNFAVORABLE FTC RULING   Citing the potential concentration of market power for QuestarPipeline Co. in the Salt Lake City area, the Federal Trade Commissionvoted against allowing Tenneco Energy Co., a subsidiary of TennecoInc., to sell its 50% interest in the Kern River natural gastransmission system to the pipeline division of Salt Lake-basedQuestar Corp.. The companies agreed last week not to legally challengethe ruling and terminated the $225 million cash deal that wasannounced Sept. 8.   The transaction would have been the largest in Questar's history,dwarfing its $94.5 million purchase in April 1994 of exploration andproduction assets formerly held by Amax Oil and Gas Co. from UnionPacific Resources Co.. "We really wanted this deal. But the FTCapparently doesn't understand how the restructured natural gasindustry works and how difficult it has become for a pipeline todominate a market," a Questar spokesman tells Petroleum Finance Week."It has sent a signal that we intend to aggressively grow and willpursue other opportunities. But the growth won't be with Kern River."   The 904-mile pipeline runs from Opal, in southwestern Wyoming, toBakersfield, Calif. It delivers 700 million cubic feet of gas per dayto customers that include local distribution companies, direct end-users, electricity cogenerators and enhanced oil recovery systems.Tulsa-based Williams Companies Inc. owns the remaining half interestin Kern River.   "We are disappointed with the Federal Trade Commission's ruling anddon't agree with it," says Tenneco Energy Chairman Steve Chesebro'."However, during the bidding process, we received a high level ofinterest from several qualified bidders. We plan to reopen contactwith these parties in the next few days, with the goal of competingthe sale in a timely manner."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PARKER DRILLING WILL BECOME FIRST U.S. LAND DRILLER IN VIETNAM   A subsidiary of Parker Drilling Co. will become the first Westerndrilling contractor to work onshore in Vietnam, officials disclosed atthe Tulsa company's annual meeting. Parker Drilling International Ltd.will drill two wells south of Hanoi for Australian oil company AnzoilN.L. near the Gulf of Tonkin coast. Further contract terms were notdisclosed. "Parker has a long tradition in pioneering new drillingmarkets. Vietnam holds great potential and we plan to establish along-term presence in this energy-rich country," said Parker DrillingPresident Robert L. Parker Jr. In 1980, the company became the firstU.S. onshore drilling contractor to gain a contract in the People'sRepublic of China. It became the first Western drilling contractor towork in the former Soviet Union in 1991 and the first to enterKazakhstan in 1992.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996LYONDELL PETROCHEMICAL ADOPTS POISON PILL THAT PARTIALLY EXCLUDES ARCO   Lyondell Petrochemical Co. adopted a 10-year shareholder rightsplan, effective Dec. 20, 1995, that its directors say is designed toprotect shareholders in the event of a proposed change of control atthe Houston petrochemical producer and petroleum refiner. Like otherso-called "poison pills," the plan would be implemented withdistribution of common stock purchase rights as a dividend if a personor group acquires 15% or more of Lyondell's outstanding common shares,or if a tender or exchange offer is commenced that would have thateffect. The plan provides an exception for Atlantic Richfield Co.,which currently holds 49.9% of Lyondell's stock. But it could beactivated if Arco decided to accumulate additional shares.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996INPUT/OUTPUT INC.'S COMMON STOCK SPLITS TWO-FOR-ONE   Input/Output Inc., a Stafford, Texas, seismic instrumentsmanufacturer and marketer, split its common stock for shareholders ofrecord on Dec. 26, 1995. The company expects to distribute theadditional shares on Jan. 9, 1996.     HOW KEY PRODUCTION CO. INC. AND BROCK EXPLORATION CORP. COMPARE                    September 1995 Nine-Month Results      (In Thousands, Except Per Share Figures and Production Data)FINANCIAL            Key ProductionBrock ExplorationRevenues$                                                  14,208$7,299Net Income$                                                   2,193$171  Earnings Per Common Share$                                  0.23$0.04Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding                   9,6233,904PRODUCTION DATANatural Gas (Millions of Cubic Feet)                         3,8861,969  Average Price (Per Thousand Cubic Feet)$                    1.67$1.33Crude Oil (Barrels)                                      477,600232,966Average Price (Per Barrel)$                                 15.67$17.33Source:  Companies' nine-month results.                     ATMOS ENERGY CORP. AT A GLANCE                    For the Year Ending September 30       (In Thousands, Except for Per Share and Operations Figures)                         FINANCIAL19951994ChangeRevenues$                                        435,820$499,808+ 12.8%Gross Profit$                                    167,010$168,237-  0.7%Operating Income (1)$                            134,633$141,771-  5.0%Net Income$                                        18,873$14,679+ 28.6%  Per Share$                                           1.22$0.97+ 25.8%Average Common Shares Outstanding                   15,41615,195+  1.5%                    YEAR-END BALANCE SHEET HIGHLIGHTSNet Property, Plant and Equipment$               363,252$327,407+ 10.9%Total Assets$                                    445,783$416,678+  7.0%Shareholders' Equity$                            158,278$149,556+  5.8%Return on Average Shareholder's Equity                12.3%10.2%+ 20.6%                               OPERATIONSHeating Degree Days                                   3,5793,953-  9.5%  Percent of Normal                                       90%99%-  9.1%Total Metered Volumes (in million cubic feet)     138,909151,395-  8.2%Average Number of Meters in Service               656,259646,165+  1.6%Source:  Atmos Energy Corp. full-year financial results.N.A. = Not Applicable.(1) After operating and maintenance expense, depreciation andamortization, income taxes and other taxes.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996WHO'S WORRIED ABOUT DEREGULATED ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPETITION? NOTATMOS   The prevailing sentiment is that natural gas demand will sufferinitially because the electric industry, once it is decontrolled, willbe so much more competitive. "For a low-cost, efficient provider likeAtmos Energy Corp., competition brings more opportunity than concern,"declared Robert F. Stephens, president and chief operating officer ofthe Dallas-based, multi-state natural gas utility holding company.   "We're old hands at competition in the industrial market,particularly in our Kentucky service area, where 59% of our throughputis to large-volume customers," he said during a recent Atmospresentation to the New York Society of Security Analysts. "We're alsoaccustomed to competition at the retail level from other energysources, and compete for customers against some very low-cost electricutilities."   The company has stayed ahead of other natural gas distributors inmaking sure its operations are streamlined and efficient. Stephenssaid that it has 400 customers per employee, compared to an industryaverage of 380. Its operating expenses are among the industry'slowest. And its plant investment per meter is below the industry'saverage.   Atmos also reduced its already low average cost of gas per thousandcubic feet during fiscal 1995 (ending Sept. 30) to $2.46 because itsmarket-sensitive contracts let customers benefit from lower wellheadprices while keeping the company competitive. "By operatingefficiently to keep its gas price low, looking for ways to trim gascosts and providing a valuable resource to its customers to reducetheir total energy bills, Atmos has achieved a record of success incompetitive markets," said Stephens.   James F. Purser, Atmos' executive vice president and chieffinancial officer, pointed out that the company achieved a 12.3%return on average shareholder equity during fiscal 1995 from earningsthat rose 28.6% (despite weather in its utilities' Texas, Colorado,Kansas, Missouri, Louisiana and Kentucky service areas that was 10.3%warmer than normal) to $18.9 million, or $1.22 per share from fiscal1994's $14.7 million, or 97 cents per share.   Cash flow per share increased 40% in fiscal 1995 to $3.02 fromfiscal 1994's $2.46, with the help of rate increases totaling $2.8million during fiscal 1995. Atmos has established an ambitiousbuilding program for fiscal 1996, including a second Colorado gasprocessing plant and gathering system upgrades in Colorado and Kansas.But the company is holding to a debt-to-equity ratio target between40% and 60%, Purser indicated. "Regulators, obviously, have an impacton that, although it has not been a bone of contention in any of ourrate cases where we have explained our capital structure," he said.   Atmos' wide-spread gas utility operations make it distinctive amonglocal distribution companies -- and frequently mentioned as apurchaser when it comes to acquisitions. "Looking at acquisitions is aregular ongoing activity for our company," Stephens confirmed. "Wehave enough experience that, generally, if someone is consideringselling a piece of property, we're generally invited to look at it."   Most government regulators are hesitant to allow recovery from autility's acquisitions that are above book rate. Atmos supports thisidea, but adds that there are occasional instances where anacquisition above book value should be allowed because it would be inthe public interest. "The kind of regulation that's present and thekind of economy that a prospective addition operates in determines howmuch we're willing to pay," said Stephens. "But our interest is piquedif something different is offered."   Atmos does not set a limit on the size of a deal because that wouldlimit its opportunities. "There are lenders who will finance $200million if a deal offers very favorable returns," said Stephens. Heconceded that earnings dilution is almost inevitable followingacquisitions. But he also emphasized that Atmos' purchases have notdiluted payouts to shareholders permanently, "and we plan to makecertain that it won't happen."   He said that Atmos is aware that several primarily electricutilities are thinking of divesting their gas holdings. "We're findingthat an equal number, if not more, tend to view their service role asenergy products and are quite happy to have gas as a part of theircompanies. I do expect several to shift more of their operations intoseparate components, and that could provide more opportunity for acompany like ours," said Stephens.   Asked if Atmos might consider acquiring electric assets, hepromptly replied, "We certainly would. We realize the reality of thesituation with electric companies' balance sheets and their higherinvestment per customer. That would make an acquisition very difficultfinancially for any gas company. But we would be interested if wefound a deal that makes financial sense."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996LYONDELL-CITGO REFINING APPOINTS TENNECO GAS EXEC AS ITS NEW PRESIDENT   Charles M. Rampacek, previously president of Tenneco EnergyTransportation Co., was named president of Lyondell-Citgo RefiningCo., the limited liability company jointly owned by LyondellPetrochemical Co. of Houston and Tulsa-based Citgo Refining Co. Hesucceeds William E. Haynes, who retired Dec. 31. Rampacek began hiscareer with Exxon Corp. as a refining engineer and held subsequentpositions of increasing responsibility. In 1982, he joined Tenneco OilCo. as senior vice president of operations, where he was responsiblefor the refining, natural gas liquids and crude and product supplydepartments. When Tenneco Inc. sold its downstream oil holdings in1989, he moved over to Tenneco's natural gas transmission division asexecutive vice president of operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996VALERO ELEVATES ITS NATURAL GAS AND NGL CHIEF TO COMPANY PRESIDENCY   Valero Energy Corp. elected Joe Becraft, previously an executivevice president and president of its natural gas and gas liquidsdivisions, as the San Antonio petroleum refining and natural gastransmission company's corporate president and chief operatingofficer. Bill Greehey will continue as chairman and chief executiveofficer. Becraft rejoined Valero in May 1995 after six years aspresident and chief executive officer of Transok Inc., the natural gaspipelines and liquids subsidiary of Central and South West Corp., aDallas utility holding company. He previously was with Valero from1984 to 1989 as senior vice president of its natural gas division.Before that, he spent 10 years at Northwest Pipeline Corp., a divisionof Williams Companies Inc., where he was vice president of gas supply,marketing and natural gas liquids.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PHILLIPS E&P EXEC WILL BECOME CHAIRMAN OF UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM   John L. Whitmire, executive vice president for exploration andproduction at Phillips Petroleum Co., will succeed A. Clark Johnson aschairman and chief executive officer of Union Texas Petroleum HoldingsInc. effective Jan. 9. Whitmire, 55, has more than 30 years ofinternational oil and gas experience, all of it with Phillips, whichhe joined in 1964 following his graduation from New Mexico StateUniversity with a bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering. Whilewith Phillips, Whitmire worked in a number of operations, includingdrilling, reservoir engineering, production and liquefied natural gasprocessing.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996DUFF AND PHELPS, FITCH TAKE POSITIVE VIEWS TOWARD ENRON FOR DIFFERENTREASONS   Duff and Phelps Credit Rating Co. and Fitch Investors Service tooka positive view toward Enron Corp. in separate ratings actions. Fitchsees an improving credit trend for the Houston integrated natural gascompany because it is structuring its businesses to compete on avertically-integrated basis worldwide in all of its operatingsegments. DCR applauds Enron's sale of more than 25% of Enron Oil andGas Co. because Enron will use the approximately $690 million ofproceeds to reduce its short-term debt. But the ratings service alsocites uncertainty regarding the final outcome of the Dabhol powerproject in India and resolution of a dispute over the J-block naturalgas contract. The Enron Oil and Gas stock sale involved two separatetransactions: the direct sale of more than 31 million shares and thesale of 10 million 6.5% interchangeable notes, which DCR and Fitchrate Triple B-Plus, with mandatory common share conversion provisions.DCR also affirmed its Triple B-Plus ratings of Enron's senior notes, aTriple B assessment its senior subordinated debt and a Triple B-Minusrating of its convertible preferred.   Moody's Investors Service and Standard and Poor's Corp. affirmedtheir assessments of Talisman Energy Inc.'s senior debt followingTalisman's announcement that it will acquire Goal Petroleum Plc. (LSE)for C$315 million in a debt-financed transaction. S&P, which assessesTalisman's debt Triple B-Plus, sees a stable outlook for the companybecause the purchase is consistent with Talisman's operating strategyand will reduce its dependence on North American natural gas markets.But Moody's, which rates the issue "Baa1", changed its outlook for theCalgary independent oil and gas producer's credit to negative fromstable. Goal is a British independent producer active in the BritishNorth Sea, and its acquisition is consistent with Talisman's goal toincrease its reserves outside Canada. Proved reserves, which totalapproximately 45 million barrels of oil equivalent, are primarilycrude oil and include a 32% interest in the Blenheim field. Moody's isconcerned over the deal's size, the fact that it is being financedwith debt and the continuing impact of low gas prices.   Moody's affirmed its "b1" rating of Tejas Gas Corp.'s preferredstock while Standard and Poor's Corp. raised its assessment of theHouston gas gathering, transmission and marketing company's issue toDouble B-Minus. Moody's also assigned a "Ba1" rating to the $455million revolving credit facility of the Tejas Acadian Holding unit,citing the parent company's relatively stable results, sensitivity ofearnings to gas prices and resulting pressures on margins from intensecompetition in Gulf Coast markets. Both ratings services favorablyview opportunities from Coral Energy Resources, a gas marketing jointventure in which Tejas has a one-third interest and Shell Oil Co.holds a two-thirds stake. Coral, which began to operate in November,is expected to assure higher volumes for Tejas' transmission systemand to expand its marketing capabilities.   S&P placed a Single B-Minus rating on KCS Energy's $150 million ofsenior unsecured notes, with a Single B corporate rating and apositive credit outlook. S&P considers KCS "a small independentexploration and production company with an aggressive financialprofile and above-average finding costs." Its positive outlook assumesa favorable outcome for a gas contract dispute and moderate RockyMountain drilling successes leading to improvements in finding anddevelopment costs that are higher than average.   In its first assessment of Public Service Co. of North Carolina,Moody's assigned a preliminary "A2" rating to the Gastonia, N.C.,natural gas utility's $125 million shelf registration for seniorunsecured debt. The assessment reflects PSNC's strong and relativelystable earnings and cash flow, management's commitment to maintain aconservative balance sheet and the absence of non-gas-relatedsubsidiaries. The rating also considers the company's small sizerelative to other publicly traded gas utilities, its relatively highaverage dividend payout ratio and the short-term nature of itscommitted bank facilities.Back to Headline List WT03-B35-33IA059-000325-B006-428http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey74.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234333 text/html 29277HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:41:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:17 GMTContent-length: 29090Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey74.html Sample Issue Copyright PLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNet January 2, 1996 Vol. 74, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES IRAN STILL CONSIDERING ITS OPTIONS ON SHAKH DENIZ ROLE (369 words) UNOCAL SEEKS TO ADJUST THAI HOLDINGS Wants to shift some stake to its partners (395 words) AMOCO CANADA WILL SELL REMAINING CRESTAR STAKE (231 words) NEB BACKING TCPL DEAL (157 words) VIETNAM TO CUT ITS TARIFFS (108 words) MARCUS HOOK SHUTDOWN DELAYED, AS THREE-WAY LABOR TALKS CONTINUING (307 words) ELECTRICITY, TAXES TO BE STATES' '96 FOCUS Power restructuring will be felt in the field (1499 words) PETRODOLLARS (837 words) PRINCIPAL DATA OF API'S WEEKLY STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF U.S. OPERATIONS (201 words) WHAT CRUDE AND NATURAL GAS MARKETS ARE DOING... (32 words) CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoIRAN STILL CONSIDERING ITS OPTIONS ON SHAKH DENIZ ROLE(London)Iran is still considering participating in Azerbaijan's Shakh Deniz oil andgas project in the Caspian Sea, a senior Iranian oil official said lastweek.Mehdi Hosseini, the National Iranian Oil Co's exploration director, said ina telephone interview from Tehran that Iran was still consideringAzerbaijan's invitation to join the project through an equity transfer fromstate oil company Socar.   Hosseini said the National Iranian Oil Co was "still looking at theviability" of the project and that further exchanges of information withSocar would be necessary. He said Socar had not imposed a deadline forIran's response to the long-standing invitation.   Azerbaijan is anxious to compensate Iran for having been rejected as amember of the consortium developing the offshore Azeri, Chirag and Guneshlifields. Cash-strapped Socar plans to sell off part of its 40% stake inShakh Deniz, assigned in a preliminary agreement last summer with BP,Statoil and Turkish TPAO which have a collective 60% equity. Negotiationson a production- sharing agreement got underway late this year and willresume in January 1996.   Current thinking among the companies involved in Shakh Deniz is thatIran could join the project, which currently has no US partners. But whileNIOC appears to be interested in Shakh Deniz, Iran's foreign ministry isunwilling to endorse Iranian participation in an Azerbaijani offshoreproject while the legal status of the Caspian remains unresolved, accordingto analysts.   Shakh Deniz's oil reserves are pegged at 1.2-1.4-bil bbl.   Meanwhile, Hosseini said, French oil major Total will shortly beginshooting seismic in the Sirri area offshore Iran. Hosseini said Totalalready has begun a seabed survey using a vessel leased from NIOC. "Totalhas started a seabed survey with this ship and will soon start seismic," hesaid. "Drilling will be the next step," he added.   Total in July signed a $600-mil contract to develop Iran's Sirri A and Efields after Conoco of the US, which originally was awarded the contract,was ordered by the US government to pull out of the deal.   Total will be paid for its work with production from the project.Hosseini said Total was working "in accordance with the time schedule."Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUNOCAL SEEKS TO ADJUST THAI HOLDINGSWants to shift some stake to its partnersBy:Maya Webber(Bangkok)Unocal Thailand has asked its partners in several Gulf of Thailand contractareas to increase their equity holdings, in a move to streamline gas pricenegotiations by standardizing equity distribution in Unocal gas salescontract areas I, II and III.   Mitsui Oil Exploration Co currently controls 20% in Unocal I, 30% inUnocal II, and 23.75% in Unocal III. If agreed to, the arrangement wouldgive Petroleum Authority of Thailand Exploration & Production Co afirst-time interest in Unocal I and II. PTTEP currently has a 5% interestin Unocal II, but no interest in the other two contract areas.   A Unocal spokesman in Thailand. said the negotiations do not reflect apullback by Unocal, which would remain the majority owner and operator ofthe contract areas.   "We were probing for a way to facilitate decision-making and costallocation among the three partners," said Konthi Kulachol, UnocalThailand's public relations manager, arguing that cost allocations can betime-consuming and tedious.   An increased interest by PTTEP could be attractive to Unocal in thefuture. PTT, the monopoly operator of Thailand's natural gas pipelines,retains a 70% interest in PTTEP.   It makes sense to have "a close working relationship" with PTTEP, theUnocal spokesman said.   PTTEP officials said they have made no decisions about whether to investin Unocal I and II.   Tevin Vongvanich, PTTEP vice-president for corporate planning and newventures, said that seeking to harmonize the equity holdings to reduce costallocation headaches is a good concept.   Because the production potential of the areas is well proven, theinvestment would involve little risk, he said. But that also means thereis limited added potential, he said. PTT's Natural Gas Business presidentPrajya Phinyawat added that price would be a big factor in the decision totake increased equity shares.   Some of the fields are "quite old" and might start to decline, he said.   Unocal Thailand's production from its offshore fields averaged 705,000Mcf/d for the first nine months of 1995. Production is expected rise to900,000-950,000 Mcf/d when a second pipeline to Rayong comes into servicenext year. The company's investment in natural gas development in the gulfrepresents the company's largest commitment for a single project. Inaddition to Unocal I,II, and III, the company is also developing blockB12/27, the Pailin field.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoAMOCO CANADA WILL SELL REMAINING CRESTAR STAKE(Calgary)Amoco Canada Petroleum Co. Ltd said it intends to sell its remaining 15%stake in Crestar Energy Inc to fulfill a pledge to the federal governmentfollowing its C$5.2-bil takeover of Dome Petroleum Ltd in 1988.   Calgary-based Amoco Canada said it has appointed RBC Dominion SecuritiesInc as its agent to oversee block trades in Crestar.   The planned transaction is valued at about C$134-mil ($98.4-mil) basedon Crestar's closing price Dec 28 of C$19.12 ($14.04) a share on theToronto Stock Exchange.   Amoco Canada had promised to make certain assets available to Canadianinvestors in the wake of its Dome acquisition. In 1993, the federalgovernment's screening agency for foreign investment allowed Amoco Canadato spin off those assets to create Crestar.   No date has been set to begin selling the 7-mil Crestar shares owned byAmoco Canada, but the sale could start as early as Jan 4 under TSEpolicies.   Industry analysts have speculated that any proceeds from the Crestarsale could be used by Amoco Canada to launch a significant takeover in1996. Three months ago, Calgary-based Anderson Exploration Ltd's shareswap valued at C$800-mil beat out Amoco Canada's C$757-mil cash bid forHome Oil Co Ltd   Crestar is considered a promising player in Canada's oil patch. Itacquired Ranchmen's Resources Ltd. in a C$177.5-mil (C$130.4- mil) hostiletakeover effective Oct. 1.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoNEB BACKING TCPL DEAL(Calgary)The National Energy Board has endorsed a historic four-year deal ondomestic and export natural gas transportation tolls negotiated byTransCanada PipeLines Ltd. and Canada's natural gas industry.   The new tolls are designed to save millions of dollars a year intransportation costs (ON 12/22).   The incentive regulation agreement between the gas line operator andshippers has been lauded as a watershed for new ways to cut the massivecosts of delivering most of Canada's gas to domestic and US markets.   Normally, tolls are decided by the NEB, rather than between suppliersand pipeline operators, said NEB secretary Scott Richardson. Finalendorsement of interim tolls that reflect the pipeline's terms of servicewill be considered at a January hearing, Richardson said.   Under the agreement--the first in North America signed with a pipelineoperator--when TransCanada saves C$1 in costs, the benefit will be split50-50 between the Calgary-based pipeline and shippers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoVIETNAM TO CUT ITS TARIFFS(Hanoi)The country will cut the import tariff for petrol from 70% to 55% beginningJan 1, following a request from the the Association of Southeast AsianNations that all tariffs be brought under 60%, an official at the taxdepartment at the Ministry of Trade said. Vietnam imports all its products.Tariffs on diesel will remain at 25% and for jet fuel at 10%, the officialsaid. The country is cutting tariffs on 857 goods or commodities from thesix members of ASEAN, the first step toward membership in the ASEAN FreeTrade Area, which Vietnam will join fully in 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoMARCUS HOOK SHUTDOWN DELAYED, AS THREE-WAY LABOR TALKS CONTINUING(New York)BP has pushed back into January the possible shutdown of the Marcus Hook,Pennsylvania refinery, allowing more time for the union there to reach anew contract with Tosco, which is buying BP's US Northeast refining andmarketing assets.   BP had said it would begin to suspend operations at the 190,000 b/dMarcus Hook plant at the start of January if it was unable to close thedeal with Tosco by the end of 1995. And BP had wanted Tosco to have a newcontract in place with the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers union at therefinery before closing its deal with Tosco.   BP now has delayed the potential shutdown until the middle of January, acompany spokesman said Dec 29. However, a union official said BP hasindicated in talks with OCAW that it would push back the suspension untilthe end of the month. The BP spokeswoman had not comment on the unionofficial's statement. BP's current contract with the OCAW expires Jan 31.   BP has extended the shutdown deadline to allow more time for thecompany, as well as Tosco, to negotiate with the OCAW, the BP spokeswomansaid. BP still must settle severance issues with the union, while Toscomust negotiate a new contract. The spokeswoman said severe winter weatherin the Philadelphia area has delayed negotiations. She also said BP isencouraged by the meetings that began last week between Tosco and the OCAW.A bargaining session was held Dec 29 between OCAW and Tosco, which wants tocut refinery staff by 25% and runs by 20%. The BP spokeswoman said BPstill wants to close the Tosco sale as soon as possible. Should the companysuspend operations in January, it's likely that the sale to Tosco wouldclose in February, she said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoELECTRICITY, TAXES TO BE STATES' '96 FOCUSPower restructuring will be felt in the fieldBy:William Mullins(Houston)The continuing shift in electricity markets in the US looms as a majorissue that oil industry officials will be watching at the state level in1996, according to a survey of oil and gas officials in several keystates.   An overview of some of the leading state issues facing the industry thisyear indicates that on the state level, the oil industry as electricityconsumer, rather than as provider of a generating fuel, has risen to thetop of the list of concerns in several states.   Ironically, the second-biggest state in terms of oil production--Texas--will not have a legislative session this year, so no issues will bedecided there.   What follows is a state-by-state survey of some of the leading issuesthat will be taken up by legislatures this year.CALIFORNIA: The ongoing restructuring of electricity markets in the stateis an important issue to oil producers because they have a constant baseload demand and use a lot of electricity, said California IndependentPetroleum Assn president Dan Kramer.   "So, as a group we'll be fighting potentially having to pay excessivestranded costs, basically paying for utilities' bad investments in nuclearpower and some other more expensive forms of power that would be embeddedin our electricity rates," Kramer said. "We'll be fighting that issue alongwith trying to lower electricity rates for our producers in general."   Electricity bills in California, depending on where a company islocated, are 25% to 50% higher than in any other state, he said.   Oil companies have formed a group called Oil Producers Electric Project,and are working on a legislative solution to the problem.   As for other issues in the nation's largest state, California doesn'thave a severance tax on oil production, and some of the more liberallegislators probably will introduce a severance tax bill on the groundsthat other large producing states have such a tax, Kramer said. But oilproducers will be opposing it, Kramer said, basing its opposition in parton the argument that California already has the highest property taxes onoil production of any state that imposes such levies.   The industry also will try again to reform the California endangeredspecies act, which is more stringent than the federal law, he said. A billalmost was passed at the end of the last session but it failed because ofdisagreements on a few issues, Kramer said.   Still another industry goal is to repeal a portion of state fish andgame laws that allow the California Dept of Fish & Game, in conjunctionwith local district attorneys, city attorneys and environmental groups, tolevy bounty hunter fines on producers with accidental spills, he said.These are small accidental spills that can be less than one barrel, butcarry fines of up to $25,000 per day. Kramer said they have been levied ona producer, even if it cleans up the spill.   "We'll also attempt to coordinate oil spill response," he said. "InCalifornia, when you have an oil spill, depending on where you're at, youcan have up to 15 or 16 different agencies involved in the spill andthey're all trying to assert their jurisdictional authority."LOUISIANA: The legislature will be holding a session on fiscal mattersonly, but the Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil & Gas Assn thinks one issue thatcould come up is the idea of an oil and gas processing tax designed toraise revenue on the foreign oil imported into Louisiana, as well as theoffshore oil and gas coming into the state. Such a proposal has beendefeated previously and probably would be again, an association spokesmannoted.OKLAHOMA: Oklahoma oil producers, like those in California, are hoping tosee the legislature enact some kind of electricity rate reform, said MickeyThompson, executive vice president of the Oklahoma Independent PetroleumAssn.   Oklahoma producers also will be fighting against two proposals thatwould modify forced pooling arrangements, and allow higher damages to beassessed in pollution cases, Thompson said.   The forced pooling issue arises from a law allowing the state to step inwhere there are multiple land owners on a tract, and an operator can'treach negotiated settlements with all of them. The state can "force pool"the properties in such circumstances.   Royalty owners and producers are on opposite sides, with royalty ownersmaintaining some operators are abusing the process by using it as a quickway of putting together a tract without bothering to negotiate, accordingto Jim Stafford, executive director of the National Assn of Royalty Owners."The poolings in Oklahoma in the last few years have gotten ridiculous interms of being vastly unfair in regards to fair market value, on leasebonuses particularly," he said.   Another factor is that royalty owners are concerned about a produceracquiring multiple zones on a lease tract, but not drilling, testing andproducing all of them, Thompson said. This can occur when the producercan't or doesn't want to produce from more than one zone and may laterproduce the others, but some royalty owners would like to see a time framewithin which a producer had to produce the zones or lose his rights.   Producers and royalty owners are having difficulty coming to anagreement over the issue, Thompson said. So the situation may develop as itdid last year, when the royalty owners found a sponsor for their bill, butcouldn't prevail in voting on the measure.   Another proposal supported by royalty owners and farm and ranchorganizations would change the Oklahoma law on how much damages courts canaward in pollution cases, Thompson said. The proposal follows a stateSupreme Court decision in 1994 that held a land owner could recover no morethan the total value of the land in a pollution case, although the OklahomaCorporation Commission still would be able to compel an operator to cleanup the pollution.   The initial bill to negate the effect of the Supreme Court rulingfailed, but the oil industry expects a similar bill will be introduced innext year's session, he said.   Another issue which probably can't be handled in one session but whichthe industry wants to pursue is the creation of a state oil and gasdepartment that would take over regulation from the Oklahoma CorporationCommission, Thompson said.KANSAS: A major tax shift bill that passed the House last year is in theSenate tax committee now, said Donald Schnacke, executive vice president ofthe Kansas Independent Oil & Gas Assn. The bill would shift about $600-milin annual school levies from overall property taxes to the sales andindividual income tax base.   "We pay a significant property tax on oil leases, about $100-mil ayear," Schnacke said. "This bill, if it passed, would reduce our ad valoremtax by about 50%. That would be a very significant improvement on our taxsituation. The governor is resisting this bill, but it's a very popularbill and he may wind up having to veto it."   There also is likely to be action on the issue of abandoned wells,Schnacke said. The Kansas Corporation Commission has estimated there may beas many as 91,000 such wells throughout the state, but they date from 1880and regulation only started in 1935. "We're probably talking about usingdedicated severance tax money or something like that to help on the expenseof this well plugging," Schnake said.COLORADO: The state's severance tax is likely to come up in the 1996session of the Colorado legislature, according to the Rocky Mountain Oil &Gas Assn. At present, 50% of the tax is allocated for local governments touse in addressing impacts from mineral development, and the other 50% goesinto a state trust account.   But an amendment is expected to be offered that would allow half thestate trust funds to be used for state agency projects directly related tomineral development.   Another proposal that the Colorado legislature is expected to consideris a bill on retail wheeling, which would allow retail customers to freelychoose among different suppliers of electricity. The oil industry'sinterest is both as a user of electricity and as a supplier of natural gasto fire power plants.NEW MEXICO: In a budget-only session, there might be a revival of aproposal to impose a pipeline tax that would raise $10- or $15-mil for thestate, said D. Van De Graaff, executive vice president of the New MexicoOil & Gas Assn. The proposal previously passed the Senate, but was defeatedin the lower chamber.OTHER STATES: The Idaho legislature will consider raising the state's motorfuels tax 2-5 cts/gal to pay for road maintenance and construction, whileSouth Dakota will be looking at an increase of 3cts/gal dedicated to countyroads and bridges.   Utah's legislature also is being urged by government agencies toincrease the state motor fuel tax to fund road work.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPETRODOLLARSBy:Peter ZipfWho would have thought that old war horses like Exxon, Mobil, Texaco andthe like could still put on such a strong finishing kick? The group of thelargest publicly traded oil majors ended 1995 with an impressiveperformance in equity markets. In the last two months of 1995, a group of14 large oil companies posted a stock- price gain of 11%, bettering the 5%increase in the Standard & Poor's 500. Most of the majors clearly neededthis late run to the wire, since for much of the year they badly lagged thestellar 34% gain posted by the S&P 500 for the full year. Even with thelate jump, the 14-member oil group's full-year gain was 24%.   The oil group did have its stars for the full year, with Exxon (up 37%),Mobil (+35%) and the smaller Kerr-McGee (+35%) managing to beat by a nosethe gain of the S&P 500. Also in this top-tier group, though trailing thebroader market by a length, were Royal Dutch/Shell (+30%), Texaco (+30%)and BP (+29%). Further back in the pack in 1995 were Shell Transport &Trading (+24%), Amoco (+22%), Chevron (+18%), Amerada Hess (+18%) andMarathon (+17%). Trailing badly were Arco (+9%), Unocal (+7%) and Phillips(+4%).   To some industry analysts, the story of 1995 was this divergence in thestock-price performance of the largest oil companies. Their conclusion: itpaid to be big and well-balanced internationally. As an example, DeanWitter's Eugene Nowak cites Mobil, whose diversity allowed it to usestronger margins in Singapore to offset weak refining margins for parts ofthe year in the US and Europe. The more US-concentrated majors, such asArco, Unocal and Phillips, also suffered because of their higher leverageto domestic natural gas prices, which had a disappointing year.   The largest companies also attracted more market attention, SchroderWertheim's Michael Mayer says, because they tend to raise their dividendsyear after year, providing a haven for yield-starved investors.   The diversity of the biggest oil companies also provided some insulationas oil prices languished for much of the year, a development that set backthe domestic majors.   If geographic and sector balance was a key to equity performance in1995, why was Kerr-McGee among the leaders? Nowak says the company's exitfrom the US downstream in 1995 exceeded expectations, with Kerr-McGeeplanning to use the $400-mil in proceeds to reduce debt and repurchasestock. Nowak calls Kerr- McGee his favorite gas play, and sees the stockgaining more than 10% in the next 12 months.   The oil group's late kick allowed it to make up some ground on theoverall market. Mayer says many major portfolios were underweighted on oilstocks during much of 1995, in large part due to OPEC-induced uncertaintyon the direction of oil prices. Once OPEC's mid-November meeting removedmuch of the haze--the organization decided to roll over its output ceilingfor another six months--the fund managers began to pour money into the bigoils. The money that rotated into oil was drawn from previously hot stockgroups such as technology and the financials.   Adding to the impact of firmer oil prices was the surge in US naturalgas prices, which Mayer calls "the icing on the cake."Bear Stearns Fred Leuffer said the end-year trading rally proves thatinvestors' "thirst for yield is insatiable," with fund money being drawn bythe relatively strong dividends paid by many large oil companies.   How will the race in 1996 infold? Many observers do not expect it to beas enticing as this year's run. "The easy money has been made," says Nowak.The international majors traditionally have been good values, he says, butthat margin has been narrowed by this year's late run.   Leuffer is advising investors to trim positions in the major oils nowthat a rally has taken place. He says his neutral outlook for the group for1996 would likely slide to "sell" if not for the yield protection the oilcompanies provide.   Leuffer believes the majors' earnings momentum has peaked. After rising35% in 1995, the analyst expects operating earnings for the group toincrease only 6% in 1996. Some of this is tied to the fact thatrestructurings, and their associated cost cuts, having largely run theircourse at most companies.   Many analysts continue to like Mobil despite its 35% gain in 1995. Mayerranks the company as a premier E&P player, saying Mobil invests abouttwo-thirds of its cash flow on the upstream-- as opposed to the industrynorm of some 85%--yet more than replaces output each year. Mobil is alsoseen deriving further savings from its broad restructuring, and is among agroup of 5-7 majors likely to boost dividends in 1996. This yieldprotection is shaping up as a key factor in the group's projectedperformance for 1996. For an investor in a defensive posture, "the oils area decent place to have holdings," Leuffer says.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPRINCIPAL DATA OF API'S WEEKLY STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF U.S. OPERATIONSPRINCIPAL DATA OF API'S WEEKLY STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF U.S. OPERATIONSProcessing      Dist 1  Dist 2  Dist 3  Dist 4  Dist 5  Ttl U.S.12/22/95Refin Input     1,594   3,252   7,246   458     2,587   15,137Mogas Total     913     1,888   3,506   264     1,064   7,635Jet Kero        78      196     815     19      392     1,500Distillate      451     820     1,584   112     447     3,414Residual        178     89      343     12      275     89712/15/95Refin Input     1,556   3,231   7,485   488     2,626   15,386Mogas Total     809     1,867   3,630   279     1,229   7,814Jet Kero        79      184     781     26      449     1,519Distillate      446     809     1,562   123     413     3,353Residual        138     74      363     9       268     852Stocks12/22/95Crude           14,283  63,404  145,130 10,727  81,203  314,747Mogas Total     51,158  50,387  61,094  6,741   27,017  196,397Jet Kero        11,016  6,429   14,930  595     6,896   39,866Distillate      53,509  30,139  29,104  2,968   12,294  128,014Residual        15,247  2,695   12,439  568     6,485   37,434Unfin Oils      11,158  12,947  41,805  2,066   21,432  89,40812/15/95Crude           15,555  64,068  147,799 10,433  81,252  319,107Mogas Total     52,975  50,054  60,436  6,877   27,105  197,447Jet Kero        11,511  6,663   14,074  592     7,516   40,356Distillate      56,549  30,235  29,692  3,031   11,710  131,217Residual        16,326  2,348   12,595  564     6,082   37,915Unfin Oils      11,388  12,833  44,049  1,935   21,542  91,747Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWHAT CRUDE AND NATURAL GAS MARKETS ARE DOING...Illustration(s):Illustration: Graph: NYMEX CRUDE SETTLE, FIRST MONTHDecember 29 $19.55; Up $0.19Illustration: Graph: NYMEX NATURAL GAS, FIRST MONTHDecember 29 $2.619; Up $0.110Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B35-34IA059-000325-B007-42http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey75.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234438 text/html 81082HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:42:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:18 GMTContent-length: 80895Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey75.html Sample Issue Copyright PLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNet January 2, 1996 Vol. 74, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WEATHER CUTS FORTIES CRUDE OUTPUT TO 550-600,000B/D (258 words) LIBYA RAISES JANUARY CRUDE PRICES BY 5-20 CTS/BBL (136 words) MORE TIME ALLOWED FOR BP REFINERY SALE TO TOSCO (319 words) ACTIVE VLCC TANKER MARKETS (165 words) JAPAN TO HIKE CRUDE OIL RESERVE TO 305-MIL BBL IN FISCAL YEAR 1996 (125 words) MARKET BY MARKET ASIA: 1995 GOES OUT QUIETLY (537 words) EUROPE: QUIET CLOSE (422 words) MTBE: QUIET AND STABLE (69 words) GAS LIQUIDS: PROPANE STILL CLIMBING (69 words) ATLANTIC COAST: READY FOR HOLIDAYS (391 words) US GULF COAST: A MODEST YEAR-END UPTURN (248 words) CHICAGO: PRICE DIFFERENTIALS UNCHANGED (64 words) GROUP THREE: DEMAND CONTINUES (69 words) FUTURES: THIN AND VOLATILE (352 words) US WEST COAST: PRICES SLIP INTO '96 (289 words) US CRUDE: TALK OF SUPPLY PROBLEMS (362 words) INTERNATIONAL CRUDE: UNEVENTFUL (356 words) FEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28 FEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28 (681 words) SPOT PRICE ASSESSMENTS ARAB GULF, FOB (22 words) Caribbean Cargoes, FOB $/MT c/Gal (29 words) Singapore/Japan Cargoes C&F Japan Singapore (128 words) GROUP THREE (27 words) New York/Boston Cargo Barge (161 words) U.S. Gulf Coast Waterborne Pipeline (128 words) European Bulk Cargoes Cargoes CIF Cargoes (174 words) Gas Liquids Mont Belvieu Conway (37 words) WEST COAST PIPELINE (94 words) WEST COAST WATERBORNE (37 words) CHICAGO PIPELINE (34 words) LATIN AMERICA, FOB (24 words) SOUTH CHINA, C&F (24 words) LATIN AMERICA CRUDE $/BBL (25 words) SPOT CRUDE PRICE ASSESSMENTS INTERNATIONAL (62 words) U.S. (47 words) Canada CD$/CM US$/BBL (24 words) Pacific Rim $/Bbl Spread vs ICP (76 words) CONTRACT CARGO PRICES CONTRACT CARGO PRICES (103 words) ATLANTIC & GULF COAST RESID ATLANTIC & GULF COAST RESID (26 words) U.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT U.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT (396 words) U.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT, REFORMULATED GASOLINE (28 words) PLATT'S INDEX PLATT'S INDEX (55 words) FIVE-DAY ROLLING AVERAGES FIVE-DAY ROLLING AVERAGES (406 words) CLOSING COMMODITY LEVELS CLOSING COMMODITY LEVELS (142 words) SPOT TANKER RATES SPOT TANKER RATES (133 words) JET FUEL PRICES JET FUEL PRICES (45 words) API WEEKLY SUMMARY API WEEKLY SUMMARY (370 words) CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWEATHER CUTS FORTIES CRUDE OUTPUT TO 550-600,000B/D(London)Production of UK Forties Blend crude plummeted to 550-600,000 b/d December29 as freezing weather conditions caused problems at onshore processingfacilities in Scotland, a source with an equity producer said.   The source said output was likely to remain at that level for the nextcouple of days. Operator BP admitted that production from the fields whichmake up the Forties system had now fallen below 800,000 b/d because of theproblems at onshore processing facilities at Kinneil.   "It's down, it's quite low. We're working on it right now," a BPspokesman said. "It was 800,000 b/d a while ago (today) and has gone below800,000 b/d," he said.   The spokesman was unable to predict when Forties output would return tonormal levels of 1-1.2-mil b/d. "We don't know with the weather being as itis," he said.   The equity producer source said Forties production was around 1-mil b/din early December and fell to 800,000 b/d "a few days ago" before fallingfurther December 29.   Trading sources close to operator BP said a total of 2-mil bbl or theequivalent of four Forties cargoes had so far been cancelled from theJanuary loading schedule. "A string of old problems" is expected to pushthe current loading schedule back for at least one to two days, one sourcesaid.   Recent Forties spot trades achieved directionally stronger pricedifferentials to dated Brent. Mid-January transactions of the grade werereported late December 28 at around dated Brent plus 20-23 cts or around$19.01-19.04/bbl.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoLIBYA RAISES JANUARY CRUDE PRICES BY 5-20 CTS/BBLBy:Gerald Bueshel, London.(London)   Libya has raised its official selling price for crude liftings inJanuary by 5-20 cts/bbl, equity sources said Friday.   The price for Es Sider, the main Libyan export grade, was set at datedBrent plus 15 cts/bbl, compared to dated Brent minus 5 cts/bbl inDecember.   January OSPs for other grades were announced as follows: Sirtica atdated Brent plus 18 cts/bbl (up 18 cts from December); Brega and Zueitinaat dated Brent plus 30 cts (up 5 cts); Sarir at dated Brent minus 55 cts(up 5 cts); Amna at dated Brent minus 60 cts (up 5 cts); Bu Attifel atdated Brent minus 40 cts (up 5 cts); and Bouri at Iranian Heavy FOB SidiKerir minus 25 cts/bbl (up 5 cts).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoMORE TIME ALLOWED FOR BP REFINERY SALE TO TOSCO(New York)   BP has pushed back into January the possible shutdown of the MarcusHook, Pennsylvania refinery, allowing more time for the union there toreach a new contract with Tosco, which is buying BP's US Northeast refiningand marketing assets.   BP had said it would begin to suspend operations at the 190,000 b/dMarcus Hook plant at the start of January if it was unable to close thedeal with Tosco by the end of 1995. And BP had wanted Tosco to have a newcontract in place with the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers union at therefinery before closing its deal with Tosco.   BP now has delayed the potential shutdown until the middle of January, acompany spokesman said December 29. However, a union official said BP hasindicated in talks with OCAW that it would push back the suspension untilthe end of the month. The BP spokeswoman had no comment on the unionofficial's statement.   BP's current contract with the OCAW expires January 31.   BP has extended the shutdown deadline to allow more time for thecompany, as well as Tosco, to negotiate with the OCAW, the BP spokeswomansaid. BP still must settle severance issues with the union, while Toscomust negotiate a new contract.   The spokeswoman said severe winter weather in the Philadelphia area hasdelayed its negotiations with the union. She also said BP is encouraged bythe meetings that began last week between Tosco and the OCAW. A bargainingsession between the two was held December 29. Tosco had indicated a desireto cut refinery staff by 25% and reduce refinery runs by 20%.   The BP spokeswoman said the company still wants to close the Tosco saleas soon as possible. Should the company suspend operations at Marcus Hookin January, it's likely that the sale to Tosco would close in February, shesaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoACTIVE VLCC TANKER MARKETS(London)   South Korean charterers were busy in the VLCC market, with a rash offixtures reported Arab Gulf-South Korea, mainly around Worldscale 57-59 for250-260,000mt lots.   Despite the Christmas holiday, European charterers were relativelyactive, with Mediterranean refiners in particular keen to fix stems out ofthe Egyptian port of Sidi Kerir through the first half of the month.Brokers suggested that owners were for now willing to settle for aroundWorldscale 90 on Suezmax ships, but that charterers feared an increase inrates once the rest of the market returned to work after the New Yearholiday.   West African business was similarly fairly brisk, with rates creepingslightly higher, even after factoring in the increase in flat rates for1996. Late in the week, several fixtures were seen for WestAfrica-UKContinent and the Med, while a steady stream of vessels continuedto head West Africa-US Gulf Coast and US Atlantic Coast at rates aroundWorldscale 89-90 for 130,000mt.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoJAPAN TO HIKE CRUDE OIL RESERVE TO 305-MIL BBL IN FISCAL YEAR 1996(Tokyo)   Japan will raise its national strategic crude stockpile by 1.2- billiter (7.5-mil bbl) to 48.71-bil liter (304.6-mil bbl) in the next fiscalyear starting April, a source at Agency of Natural Resources and Energysaid Wednesday.   Ministry of Finance halved the agency's original request for 2.5-billiter (15.6-mil bbl) in order to allocate financial resources forconstruction of a national strategic LPG stockpile, industry sources said.   The country's first government-operated LPG reserve complex, with acapacity of 250,000mt, will be built in Nanao in central Japan's Ishikawaprefecture next year.   The national strategic crude stockpile is expected to reach thegovernment's self-imposed goal of 50-bil liters (312.7-mil bbl) in thefiscal year 1997-1998, the agency source added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoASIA: 1995 GOES OUT QUIETLY   Gasoline cargo prices in Singapore were steady in very quiet trade aheadof the New Year holiday. The 97 RON unleaded market was supported at $21.50while 95 RON was flat at $20.95. In the 92 RON market, prices were flat at$19.75-19.85. Swaps were also unchanged for January and February at$20.70-21.20.   The open-spec naphtha market was softer due to the downturn on crudeprices and news that the CDU at the SRC refinery would re-starting onSunday. Trade was thin as the market slowed for the holiday break. Secondhalf February was bid at $175.00 while first half March quoted at$174.00-175.00. The front half to back half February spread was inbackwardation at $1.75. Singapore paper was weaker with January talked at$17.50-17.60, February at $17.40-17.50.   The kerosene market dropped slightly with some selling interest nowapparent in Singapore. A major offered 100,000 bbl, FOB Singapore, forloading January 23-28 at $32.25. A trader bought the parcel at even withthe market mean, pricing on current day quotes. Another major and a traderbid for 200,000-250,000 bbl parcels for loading January 14-24 at $32.50.Reports surfaced that a major was shipping kerosene to Asia from WesternEurope and some talked of shipments from the Caribbean. A major bid for DPKon a C+F basis into Japan at $34.40-35.20 for delivery January 25-29.However, there was only interest if the product was shipped directly from arefinery and not from storage.   The gasoil paper market tumbled in early Singapore trade with Januarydone at $26.30, markedly lower that the previous day's close at $25.90. Thedrop was attributed to weaker IPE and NYMEX settlements on Thursday and theclosing of positions ahead of the New Year. January paper dropped to aslow as $24.95 before it recovered to around $25.15, a reflection of IPEstrength at the opening. Physical bids were also lower in Singapore asbuyers stepped down almost in line with the weaker paper. A trader bid for180,000 bbl for loading January 13-17 at $25.75, then at $25.85. A selleroffered 150,000 bbl at $26.00 for loading January 20-24 but no deal wasdone. Earlier in the day, a 100,000 bbl parcel traded at 50 cts over themarket mean.   Despite bearish sentiment in the swaps market, cargo residual fuel oilprices were stable due to the rebound in crude values. A trader offered20,000mt of 180 CST at $116.50, then at $117.50, for January 13-17.   A major bid for that date range at $116.25, then at $117.25. The samecompany was also willing to pay $117.00 for January 18-22. A bid forJanuary 24-28 was seen at $115.75. Later, a 20,000mt trade went on thebooks for January 18-22 at $117.00. The 180/380 CST spread was pegged at$6.50/mt due to tight cutter stock avails. January swaps were done at$115.00, $114.75, $114.00, $113.00 and $113.50 and February at $108.50 and$107.40.   Indonesia is expected to allocate an additional 400,000 bbl of LSWR forJanuary to its affiliates. Indonesia had allocated 4.15-mil bbl. AIndonesian affiliate fixed 200,000 bbl of mixed/cracked for second halfJanuary lifting at the Pertamina formula, plus around $1.20, FOBIndonesia.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoEUROPE: QUIET CLOSE   A couple of first half January premium unleaded barges changed hands atslightly lower prices, $167.00 and $167.50 for storage material, FOBAmsterdam/Rotterdam, and $166 for very prompt loading. A regular unleadedbarge sale was reported at $157 for 1,000mt, FOB Rotterdam. Cargo activity,however, was dead, and the only other business reported was some Januaryswap action at $169.50-170.00, FOB Rotterdam.   A flurry of naphtha cargoes was placed ahead of the New Year break asmost dealers headed off early for the weekend. An Egyptian cargo for earlyJanuary loading was reported sold into Brazil and another sale was heardinto Canada. A January 10-20 arrival for the Mediterranean was confirmed at$165.50, CIF Spain, for 70 min paraffins. Swaps values were more difficultto establish. January and February swap levels were notional at $166-168,CIF NWE.   A firm tone was maintained though activity was quiet on the jet fuelmarket. Sources expected the firm numbers currently obtainable to attractavails into the market next week. Buying interest into the UK was stillapparent, but much of traders' attention still focused on moving productinto eastern arbitrage opportunities.   A Russian gasoil cargo was reported sold into Cyprus at $9 over the highCIF market quotes. Trade was said very quiet over the day with bargesasking a slightly firmer $1 over the gasoil futures screen. GOM wasreported sold FOB at even with the high CIF market quotes. There was alsotalk in the market of an Algerian offered in the Mediterranean at $1.25over formula with bids at 50 cts over. The North may be moving more intoline with the firm numbers in the Mediterranean, traders said. Delaysreported in the Black Sea may be resolved before the New Year, saidsources, and vessels awaiting loading berths were due to dock at theweekend.   High sulfur cracked fuel oil in the Mediterranean was again strongerwith a deal heard into Romania at $114, CIF Constanza. FOB bbl were alsowell bid, according to brokers. Low sulfur material was harder to gauge. InNWE, netback values to the US suggested a much firmer market, but trade wasreported into Italy at $123.25, CIF. Refiner, as well as utility, demandwas reported into Italy. High sulfur barge activity was very thin withprompt trade heard at $105.50, FOB ARA. Low sulfur barges continued tobenefit from the very cold weather in Europe. An E-4 cargo was said to havebeen done at $118, basis Rotterdam.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoMTBE: QUIET AND STABLE   Prices were stable in very quiet trade. Material for very early Januarywere perceived as tight. A refiner reportedly offered 50,000 bbl forJanuary 10-15 at 92.75 cts, FOB US Gulf. A producer indicated sellinginterest for second half January at 93 cts, FOB US Gulf.   In the Northeast, buying interest was again reported at close to 100 ctsin New York Harbor.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGAS LIQUIDS: PROPANE STILL CLIMBING   December non-TET propane was done at 38.50 cts at Mt Belvieu in themorning. But trade thinned with many players leaving early for the New Yearholiday.   A trader bought normal butane at 38.50 cts for December. January normalbutane sold at 39.50 cts.   Activity at Conway was extremely quiet. December Warren bbl of naturalgasoline sold at 41.75 cts and 42.00 cts.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoATLANTIC COAST: READY FOR HOLIDAYS   Unleaded gasoline markets were thinly traded. Sources said that manytraders were "out of the saddle" getting ready to "pop the corks" andcelebrate the New Year.   Prompt RFG regular unleaded 87 barge offers held at 150 points under theJanuary screen while bids languished at 200 points under. Softer front halfJanuary RFG Boston unleaded cargo talk was heard at 125-160 points underthe January print.   Oxygenated RFG regular unleaded 87 barge talk weakened to even to 50points over the January screen. Softer RFG premium unleaded 93 values wereseen at 3.50-3.75 cts over the January print. Oxygenated RFG premiumunleaded 93 talked at 6.25-6.50 cts over January futures.   Talk for conventional regular unleaded 87 barges slipped to 5.75-6.25cts under the January print. Conventional premium unleaded 93 barge valueswere seen at 1.75-2.00 cts under the January screen.   Differentials to the futures screen for No.2 heating oil slipped on theback of sharply lower NYMEX prices. Prompt No.2 oil barge offers were seenat 25 points under the January screen, bids were 50 points under. Fronthalf January Boston No.2 cargo values were pegged at 20-40 points over theJanuary screen.   Low sulfur No.2 oil talked at parity with regular No.2 oil. Slightlysofter 54 grade jet fuel talk was heard at 1.20-1.40 cts over the No.2print. Low sulfur jet/kero, 55 grade, values held at 4.50-4.75 cts over theNo.2 screen.   Residual fuel oil traders ended 1995 on a quiet note. Most weren'tespecially eager to buy or sell and potential selling interest was mostlylimited to a few looking to move foreign low sulfur cargoes.   Little discussion was heard for 0.3%S H/P and L/P as traders waited fora New York utility to award its H/P tender for January 10-20 on January 4.Sellers of 0.3%S L/P barges could still be found at $23.00-23.25.   Nothing new was seen on the physical 1.0%S market. The "best bid" seenwas at $21.50. Values for January 1.0%S paper were little changed withsales reported at $20.20, $20.25 and possibly at $20.35.   Late Thursday, a trader sold its South American 1.7%S cargo at amarket-related high plus 50 cts, delivered to a New England utility. Valuesfor high sulfur material held near $18.00. New York 380 CST bunker saleswere last heard at $130.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUS GULF COAST: A MODEST YEAR-END UPTURN   Unleaded gasoline prices firmed on the pipeline as a major stepped in topick up a few bbl. At one point the market was pushed to 710 points belowthe February gasoline futures print. By the end of the day, most called thefirst cycle 730 points off.   Premium unleaded looked a bit stronger at 3.0 cts over regular unleadedand 93 octane material was another 1.0 cts over that.   No.2 heating oil was still tight on the water. A 90,000mt ship was takento export for the Far East and most put the waterborne market about a 50-75points over the pipeline. On the pipeline, high sulfur No.2 oil traded aslow as 420 points under the February futures print, slightly less thanThursday's levels.   Low sulfur diesel was 15-25 points lower than high sulfur. Jet fuel onthe prompt cycle was 225 points below the February print, while low sulfurjet fuel sat at 150 points over. Both of those differentials were unchangedfrom Thursday.   Residual fuel oil values were up on the bunker market with $105 reportedfor 380 CST at Houston. Most attributed the strength to "distress buying"for the holiday.   There was little bulk market activity, but the consensus was that whilemore product was available, good export demand remained. Talk on 1.0%S washigher as well due to the possibility of Florida buying above its contractrequirements.   Naphtha was quiet around 1.0 cts under unleaded prices.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCHICAGO: PRICE DIFFERENTIALS UNCHANGED   Differentials to the futures screen were about unchanged with No.2 oilat 5.25 cts under the print and low sulfur diesel was 3.5 cts below.   Unleaded gasoline was stable at 4.5 cts under the February futuresprint. Premium unleaded was quoted at a 3.5 cts regrade. RBOB was reporteddone at a 1.5 cts premium to conventional unleaded.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGROUP THREE: DEMAND CONTINUES   Differentials to the futures screen for gasoline were unchanged at about4.50 cts under the February print. Premium unleaded held on to its3.25-3.50 spread over regular unleaded.   No.2 heating oil was quiet at 6.0 cts below the February futures printand low sulfur No.2 oil was 3.0 cts under.   Al prices were quoted in relation to the February futures for Januarydelivery.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoFUTURES: THIN AND VOLATILE   The session on NYMEX was dominated by expiration-related activity on theproducts, traders said, and resulted in a sharp sell-off in January heatingoil and a milder decline in January unleaded.   February crude rallied to a new contract high near the close. Sometraders left early, or failed to appear to trade, before the long holidayweekend and that left trading thin and volatile. Additionally, the IPEclosed at 1300 GMT and that tended to erase some direction from themarket.   January heating oil, which from early December until Thursday had ledthe NYMEX energy complex higher, dropped for the second consecutivesession. Traders tied the decline to expiration-related long liquidation,profit taking and hedge unwinding. "It's the last day of the last month forthat contract and hedgers and speculators who were long during the recentprice run-up got out," a trader said. The contract also came under pressureover the past two days due to expectations of moderating temperatures.   January heating oil began its recent rise at the beginning of Decemberaround 52.00 cts and peaked at the contract high of 62.45 cts on Thursday.However, profit-taking prior to expiration caused it to drop more than 4cts in two days. January heating oil closed down 169 points at 58.63 cts.   January unleaded, which also expired, was under pressure much of thesession on expiration-related activity. Thought the contract recovered fromits lows, the market was too illiquid to really discern much aboutdirection. January unleaded closed off 42 points at 58.86 cts.   February crude was range-bound after gaining early on an unexpectedlylow US crude stock figure as reported by API. While crude received somesupport from its stock draw, the draws in heating oil and unleaded failedto support those contracts. "The market tends to ignore the figuresfollowing the initial reaction," a trader said.   However, in the final minutes of trading the February crude contractfound renewed strength as the market stabilized and it broke aboveresistance at the previous contract high of $19.55 to set a new high at$19.57.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUS WEST COAST: PRICES SLIP INTO '96   The end of 1995 approached quietly in Los Angeles with little talk heardfor most products. Los Angeles unleaded languished at the previous day'slevel of 57.00-58.00 cts with few buyers seen. Talk was mostly notionalwith some narrower ranges heard.   Traders said it appeared the Portland unleaded market was starting toslide a little faster. The range dipped to 54.25-55.25 cts as the marketcontinued to "figure things out" following the reopening of the pipelinefrom Seattle.   Bay unleaded was said to be losing ground to Los Angeles and talked atleast 1.50 cts lower than Los Angeles. Oxy was reported done at 2.50 ctsover Bay unleaded. Reformulated talk was no higher than 2.00 cts over LosAngeles conventional unleaded.   Jet fuel prices in Los Angeles appeared closer to the 66.25 cts level atwhich the last reported deal was done. Apparently little was getting done,but there continued to be enough outside pressure in the form of refineryproblems and Asian prices to keep jet supported.   A CARB seller in Los Angeles was reportedly looking for 67.00 cts earlywhile the Bay was pegged around 62.50 cts. Low sulfur No. 2 oil held steadythrough the day at 60.00-61.25 cts with 60.00 cts reported done in LosAngeles for the back half of the month. Portland L/S No.2 oil talked lowerat 57.75-58.75 cts.   Demand into the fuel oil market screeched to a halt on the last tradingday of the year. Traders scrambled to supply what was left of the demand inthe bunker market.   In Los Angeles, sources reported that bunker-C sold at $111.50,resulting in a slight increase in the price of 380 CST and 180 CST.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUS CRUDE: TALK OF SUPPLY PROBLEMS   The steady march to stronger prices in Gulf Coast grades continued onFriday. The tight avails of crude in the US Gulf has been pushing priceshigher as refiners seek out alternate, cheaper crudes.   According to one trader, the Brent replacement cost on Thursday wasFebruary WTI plus 42 cts and that contributed to the gains seen in LLS.That sweet grade climbed several cents above Thursday's levels which werestronger than Wednesday's levels. February LLS was heard traded at 68, 69and 70 cts over Cushing WTI, with 70 cts over Cushing WTI said to have beendone 10 to 12 times. That topped Thursday's high of 65 cts.   February Midland WTI was done at 8-10 cts under Cushing WTI, actuallypriced into the Gulf and not into Cushing. The February WTS talk levelfirmed. One trader suggested, that with the climb in LLS prices, refinersmight turn to WTS because of the wide differential, as much as $1.00-1.65."They would run as much as possible until they 'max out' and theirdesulfurization units halt," he said.   Production problems which cut four January Forties cargoes, cold weathereffects on refineries overseas and production problems in certain fieldscreated a supply problem in crude worldwide, traders noted. The bottomline, another said, is "crude is tight, crude is strong."   There were numerous and persistent reports of activity in South Americancrude, but, due to an absence of traders prior to the long weekend, thereports remained unconfirmed. In addition, a trader said that informationappeared to be flowing less freely than it had in the past.   A second half February Cano Limon said on offer at WTI minus $1.20 and,while buyer and seller were confirmed, the selling price could not beverified. There was talk that an end-January or February Vasconia hadtraded, but details weren't available. Several traders doubted reports thatup to four cargoes of Oriente had traded around the ANS minus 40 cts level.The doubt was due to uncertainty about whether Petroecuador will change itspricing formula in February.   No West Coast ANS sales were reported by the main spot seller.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoINTERNATIONAL CRUDE: UNEVENTFUL   The 15-day Brent market was uneventful with two February Brent cargoesdone at $18.53 and a partial done at $18.51. February Brent/Dubai talked at$1.20-1.25 while February/March Dubai talked at plus 24-30 cts andMarch/April Dubai talked at plus 21-25 cts. January 2-5 Brent CFDs werepegged at February plus 35-40 cts. January 8-12 Brent CFDs were valuedaround February plus 15 cts.   Prompt physical Brent values moved lower versus February when a January4-6 cargo changed hands early at February plus 30 cts. But two late-daytrades tightened the market. A January 15-17 was done at 5 cts underJanuary, equivalent to February plus 67 cts. It was later re-sold atFebruary plus 60 cts. Talk was tighter during the day so the late dealcoincided somewhat with the market. However, next week's CFDs were rumoreddone at plus 37 cts. Based on the three trades, the market was valued atFebruary plus 52 cts.   In other dated Brent talk, most were waiting for fresh second decadeJanuary offers while seven sets of Brent dates were kept from the chains.Six of the dates were kept by a UK major said to hold up to 13 physicalBrent cargoes. Little action took place in other North Sea markets withOseberg price differentials to dated widening. An end-January cargo of thegrade was heard done at dated plus 37 cts.   West African markets were fairly quiet with many still absent due to theholiday season. The general tone for BQ and Forcados price differentials todated was said "reasonably strong." Recent trades were seen breaking thedated plus 50 ct mark. Offers for light Nigerian grades, loading towardsend-January, were said at the mid 50s over dated Friday.   Mediterranean Urals trade was thin though prices firmed on back of tightavails with one deal done at dated plus 15 cts, C+F Augusta, for 80,000mt.Although the port of Novorossiisk re-opened late Thursday, 19 vessels were reportedly waiting to load. Sources said Mediterranean refiners wereseeking alternative crude supplies and were replacing their sour cruderequirements with sweet North Sea barrels.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoFEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28       FEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28                                    FEEDER CRUDES                                (DESCENDING GRAVITIES)                ----------YIELDS---------    ---------NETBACKS--------SPOTOPEC            at     at    at    at  OSP-a  from  from  from  from F.O.B.CRUDES         USGlf R'dam S'pore Italy       USGlf R'dam S'poreItalySourceArun Cond      19.33 18.72 20.13 19.05 16.83  16.70 16.95 19.92 17.0619.00Saharan Blend  20.45 20.68 21.38 18.52 18.87  18.97 20.13 19.66 18.2219.27Brass River    20.35 20.15 21.87 19.08 19.19  18.75 19.22 20.77 18.2819.05Es Sider       19.53 19.63 20.71 18.26 18.76  18.01 18.99 19.14 18.0218.65Zueitina       20.21 20.32 20.87 18.44 19.06  18.65 19.70 19.48 18.1718.95Zar'taine      19.83 19.77 21.05 18.61 18.87  18.34 19.21 20.66 18.3019.17L. Zakum       20.12 20.15 21.65 18.77 16.95  17.82 18.78 21.17 16.9518.32Brega          19.64 19.63 20.78 18.43 19.06  18.09 19.02 19.39 18.1818.95Qatar Dukhan   19.53 19.63 21.11 18.40 16.38  16.91 18.03 20.69 16.5617.72Murban         19.87 19.94 21.34 18.48 16.95  17.41 18.31 20.68 16.6218.32Arab Berri     19.21 19.32 20.65 18.12 18.23  16.88 17.93 20.16 17.0418.23Sirtica        20.03 20.19 20.78 18.35 18.81  18.44 19.55 20.78 18.0818.83Bonny Light    20.66 20.57 21.47 18.88 19.13  18.80 19.40 20.19 17.8719.15Umm Shaif      19.10 19.22 20.65 18.07 16.55  16.76 19.22 20.16 16.2117.92Sarir          19.62 19.97 20.14 17.88 18.21  18.03 19.33 18.51 17.6018.10Qatar Marine   20.25 20.45 21.25 18.49 16.26  17.89 19.03 20.75 16.6117.60Amna           19.00 19.24 19.77 17.74 18.16  17.35 18.56 18.34 17.4318.05Kirkuk         19.39 19.75 20.65 17.94 17.60  17.67 19.01 19.24 17.5714.00Minas          19.55 19.75 19.88 17.91 16.96  16.40 19.24 19.64 15.9519.85Basrah Light   19.18 19.70 20.51  0.00  0.00  16.93 17.67 19.72  0.0016.00Iran Light     19.35 19.73 20.40 17.84 17.18  16.91 18.23 19.83 16.6817.23Arab Light     19.31 19.87 20.67 17.74 17.78  16.92 18.43 20.17 16.6317.78Hout           18.38 18.48 19.98 17.76 17.12  14.99 16.18 19.18 15.5617.18Cinta          18.69 19.03 18.59 17.21 16.41  15.85 18.90 18.29 15.2719.10Kuwait         18.30 18.79 19.63 17.26 16.98  15.87 16.03 19.10 16.1116.98T-J-Light      18.38 18.60 19.71 17.56 17.17  17.32 17.76 18.20 16.37 n.a.Iran Heavy     18.82 19.38 19.90 17.41 17.21  16.35 17.86 19.32 16.2317.22Dubai          19.38 19.79 20.55 17.86  0.00  17.14 18.36 20.08 16.5317.05Arab Medium    18.82 19.47 20.30 17.44 17.08  16.41 18.02 19.79 16.3117.08Forcados       20.71 21.00 21.86 18.67 19.10  19.03 20.01 20.68 17.8319.15Mandji         18.46 18.88 19.82 17.33 17.32  16.66 17.76 17.72 16.2317.25Oriente        18.95 19.40 19.56 17.44 16.50  17.51 18.12 18.16 16.1617.45Khafji         16.99 17.90 19.55 16.16 16.27   5.58 16.40 19.01 14.9917.78Arab Heavy     17.57 18.46 19.29 16.62 16.78  15.12 16.98 18.77 15.4716.78Bonny Medium   19.93 20.13 21.29 18.32 18.97  18.11 18.89 19.91 17.2418.82T-J-Medium     18.28 18.51 19.70 17.52  0.00  17.20 17.64 18.13 16.28 n.a.Duri           18.42 19.19 18.90 16.73 15.25  15.33 18.64 18.64 15.5018.35NON-OPEC CRUDES                      FOREIGNGippsland      20.40 20.16 21.91 19.15  n.a.  17.81 17.81 20.87 17.1519.05Oman Blend     19.55 19.63 20.90 18.31 15.96  17.72 18.41 20.48 17.4317.30Ekofisk        20.49 20.59 21.28 18.64  n.a.  18.94 20.16 18.98 17.9618.85Brent          20.34 20.51 21.23 18.51  n.a.  18.82 19.93 18.85 17.8018.65Isthmus        19.35 19.48 20.21 18.00 17.85  18.50 18.59 17.59 17.0917.85Forties        20.20 20.38 20.95 18.41  n.a.  18.64 19.93 18.56 17.6918.85Flotta Blend   18.77 18.90 20.18 17.87  n.a.  17.23 18.42 20.18 17.1518.25Daqing         18.93 19.38 19.05 17.32  n.a.  16.08 18.84 18.24 15.4719.60Suez Blend     18.00 18.93 19.52 16.77 17.38  15.86 17.77 18.25 16.1417.10Urals          19.45 19.80 20.63 17.95  n.a.  17.33 18.66 18.71 17.1918.70Kole           19.16 19.39 20.25 17.88  n.a.  17.38 18.29 19.01 16.9318.12Cano Limon     20.14 20.76 21.21 18.10  n.a.  18.85 19.90 19.81 17.1018.51Maya           16.73 17.72 18.39 16.05 15.49  15.87 16.78 16.63 15.0815.49                                     UNITED STATES:WTI            20.53  n.a.  n.a.  n.a. 18.00  20.33  n.a.  n.a.  n.a.19.30WTS            19.27  n.a.  n.a.  n.a. 15.75  18.67  n.a.  n.a.  n.a.18.25ANS            19.08  n.a.  n.a.  n.a. 17.70  19.08  n.a.  n.a.  n.a.17.85(a) ANS del USG; Urals del Med; Basrah ex Yanbu; Kirkuk ex Ceyhan.Oriente del USG.  Cano Limon del USG.  Brent prices for dated Cargoes.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoARAB GULF, FOB                        Arab Gulf, FOB$/MT   Naphtha                                 -146.00-148.00-       HSFO 180 cst                            +108.65-109.65+$Bbl   Kerosene                                -30.65-30.70-       Gasoil                                  -24.05-24.15-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCaribbean Cargoes, FOB        $/MT                c/GalCaribbean Cargoes, FOB        $/MT                c/Gal        Naphtha             159.75-162.00       44.00-44.50        Jet Kerosene        191.00-195.00       59.00-60.00        Gasoil              176.50-178.25       57.00-57.50$/Bbl   No.6 2.0%S         +15.75-16.25+        No.6 2.8%S         +15.00-15.25+Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoSingapore/Japan Cargoes      C&F Japan           SingaporeSingapore/Japan Cargoes      C&F Japan           Singapore$/Bbl  Mogas Unl            21.70-21.80       Mogas 92 Unl                             19.75-19.85       Mogas 95 Unl                             20.90-21.00       Mogas 95 Unl Pap.(JAN )                   20.70-21.20       Mogas 95 Unl Pap.(FEB )                   20.70-21.20       Mogas 97 Unl                             21.30-21.70$/MT   MTBE                                     265.00-275.00       Naphtha             -174.00-176.00-     -17.70-17.80-       Naphtha 30-45       -176.75-177.75-       Naphtha 45-60       -175.00-176.00-       Naphtha 60-75       -174.00-175.00-$/Bbl  Kerosene            +34.70-35.90+       -32.25-32.50-       Gasoil Cracked      -26.50-26.65-       Gasoil Pure         -27.40-27.55-       Gasoil 0.5%S                            -25.80-26.00-       Gasoil 1.0%S                            -25.65-25.85-       Gasoil LoPr                             -25.85-26.05-       LSWR S.R. 0.3%S                          18.70-18.90       LSWR Mixed/Cracked                       18.70-18.90       Naphtha Pap.(JAN )                      -17.50-17.60-       Naphtha Pap.(FEB )                      -17.40-17.50-       Kerosene Pap.(JAN )                     -29.70-29.85-       Kerosene Pap.(FEB )                     -27.20-27.35-       Gasoil Pap.(JAN )                       -25.10-25.25-       Gasoil Pap.(FEB )                       -24.45-24.60-$/MT   FO 180 cst 2%                           -122.00-123.00-       HSFO 180cst         -124.70-125.70-     -116.50-117.50-       HSFO 380cst                             -110.00-111.00-       HSFO 180cst Pap.(JAN )                   -113.00-114.00-       HSFO 180cst Pap.(FEB  )                  -107.00-108.00-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGROUP THREE              Group Three15.0 RVPc/Gal   Unleaded            53.50-54.00        Prem. Unleaded     +56.75-57.00+        No. 2               52.50-52.75-        LS No. 2           -55.50-55.75-        Jet Fuel           -59.75-60.00-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoNew York/Boston               Cargo               BargeNew York/Boston               Cargo               Barge15.0 RVPUnl 87             -52.00-52.50-       -52.50-53.00-        Unl 87 RFG         -56.25-56.75-       -56.75-57.25-        Unl 87 RFG Ox      -58.75-59.25-       -58.75-59.25-        Unl 87 (Boston)    -52.75-53.25-        Unl 87 (Boston RFG)                    -57.25-57.50-        Unl 89             -55.25-56.00-       -55.75-56.25-        Unl 89 RFG         -58.50-58.75-       -59.00-59.25-        Unl 89 RFG Ox      -60.75-61.25-       -61.25-61.75-        Super Unl 93       -60.00-60.25-        60.50-60.75        Super Unl 93 RFG   -61.75-62.00-       -62.25-62.50-        Super Unl 93 RFG Ox 64.50-64.75-       -65.00-65.25-        Jet Fuel           -59.75-60.25-       -60.00-60.50-        LS Jet/Kero        -63.00-63.25-       -63.25-63.50-        LS Jet/Kero(Boston)                    -63.25-63.50-        No. 2              -58.25-58.50-       -58.25-58.50-        LS No. 2           -58.25-58.50-       -58.25-58.50-        No. 2 (Boston)     -58.75-59.00-        LS No. 2 (Boston)  -58.75-59.00-$/Bbl   No. 6 0.3%S HiPr    22.50-22.75         22.75-23.00        No. 6 0.3%S LoPr    22.75-23.00         22.75-23.00        No. 6 0.7%S Max     21.85-22.10         21.85-22.10        No. 6 1%S Max       21.35-21.60         21.35-21.60        No. 6 2.2%S Max     18.50-18.75         18.50-18.75        No. 6 2.2%S Max (Bstn)                  18.60-18.85        No. 6 3.0%S Max     17.50-17.75         17.50-17.75        No. 6 1.0%S Pap. 1st M                 -20.20-20.45-        No. 6 1.0%S Pap. 2nd M                 -18.25-18.50-        No. 6 1.0%S Pap. Qtrly                 -18.25-18.50-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S. Gulf Coast              Waterborne          PipelineU.S. Gulf Coast              Waterborne          Pipeline13.5 RVPc/Gal  Unl 87              +50.50-50.75+       +50.50-50.75+       Unl 87 RFG          +54.25-54.50+       +54.25-54.50+       Unl 89              +51.75-52.00+       +51.75-52.00+       Unl 89 RFG          +55.50-55.75+       +55.50-55.75+       Prem Unl 92         +53.50-53.75+       +53.50-53.75+       Prem Unl 92 RFG     +57.50-57.75+       +57.50-57.75+       Prem Unl 93         +54.50-54.75+       +54.50-54.75+       Prem Unl 93 RFG     +58.50-58.75+       +58.50-58.75+       MTBE                 92.00-93.00       Naphtha             +48.75-49.25+       Jet/Kero 54         -56.50-57.00-       -56.25-56.50-       Jet/Kero 55         -60.00-60.50-       -60.00-60.50-       No. 2               -55.00-55.75-       -54.50-54.75-       LS No. 2            -54.25-54.50-       -54.25-54.50-$/Bbl  No. 6 0.7%S          17.95-18.20       No. 6 1.0%S 8 API    17.00-17.25       No. 6 1.0%S 10.5 API                     17.00-17.25       No. 6 3.0%S          15.00-15.25       No. 6 3.0%S Pap. 1st M                   14.75-15.00       No. 6 3.0%S Pap. 2nd M                   14.75-15.00       No. 6 3.0%S Pap. Qtrly                   14.50-14.7515.0 RVP                   SupplementalNorthern Grade Gasolinec/Gal  Unl 87 RFG          +55.75-56.25+       +55.75-56.25+Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoEuropean Bulk                     Cargoes         Cargoes CIF     CargoesEuropean Bulk                     Cargoes         Cargoes CIF     Cargoes                                  FOB Med         Med Basis       CIF NWE                                 Basis Italy     Genoa/Lavera    Basis ARA$/MT          Prem 0.15 G/L     165.00-167.00   175.00-177.00  173.00-175.00              98 RON Unl                                       187.00-189.00              Prem Unl          162.00-164.00   172.00-174.00  169.00-171.00              Reg Unl                                          164.00-166.00              MTBE              Naphtha Physical +145.00-149.00+ +162.00-166.00++165.00-169.00+              Naphtha Swaps                                   +166.00-168.00+              Jet Kerosene     -193.00-196.00                 -209.00-212.00              Gasoil EN590     -185.00-185.50- -194.00-195.00--187.50-189.00-              Gasoil 0.2       -180.50-181.50- -189.00-190.00--185.00-186.00-              1% Fuel Oil       118.00-119.00   125.00-126.00  125.00-127.00+              3% Fuel Oil                                      110.00-111.00              3.5% Fuel Oil    +103.00-105.00+ +110.00-112.00+ 110.00-111.00              E4 Feedstock                                    -10.00-11.00-              M-40 Feedstock                    8.00-10.00              0.5%-0.7% Straight Run0.2 PCT Gasoil does not include -5 -15 spec.IPE Average (JAN) 179.75-. IPE Average (FEB) 173.75-.                                  Barges           Cargoes                                   FOB               FOB                                 Rotterdam           NWE$/MT          Prem 0.15 G/L    -172.00-174.00-  165.00-167.00              98 RON Unl       -189.00-191.00-  179.00-181.00              Prem Unl         -167.00-169.00-  161.00-163.00              Reg Unl          -156.00-157.00-  156.00-158.00              MTBE              315.00-320.00              Naphtha Physical +159.00-162.00+              Naphtha Swaps              Jet Kerosene     -201.50-202.00- -202.00-205.00              Gasoil EN590                     -179.00-180.50-              Gasoil 0.2       -180.00-180.50- -176.50-177.50-              1% Fuel Oil      +120.00-121.00+  118.00-120.00+              3% Fuel Oil                       104.00-105.00              3.5% Fuel Oil    +105.00-106.00   104.00-105.00              E4 Feedstock              M-40 Feedstock              0.5%-0.7% Straight Run            121.00-124.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGas Liquids                 Mont Belvieu          ConwayGas Liquids                 Mont Belvieu          Conwayc/Gal   Ethane             +18.50-20.50+       +16.50-17.00+        Propane            +38.25-38.75+       +39.50-40.50+        Propane (TET)       38.25-38.75        Normal Butane       38.50-38.75         39.00-39.25        Normal Butane (TET)                     38.50-38.75        Isobutane           42.00-42.25         43.25-43.50        Natural Gasoline    41.25-42.00+        41.25-41.50Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWEST COAST PIPELINE                      West Coast PipelineCalifornia                 Los Angeles(a)      San Francisco(b)c/Gal   Unl 87              57.00-58.00        -55.75-56.75-        Unl 87 Ox                              +58.25-59.25+        Unl 87 RFG*        -58.75-59.75-        Prem Unl 92        +63.75-64.75+        63.00-64.00        Prem Unl 92 Ox                          64.25-65.25        Prem Unl 92 RFG*   -61.00-62.00        Jet Fuel           +66.00-66.75+       +65.75-66.75+        LS No. 2            60.00-61.25+        60.00-61.00        CARB Diesel        -66.25-67.25-       -62.00-63.00-$/MT    180 cst             112.00-115.00+        380 cst            +109.00-112.00+Northwest                  Portland(c)         Seattle(d)c/Gal   Unl 87             -54.25-55.25-       -52.50-53.50-        Prem Unl 92        -60.25-61.25-       -58.50-59.50-        Jet Fuel                                64.75-65.75        LS No. 2           -57.75-58.75-        55.50-56.50$/MT    180 cst            -127.00-132.00-      119.00-122.00        380 cst            -126.00-131.00-      115.00-119.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWEST COAST WATERBORNE                    West Coast Waterbornec/Gal   Unleaded 87                             55.25-56.25        Jet Fuel                               +64.75-65.50+$/Bbl   Gasoil                                 -23.50-23.90-        No. 6 0.5%S                             16.50-17.00        No. 6 1.0%S                             15.50-16.00        No. 6 1.6%S                             13.25-14.25$/MT    180cst                                  86.00-96.00        380cst                                  82.00-92.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCHICAGO PIPELINE            Chicago Pipeline15.0 RVPc/Gal Unleaded 87            53.25-53.50      Unleaded 89            54.50-54.75      Prem. Unl 92           56.50-56.75      RBOB                  -54.75-55.00-      Jet Fuel              -60.00-60.50-      No. 2                 -53.25-53.50-      LS No. 2              -54.75-55.00-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoLATIN AMERICA, FOBIllustration(s):Table: Latin America, FOB (This table is not available electronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoSOUTH CHINA, C&FIllustration(s):Table: South China, C&F (This table is not available electronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoLATIN AMERICA CRUDE $/BBLIllustration(s):Table: Latin America Crude $/Bbl (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoINTERNATIONAL                            International$/Bbl  Brent(JAN)     +19.19-19.27+     Dubai(FEB)        +17.27-17.34+       Brent(FEB)     +18.52-18.54+     Dubai(MAR)        +16.99-17.08+       Brent(MAR)     +17.96-17.99+     Dubai(APR)        +16.75-16.86+       Brent(DTD)     +19.03-19.07+     Oman(FEB)         +17.47-17.61+       Forties        +19.24-19.30+     Oman "MPM"          0.20-0.25       Ekofisk        +19.25-19.31+     Ural (Med)        +19.17-19.23+       Statfjord      +19.29-19.35+     Ural (Rdam)       +19.19-19.27+       Oseberg        +19.38-19.44+     Es Sider          +19.00-19.09+       Flotta         +18.67-18.73+     Iran Lt(Sidi)     +18.63-18.69+       Forcados       +19.51-19.58+     Iran Hvy(Sidi)    +18.26-18.32+       BQ             +19.51-19.60+     Suez Blend        +17.45-17.55+       Cabinda        +18.40-18.46+Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S.                                U.S.$/Bbl  WTI(FEB)       +19.54-19.56+     ANS(JAN)          +18.10-18.14+       WTI(MAR)       +19.06-19.10+     Eugene Island     +18.41-18.46+       WTI Midland    +19.44-19.48+     Line 63           +16.85-16.91+       WTS            +18.57-18.62+     THUMS              14.63-14.67       LLS            +20.21-20.27+     Kern River         13.23-13.27       HLS            +19.77-19.83+     ANS(Cal)          +17.70-17.76+       Wyo. Sweet     +19.52-19.58+     P-Plus Line 63     1.00-1.05       P-Plus WTI     +2.12-2.13-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCanada CD$/CM                                                US$/BBLCanada CD$/CM                                                US$/BBLPar Crude             -158.75-160.75-                     -18.49-18.72-Mixed Lt. Sr           134.35-136.35                      -15.65-15.88-Bow River/            +127.00-129.00+                     +14.79-15.02+HardistyCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPacific Rim $/Bbl                                        Spread vs ICPPacific Rim $/Bbl                                        Spread vs ICPTapis                 -20.40-20.50-     Minas     -19.95-20.05-  0.85-1.00Pap. Tapis(JAN )      -19.85-19.95-     Attaka    -20.05-20.15-  0.70-0.80Pap. Tapis(FEB )      -19.22-19.30-     Arun      -19.25-19.35-  0.50-0.60Labuan                -20.45-20.55-     Ardjuna   -19.50-19.60-  0.60-0.70Miri                  -20.30-20.40-     Handil    -19.10-19.20-  0.40-0.60Gippsland             -19.20-19.30-     Cinta     -19.25-19.35-  0.80-0.95Jabiru                -20.55-20.65-     Duri      -18.45-18.55- +1.00-1.20Thevenard             -20.75-20.80-     Widuri    -19.20-19.30-  0.80-0.95Kutubu                -19.45-19.50-     Belida    -20.25-20.35-  0.90-1.20Daqing                -19.85-19.95-     Lalang    -19.50-19.60- +0.60-0.70Shengli               -18.45-18.55-     Nanhai    -19.75-19.85-NW Shelf              -19.65-19.75-     Griffin   -19.15-19.20-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCONTRACT CARGO PRICESNo. 2 Fuel Bargec/Gal                     +66.00-66.75(a)No. 6 Fuel Cargoes$/Bbl Company   Eff Date  0.3pct    0.5pct    1.0pct    2.2pct    2.8pct      Coastal   12/21     27.00     26.80     26.50     21.00     19.50      Global    12/29     +29.75    +29.50    +27.00    +21.00    +20.55      Hess      05/10     25.00     23.50     23.00      Rio Energy          12/28               22.50     21.00     18.50      Apex      05/18                                   18.50     17.50      Sprague   12/22               27.25     26.25      Northeast 12/27     28.00     27.25     26.75     22.25      Ranges(b)      0.3pct              27.00-28.00      0.5pct              23.50-27.25      1.0pct              23.00-26.75+      2.2pct              18.50-21.00      2.8pct              19.50-19.50All prices delivered, N.Y. Harbor. Residual fuels are low pour.(a)Barge prices, FOB Terminal. Some suppliers grant TVAs.(b)Ranges excluded low and high for each grade.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoATLANTIC & GULF COAST RESIDIllustration(s):Table: Atlantic & Gulf Coast Resid (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT                      U.S. Tank Car Truck TransportPAD1                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedMetroNY*N.New Jersey*Albany                            -58.00-60.15-  -61.25-64.00--65.80-70.50Atlanta                           +52.25-53.70+  +55.05-56.50++59.25-61.45Baltimore                         -54.50-54.50-  -60.05-60.05-+64.15-64.15+Boston*                                                                                    (x)-64.25-72.25Charleston                         54.40-55.20+   57.03-58.00+ 61.90-62.90+Greensboro,NC(a)                  -52.25-53.70+  -55.25-59.00+-59.25-61.40+Miami                              53.55-54.05+  +56.70-57.05+ 61.05-62.55+New Haven*Norfolk                            52.45-54.15    55.46-58.30  60.45-64.15Philadelphia*Pittsburgh                         55.13-58.30-   59.03-62.60- 64.88-70.75-Portland,ME*Savannah                          +54.70-55.45+  +57.65-58.15++62.85-64.15+Spartanburg                       +53.00-53.70+  +56.00-56.50++60.05-60.70+Tampa                              53.40-55.80+   56.40-58.80+ 61.40-63.80+Wilmington,NC                     -55.40-55.40-  -58.60-58.60--62.40-62.40-                    Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional        No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselMetroNY*           -81.70-81.70-  -64.85-66.65-  -65.30-68.40-N.New Jersey*      -68.00-70.00-  -61.75-63.65-  -61.75-64.10-Albany             -70.15-72.05-  -63.35-65.20-  -64.10-66.60-Atlanta                           -57.70-59.55-  -56.75-59.60-Baltimore          -68.95-68.95-  -59.85-62.10-  -58.80-62.95-Boston*            -68.70-76.75 (x)              -64.05-71.00Charleston         -65.00-65.00-                 -59.00-60.65-Greensboro,NC(a)   -64.15-67.00-  -58.15-59.80-  -57.15-60.00-Miami                             -59.20-59.70-  -57.90-59.35-New Haven*         -71.15-76.15-  +63.75-70.00   -64.95-65.10-Norfolk                           -58.30-60.95-  -58.15-61.60-Philadelphia*      -66.75-68.30-  -62.50-62.75-  -62.50-62.90-Pittsburgh         -69.65-69.65-  +59.04-59.50-   61.93-62.65-Portland,ME*       -68.95-74.00-  -64.15-71.10   -64.40-71.75Savannah                          -60.95-60.95-  -59.50-60.45-Spartanburg                       -57.75-59.80-  -57.30-59.80-Tampa                             -58.00-58.65-  -57.55-59.45-Wilmington,NC                     -60.50-60.50-  -60.50-60.50-PAD2                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedChicago                           +55.50-55.60-  +58.50-58.50++62.50-62.60-Columbus                          -56.45-57.70+   59.85-60.70+-64.45-66.70+Des Moines                        -56.45-57.15+               -62.95-63.65+Detroit                           +55.65-57.20+  +58.90-60.20++63.40-65.70+Mpls/St.Paul(a)                   +56.20-62.00+               +67.00-67.00+Oklahoma                          +53.35-54.40-  +56.35-57.55++59.90-62.65St.Louis                          -53.50-54.77-               -61.00-62.35-                    Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional        No.6Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselChicago             35.00-42.00   -54.10-54.95-  -55.45-57.10-Columbus                          -56.00-58.90-  -56.05-59.80-Des Moines                        -57.00-57.60-  -60.10-61.45-Detroit                           -56.25-56.45-  -55.55-59.65-Mpls/St.Paul        38.00-40.00    56.45-58.15-   60.20-61.75-Oklahoma                          -53.65-54.03-  -57.82-58.90-St.Louis                          -54.00-54.85-  -55.85-60.65-PAD3                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedAlbuquerque(a)                     64.75-64.75                 73.25-73.25Amarillo                           55.85-55.85    59.85-59.85  63.85-63.85Arkansas                          +52.80-54.05   +55.50-57.05 +60.05-61.90Birmingham                        +51.95-52.70    55.65-55.65 +58.95-60.15Corpus Christi                     50.00-50.80-  -54.10-54.10- 58.00-58.80-Dallas/Ft.Worth                   +54.00-54.00+               +62.00-62.00+Houston*N.Orleans Area                     51.80-52.35-   54.80-55.07--59.60-60.30                   Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional       No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselAlbuquerque(a)                                    64.50-64.50Amarillo                                         -60.55-60.55-Arkansas                          -56.05-59.60-  -57.55-62.70-Birmingham                        -57.70-59.70-  -56.65-59.65-Corpus Christi                    -56.50-57.90-  -55.00-57.95-Dallas/Ft.Worth                   -58.75-58.75-  -57.00-60.00-Houston*                          -56.80-59.50-  -56.50-60.00-N.Orleans Area                    -57.00-58.30-  -56.50-58.25-PAD4                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedBillings(d)                        61.50-61.50                 70.50-70.50Casper(d)                          60.00-60.00                 68.50-68.50Denver(d)                          53.25-55.00+                61.50-63.50+Salt Lake   (d)                   +56.50-56.50+               +65.50-65.50+                Kerosene           Diesel         Low SulfurConventional       No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselBillings(d)                                       65.00-65.42Casper(d)                                         63.75-63.77Denver(d)                         +57.90-57.90+  +58.00-60.37+Salt Lake                         -62.50-62.50-  -62.02-62.75-PAD5                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedLos Angeles*Phoenix(a)                         65.50-70.25+                73.00-80.25+Portland,OR                       -57.75-66.25                -67.75-76.25SanFran-EBay                      +60.75-63.25+  +64.75-67.25++69.75-72.25+Seattle/Tacoma                     56.50-56.50                 66.50-66.50Spokane(a)                         65.50-65.50                 76.50-76.50                   Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional       No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselLos Angeles*                                      69.75-71.00+Phoenix(a)                                        65.75-66.25Portland,OR                       -57.75-59.50-  -61.00-62.00SanFran-EBay                                     -67.00-67.00-Seattle/Tacoma                     55.85-55.85    56.00-57.20Spokane(a)                         64.00-65.00    64.00-65.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT, REFORMULATED GASOLINEIllustration(s):Table: U.S. Tank Car Truck Transport, Reformulated Gasoline (This table isnot available electronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPLATT'S INDEX             PLATT'S INDEXJet Kerosene   Gasoline       Gasoil135.52 + 0.74  104.54 - 0.35  127.24 - 1.61Naphtha        Resid          Atlantic Sweet Crude113.32 + 0.60  186.56 + 0.72  119.69 + 1.52Med Sour Crude  PG/Asia Crude  U.S. Pipeline Crude125.16 + 1.73   128.19 + 0.10  115.27 + 1.08Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoFIVE-DAY ROLLING AVERAGES                 Five-Day Rolling AveragesGasoil/Heating Oil          $/Bbl               c/GalSingapore                   25.4625.59          60.62**60.93Arab Gulf                   23.6723.78          56.36**56.62W.C. Cargo                  22.9823.38          54.71**55.67L.A. LS.2                   25.10**25.49        59.7560.70S.F. LS.2                   24.99**25.39        59.5060.45$/MT                c/Gal0.2 CIF ARA                 180.90182.10        57.80**57.44EN590 CIF ARA               182.80184.10        58.40**58.820.2 Rotterdam Barge         175.40175.90        56.04**56.200.2 FOB NWE                 172.40173.60        55.08**55.460.2 CIF MED                 184.70185.70        59.01**58.58EN590 CIF MED               189.20190.40        60.45**60.83NY Cargo                    190.26**191.21      60.4060.70NY Barge                    190.26**191.21      60.4060.70US Gulf Water               170.32**171.56      55.3055.70US Gulf Pipe                169.55**170.48      55.0555.35Group 3                     160.47**161.85      52.1052.55Carib Cargo                 175.90177.50        56.56**57.07NYMEX NO. 2                 191.05              60.65Naphtha$/Bbl               c/GalSingapore                   17.1617.26          40.86**41.10$/MT                c/GalJapan C/F                   170.15171.35        45.01**45.33Arab Gulf                   142.15143.35        37.61**37.92CIF NWE Physical            161.60164.00        42.75**44.32Rotterdam  Barge            156.00 158.40       41.27**42.81FOB Med                     141.60144.00        37.46**38.92CIF Genoa                   158.60161.00        41.96**43.51US Gulf W                   174.64**177.97      47.2048.10Carib Cargo                 158.70161.70        43.72**44.55Jet Kerosene                $/MT                c/GalCIF NWE Cargo               203.80  205.80      61.76**61.99Rotterdam Barge             196.70197.30        59.61**59.43FOB Med                     187.80189.80        56.91**57.17US Gulf Water               190.73**192.06      57.4557.85US Gulf Pipe                190.73**192.06      57.4557.85Carib Cargo                 182.50185.11        56.50**57.31NY Cargo                    204.11**204.93      61.8562.10LA Pipeline                 206.23**209.10      64.6565.55Group 3                     201.36**202.52      60.6561.00Chicago                     199.37**200.53      60.0560.40Gasoline,Intl. Market       c/Gal               Prem $/MtCIF ARA 0.15                48.66**49.23        170.80172.80Rotterdam Barge 0.15        48.15**48.92        169.00171.70FOB NWE 0.15                46.38**46.95        162.80164.80FOB Med 0.15                46.15**46.72        162.00164.00Gasoline, U.S. Market         Unleaded            PremiumSF Pipeline                 55.3056.25          60.4561.40Chicago                     51.7552.05          55.0055.40NYMEX Unl                   58.55Low Sulfur Resid Fuel Oil   $/Bbl               $/MtSingapore LSWR              18.0418.24          120.87**122.21CIF ARA 1%                  19.41**19.59        124.20125.40Rot Bar 1%                  18.34**18.34        117.40119.20NWE FOB 1%                  18.31**18.22        117.20118.40Med FOB 1%                  18.44**18.40        118.00119.60NY Cargo .3% HP             22.3922.64          150.01**151.69NY Cargo .3% LP             22.7022.95          152.09**153.77NY Cargo .7% Max            21.3421.59          138.71**140.34NY Cargo 1% Max             20.8421.09          135.46**137.09US Gulf .7%                 18.0018.25          115.02**116.62US Gulf 1%                  17.0717.32          109.08**110.67Hi Sulfur Resid Fuel Oil    $/Bbl               $/MtSingapore 180               17.70**17.93        115.05116.55Singapore 380               16.96**17.18        108.55109.95Arab Gulf 180               16.86**17.09        107.90109.40CIF ARA 3.5%                17.02**17.17        107.20109.00NWE FOB 3.5%                16.06**16.22        101.20103.00Med FOB 3.5%                15.59**15.81        98.20100.40CIF Med 3.5%                16.70**16.91        105.20107.40NY Cargo 2.2%               17.8218.07          114.05**115.65NY Cargo 3.0%               16.9917.24          108.74**110.34US Gulf 3%                  15.0515.30          96.32**97.92Carib 2.0%                  15.0015.25          96.00**97.60Carib 2.8%                  14.7515.00          94.40**96.00Crude Oil, FOB Source       $/BblWest Texas Int              19.1919.23NYMEX Crude                 19.25Brent (DTD)                 18.5418.58Brent (First Month)         18.8418.89Dubai                       16.9917.05Iran (Sidi)                 17.6917.75ANS (First Month)           17.7517.81ANS (California)            17.3317.40WTI Posting Plus            1.911.94*Five Days ending December 28Conversions either side of asterisksCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCLOSING COMMODITY LEVELS                      Closing Commodity Levels                                        Change                  Change$/Bbl   NYMEX Crude     Feb     19.36   -0.14   Mar     18.92   -0.12        NYMEX Sr. Crude Feb     n.a.    n.a.    Mar     n.a.    n.a.        IPE Crude       Feb     18.26   -0.09   Mar     17.75   -0.04c/Gal   NYMEX No. 2     Jan     60.32   -2.01   Feb     59.15   -1.46        NYMEX NY Unl    Jan     59.28   -0.98   Feb     58.07   +0.08        NYMEX GC Unl    Jan     n.a.    n.a.    Feb     n.a     n.a.$/MT    IPE Unl         Jan     n.a     n.a.    Feb     n.a     n.a        IPE Gasoil      Jan     178.25  -1.75   Feb     172.75  -2.75                                        Change  Total Volume$/Bbl   NYMEX Crude     Apr     18.56   -0.09   55,845        NYMEX Sr. Crude Apr     n.a.    n.a.    0        IPE Crude       Apr     17.35   -0.06   29,233c/Gal   NYMEX No. 2     Mar     55.99   -1.12   67,085        NYMEX NY Unl    Mar     56.64   +0.15   33,582        NYMEX GC Unl    Mar     n.a.    n.a.    0$/MT    IPE Unl         Mar     n.a.    n.a.    0        IPE Gasoil      Mar     165.75  -3.25   21,102Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoSPOT TANKER RATES                            DIRTY                         Route           WS=100 WS Assess. Rate/$MT65,000 MT                FE/FE             6.20      117   7.254                         CARIB/USAC        4.89      152   7.44080,000 MT                MED/MED           4.96       98   4.861                         AG/FE             5.95      125   7.438                         MED/USG           9.49       89   8.446                         UKC/UKC           3.72       96   3.571130,000 MT               MED/USG          10.41       80   8.332                         WAF/USG           9.63       90   8.671                         UKC/USG           8.96       88   7.880                         AG/MED            8.26       75   6.195250,000 MT               AG/USG           14.47       58   8.396                         AG/FE             5.95       59   3.510                            CLEAN                         Route           WS=100 WS Assess. Rate/$MT30,000 MT                MED/UKC           5.18      165   8.547                         MED/USAC          7.72      225  17.381                         MED/MED           3.52      160   5.632                         UKC/USAC          7.18      230  16.526                         UKC/UKC           4.00      160   6.400                         BSEA/MED          4.26      160   6.816                         AG/INDIA          5.59      270  15.093                         AG/JAP           10.45      260  27.170                         SING/JAP          5.71      249  14.218                         CARIB/USAC        3.92      360  14.130                         CARIB/USG         4.25      370  15.743                         CARIB/UKC         6.94      300  20.82055,000 MT                AG/JAPAN         10.45      215  22.468Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoJET FUEL PRICES                  Jet Fuel Prices                       Contract             Spotc/GalHouston         +63.00-64.00        -56.50-57.00-     E. Chicago      +61.50-68.00+       +60.00-60.50+     Linden           59.75-66.75+       -60.00-60.50-     Los Angeles     +70.50-75.00        +66.00-66.75+     Denver          +65.25-65.50+     Tulsa           +66.00-67.50        -59.75-60.00-     Pt. Everglades  +62.50-67.00+       +59.00-60.00+     San Antonio      61.50-66.00     Boston          +68.00-69.00+     Alaska           74.75-75.25+Effective December 29Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoAPI WEEKLY SUMMARY                         API Weekly SummaryDistrict 1                           12/22/95  12/15/95  12/23/94 12/24/93Crude                                14,283    15,555    14,111    14,970Oxygenated Mogas                     209       186       2,087     naReformulated Mogas                   18,319    17,698    24,617    naTotal Mogas                          51,158    52,975    56,549    64,654Kero Jet                             11,016    11,511    11,918     9,020Distillate greater than 0.05         36,263    38,794    45,923    naDistillate less than 0.05            17,246    17,755    20,177    naTotal Distillate                     53,509    56,549    66,100    65,144Resid                                15,247    16,326    17,997    17,617District 2Crude                                63,404    64,068    72,523    77,102Oxygenated Mogas                     608       659       523       naReformulated Mogas                   1,544     1,625     2,867     naTotal Mogas                          50,387    50,054    55,495    56,563Kero Jet                             6,429     6,663     7,790     7,293Distillate greater than 0.05         10,524    10,744    9,707     naDistillate less than 0.05            19,615    19,491    21,747    naTotal Distillate                     30,139    30,235    31,454    34,164Resid                                2,695     2,348     2,410     3,181District 3Crude                                145,130   147,799   165,815   170,766Oxygenated Mogas                     375       492       1,028     naReformulated Mogas                   8,850     9,074     10,276    naTotal Mogas                          61,094    60,436    61,006    64,794Kero Jet                             14,930    14,074    16,763    12,722Distillate greater than 0.05         13,329    13,792    13,162    naDistillate less than 0.05            15,775    15,900    14,567    naTotal Distillate                     29,104    29,692    27,729    28,696Resid                                12,439    12,595    15,031    15,893District 4Crude                                10,727    10,433    11,736    10,633Oxygenated Mogas                     114       198       370       naReformulated Mogas                   na        na        na        naTotal Mogas                          6,741     6,877     6,882         6,809Kero Jet                             595       592       499       432Distillate greater than 0.05         662       649       570       naDistillate less than 0.05            2,306     2,382     2,486     naTotal Distillate                     2,968     3,031     3,056     3,199Resid                                568       564       474       421District 5Crude                                81,203    81,252    73,741    74,973Oxygenated Mogas                     3,010     2,889     4,078     naReformulated Mogas                   6,128     6,105     5,146     naTotal Mogas                          27,017    27,105    29,958    31,635Kero Jet                             6,896     7,516     7,793     8,230Distillate greater than 0.05         4,332     3,811     4,025     naDistillate less than 0.05            7,962     7,899     8,018     naTotal Distillate                     12,294    11,710    12,043    11,546Resid                                6,485     6,082     6,715     7,396Total                                12/22/95  12/15/95  12/23/94 12/24/93Crude                                314,747   319,107   337,926   348,444Oxygenated Mogas                     4,316     4,424     8,086     naReformulated Mogas                   34,841    34,502    42,906    naTotal Mogas                          196,397   197,447   209,890   224,455Kero Jet                             39,866    40,356    44,763    37,697Distillate greater than 0.05         65,110    67,790    73,387    naDistillate less than 0.05            62,904    63,427    66,995    naTotal Distillate                     128,014   131,217   140,382   142,749Resid                                37,434    37,915    42,627    44,508Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List