WT03-B36-1IA059-000325-B007-133http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey84.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234638 text/html 295042HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:43:11 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:23 GMTContent-length: 294854Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey84.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER via NewsNet January, 1992 Vol. 136, No. SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ABB REORGANIZED TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER SERVICE (868 words) WASHINGTON UPDATE IN AN UNDERTAKING AS COMPLEX AND COSTLY AS POWERPLANT DEVELOPMENT--WHERE STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS CAN SIGNIFICANTLY AFFECT THE DESIGN AND OPERATION OF A PLANT--PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS MUST BE AMPLY PREPARED FOR REGULATORY AND PUBLIC OVERSIGHT. (390 words) RECENT COURT RULINGS AND LAWSUITS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE WASTE-TO-ENERGY (WTE) PLANTS, AS WELL AS COAL-FIRED FACILITIES, HAVE UNDERSCORED THE NEED FOR DEFINITIVE REGULATION ON ASH FROM POWERPLANTS. (530 words) DRAFT LEGISLATION AIMED AT SUBSIDIZING THE RENEWABLE-ENERGY INDUSTRY IS DRAWING FIRE FROM INDUSTRY GROUPS. (185 words) NEW POWERPLANT PROJECTS TECHNICAL PROFILES OF CURRENT PROJECTS AS REPORTED IN MCGRAW-HILL ENERGY GROUP'S ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK, INDEPENDENT POWER REPORT, AND NUCLEONICS WEEK NEWSLETTERS (1272 words) SPECIAL REPORT COAL HANDLING AND PREPARATION Although the basics remain the same, the many elements comprising coal handling and preparation in the powerplant have taken on a new luster--put there by the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (6164 words) COMING: EXPERT SYSTEMS TO PREDICT IMPACT OF COAL QUALITY ON PLANT OPERATION (230 words) MICRONIZED-COAL MILLS YIELD PRODUCT 10 TIMES FINER THAN PULVERIZED COAL (314 words) SPECIAL REPORT: PROJECT PROFILES SUPPRESSANTS CONTROL DUST IN ALASKAN MINE (176 words) ON-LINE COAL ANALYZER INSURES SO SUBSCRIPT 2 COMPLIANCE (127 words) BARGE UNLOADER MOVES COAL INLAND IN A HURRY (177 words) VALVE ISOLATES BURNER/PULVERIZER LINE (131 words) FEEDERS PROVIDE CONTINUOUS, DEPENDABLE TRANSFER OF COAL (104 words) FAMILY OF DUST SUPPRESSANTS BASED ON RESEARCH, TESTING (143 words) RING HAMMERMILL OFFERS DIVERSE SERVICE (164 words) PAIR CRUSHER/DRYER WITH FLUIDIZED-BED COMBUSTORS FOR EFFICIENT FUEL PREPARATION (179 words) SAMPLING WITHIN BIAS-TEST ACCURACY LIMITS (162 words) PULVERIZER UPGRADES BOOST PERFORMANCE (125 words) MILL EFFICIENTLY GRINDS WET OR DRY COAL FINES (194 words) WATER TREATMENT TWO-PASS RO EASES DEMINERALIZER REGENERATION BURDEN Membrane applications to makeup-water treatment continue to expand. Redesign of a utility pretreatment system, described here, introduced many improvements, not least among which was a major reduction in chemical costs (969 words) UTILITIES CONTEND WITH COPPER TO ENHANCE CYCLE RELIABILITY Remedies for corrosion and fouling include replacement of copper-bearing components, improvement of condensate polishing procedures, intensive chemistry monitoring (1948 words) PEOPLE Energy & Environmental Research Corp appoints Dr Anu Sanyal director of (18 words) STONE & WEBSTER ENGINEERING CORP (22 words) Stone & Webster Inc elects James N White senior vice president... (16 words) Foster Wheeler Energy Corp appoints Elias Gedeon manager of international (16 words) Osmonics Inc appoints Andrew T Rensink vice president of technology... (15 words) Hadson Power Systems Inc names Lawrence S Folk president and CEO and Scott (25 words) Gibbs & Hill Inc names Irvin E Richter president... (14 words) UNITED ENGINEERS 7 CONSTRUCTORS INC (19 words) ABB Power Generation Inc appoints Harvey Padewer president of its gas (28 words) CRS Sirrine Engineers Inc appoints Gary F Payne senior project director of (20 words) Flexitallic Inc names Michael Berry president... (11 words) Research Cottrell, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies Corp, names Dr (24 words) The Atlantic Group names W H Robinson manager of valve services for its (20 words) CONTRACTS Newport News Industrial Corp, Newport News, Va, receives a major valve (49 words) Power Safety International will train NRC inspectors to recognize and (26 words) ABB Combustion Engineering Services, Windsor, Conn, will supply the (165 words) ABB Resource Recovery Systems, Windsor, Conn, supplies three (31 words) ABB Power Generation Inc, Manufacturing Div, begins manufacturing (22 words) Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, conducts an audit of (27 words) Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, will construct a 135-MW, (28 words) Chas T Main Inc, Boston, Mass, will construct a 54-MW, gas-turbine-based (28 words) General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md, (33 words) Chem-Nuclear Systems Inc, Columbia, SC, supplies water filtration and (23 words) PaR Systems Group, a subsidiary of Cimcorp Precision Systems Inc, St. Paul, (40 words) Stone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass, is awarded contracts by (116 words) Research-Cottrell, Branchburg, NJ, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies (47 words) Primesouth Inc, Columbia, SC, will operate and maintain a 19-MW, wood-fired (33 words) Metric Constructors Inc, Charlotte, NC, will build a 340-MW, (30 words) Papco Industries Inc, Northvale, NJ, supplies non-metallic expansion joints (36 words) Resorcon Inc, a division of Niagara Blower Co, Pittsburgh, Pa, supplies (40 words) Conversion Systems Inc, Horsham, Pa, provides a system to stabilize FGD (26 words) Foxboro Co, Foxboro, Mass, will supply hardware for a prototype nuclear (27 words) Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Walnut Creek, Calif, will develop a (45 words) Research-Cottrell Companies, Environmental Services & Technologies Div, (32 words) Custom Coals International, Pittsburgh, Pa, a joint venture of Duquesne (48 words) Foster Wheeler Energy Corp, Clinton, NJ, will supply 12 low-NO subscript x (26 words) Black & Veatch, Kansas City, Mo, will install continuous (34 words) FMC Corp, Chalfont, Pa, will supply coal unloading, storage, and reclaim (26 words) GEC Alsthom, Paris, France, will supply a 285-MW steam turbine/generator (23 words) Leeds & Northrup, a unit of General Signal Corp, North Wales, Pa, will (59 words) Vortec Corp, Collegeville, Pa, receives a DOE contract to develop an (32 words) Environmental Elements Corp, Baltimore, Md, will supply an electrostatic (29 words) Johnston Pump Co, Nuclear Services Div, Chattanooga, Tenn, will supply 11 (26 words) Research-Cottrell Companies' subsidiary KVB, Branchburg, NJ, will supply (28 words) United Engineers & Constructors Inc, Englewood, Colo, will provide (31 words) General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md, (29 words) BW/IP International Inc, Long Beach, Calif, will provide maintenance and (30 words) MERGERS/ACQUISITIONS Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, acquires Resources (34 words) Aquagenics Inc, Londberry, NH, is established to provide engineering and (24 words) Ronan Engineering Co, Woodland Hills, Calif, Honeywell Inc, Industrial (42 words) B&W Nuclear Services Co, Lynchburg, Va, opens a new nuclear parts service (20 words) Bergmann USA Inc, Houston, Tex, establishes Bergmann Heavy Industries Inc, (29 words) BURNS & MCDONNEL ENGINEERING CO (28 words) Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, and IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, form (31 words) Coppus Murray Turbomachinery Corp, Burlington, Iowa, signs an agreement (31 words) Mobay Corp, Miles Inc, and Agfa Corp merge to form Miles, Inc, Pittsburgh, (19 words) PRECISION SAMPLERS INC (23 words) PUMPS, COMPRESSORS, VALVES, AND PIPING CIRC-WATER PIPING REPLACEMENT: GIVE IT THE ATTENTION IT DEMANDS When a vital piping system runs out of life, there is a chance to rethink possibilities, reconsider principles, and even to come up with unique solutions (2117 words) LOOK AT SUCTION SPECIFIC SPEED FROM A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE Rework of experience-based limits for impeller performance makes the concept more helpful in practical pump selection (2002 words) STEAM GENERATION KNOW CAUSES OF, SOLUTIONS TO CFB-BOILER REFRACTORY PROBLEMS Refractories are used extensively in CFB boilers. Because early systems were prone to failures, advanced refractory systems have been developed and applied successfully (3170 words) STOKERS KEEP PACE WITH MODERN COMBUSTION Often-subtle design and operating details ensure maximum performance from spreader stokers firing most types of coal and solid waste fuels (1271 words) INSTRUMENTATION, CONTROLS, COMPUTERS, AND SOFTWARE DIAGNOSTIC MONITORING--AN OVERVIEW Diagnostic engineering is a recognized plant-maintenance function. This article outlines the use of diagnostic monitoring for detection of incipient failure, to facilitate predictive maintenance (1283 words) GAS TURBINES, STEAM TURBINES, ENGINES GAS TURBINES PACE NEW CAPACITY ADDITIONS The relentless march of gas turbines into the powerplant arena results from continued advances in efficiency, ultra-low NO subscript x emissions, coal compatibility, and unit output. The latest target: base-load power supply (1207 words) ADVANCED BURNERS REDUCE NO SUBSCRIPT X EMISSIONS (689 words) AERODERIVATIVE UNITS FEATURE HIGH EFFICIENCY, AIRCRAFT-ENGINE PARTS COMPATABILITY (348 words) INDUSTRY NOTES: UTILITIES ICE MAKER ADDS LOW-COST KILOWATTS TO PEAKING UNIT (1213 words) INDUSTRY NOTES: PROCESS/MANUFACTURING/UTILITIES DEVELOPMENTS TO WATCH (1917 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE COMPANY FEATURES RANGE OF PRODUCTS AT ISA SHOW (198 words) MONITOR, CONTROL ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION FROM CENTRAL LOCATION (254 words) UPGRADE INDUSTRIAL GAS TURBINES WITH ELECTRONIC TRANSMITTERS (334 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: STEAM GENERATION Tensioning system permits reduced radiation exposure, shortened downtime, (40 words) Condensate discharge system combines the best features of float and (58 words) Steam-generator services are outlined in booklet, which covers everything (47 words) Valve repairs by company at Cape Fear plant operation were honored with (51 words) Scada system, for cooling-water treatment applications, provides increased (44 words) Data-acquisition system--an advanced computer monitoring process--links (47 words) Ceramic adhesive bonds silica gaskets to furnace brick. The (48 words) Utility-boiler upgrades are featured in brochure, including those for NOx (36 words) Report-generation service combines heat-exchanger eddy-current inspection (42 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: FUELS AND FUEL HANDLING Bulk-material valve with inflatable seal is designed for use in pressurized (51 words) Drum/tank samplers are a durable, safe, accurate, and easy-to-use product (49 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: GAS TURBINES, STEAM TURBINES, ENGINES PC-based system reduces time required to balance rotors in large steam (51 words) Low-NO subscript x combustors for company's heavy-duty gas turbines are (49 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: PLANT ELECTRIC SYSTEMS Switchgear offers safety features, minimum downtime, system selectivity, (39 words) Communicator interface allows uninterruptible power systems (UPS) to (49 words) Circuit interrupter combines the best of switching- and vacuum-interruption (48 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: PUMPS, COMPRESSORS, VALVES, AND PIPING Expansion joints feature one-piece welded construction ofbody and gland, (39 words) Pump features include plunger couplings, double-extended crankshaft, (42 words) Rotary control valve provides noise abatement in gas or vapor service plus (45 words) Expansion joint absorbs lateral deflection and limits angular rotation to (35 words) Check valve, in sizes 2 to 24 in., features low head loss with non-slam (35 words) Air compressors, 15 to 30 hp, operate continuously under full load at (55 words) Ball valves promise zero leakage in severe service applications, operating (48 words) Valve services and products include upgraded test equipment for actuator (49 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: PUMPS, COMPRESSORS,VALVES, AND PIPING Expansion joints provide 13-in. movement, 50 psig in the abrasive (40 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE:INSTRUMENTATION, CONTROLS, COMPUTERS, AND SOFTWARE Flue-gas analyzer has zirconium electrochemical cell for use in gas streams (49 words) Emissions monitor is a single-pass EPA-compliance system that uses (46 words) Pressure sensors for measurements on internal-combustion engines convert (60 words) Distributed-control system (DCS) offers transducer compatibility, precision (38 words) Company products include microprocessor-based control systems, (40 words) Data-logging system is a self-contained, battery-powered package with up to (43 words) Thermal imaging and temperature-measurement systems are described in (38 words) O subscript 2 analyzer is suitable for monitoring and controlling any (57 words) Pressure transducers reportedly are offered at less cost than those made (47 words) Characterizable positioners provide sensitive and accurate positioning of (36 words) Digital multimeters feature large LCD numerals (0.7 in.) for easy viewing, (40 words) Level controller offers reliable operation for steam-generating plant, (37 words) Transmitter enclosure features a large window for increased viewing area (53 words) Software package projects long-term energy use and demand for 100- to (50 words) HART protocol-based measurement and control instruments are available from (44 words) Applications program allows fully functional annunciator--monitoring up to (46 words) Stator ground relay combines (1) 60-Hz signals from measurements of (53 words) Software programs help companies cope with the many federal, state, and (38 words) XL-Net, a flexible software package, provides plant-wide human integrated (51 words) DESIGN/OPERATING IDEAS DETECT HOT SPOTS IN AIR HEATERS BEFORE FIRE OCCURS (514 words) CUT SCRUBBER O&M COSTS BY ACID-CLEANING FILTER SCREENS (145 words) USE MODEL PLANE TO RECORD STACK CONDITIONS (202 words) CALCULATE LOSSES CAUSED BY STEAM LEAKS (154 words) COOK ZEBRA MUSSELS BY RECIRCULATING COOLING WATER (70 words) FLOW MODIFIER UPS EFFICIENCY OF GAS-FIRED BOILERS (243 words) THIS MONTH'S PROBLEM HOW SHOULD WE PLAN FOR REPAIRS AFTER FIRE OR STORM? (1595 words) CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB REORGANIZED TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER SERVICEDr Richard J Slember, president, ABB Power Plant Operations (US),headquartered in Stamford, Conn, announces several changes in the areas ofsales/marketing, nuclear systems, fossil systems, services, controls, andR&D. These changes, made public over the last few weeks, are a major partof Slember's plan to build a more closely knit organization--one that can"get the synergy out of ABB" and better serve the customer.   Slember, who joined ABB Asea Brown Boveri in November 1990, told Powerthat he expects to make a few more announcements in the coming months as hefine-tunes his organization; however, these will be primarily personnelassignments and not involve structural changes to the organization.   Unified sales force. Perhaps the most significant of Slember's recentannouncements is the appointment of Michael Bray to head a newly formed,unified US sales force to serve all units of ABB Power Plant Operationsexcept the nuclear and services groups. The new organization is now ABB'sprimary interface with electric utilities for boilers, steam and gasturbines, environmental control equipment, and powerplant controls.   It was created in response to feedback from utilities, which hadrequested a more focused customer-service organization. Says Slember, "Thisaction brings together an unparalleled offering in meeting customerrequirements. ABB, with a single organization, can now meet the customer'sneeds for the entire powerplant, from fuel feed to stack."   The Power Plant Operations sales force will operate from five regionaloffices, coordinated by Bray from ABB's Windsor (Conn) facility. Regionalvice presidents are Andrew Cook, East, based in Windsor; Michael Salerno,Southwest, Atlanta; Steven Deabler, Southwest, Dallas; Vincent Pacello,Central, Chicago. The western regional vice president, to be located inCalifornia, is still unnamed.   Nuclear. Dr Shelby Brewer is appointed chairman, ABB CombustionEngineering Nuclear Power, with responsibility for strategic customers,government relations, and long-term positioning of the company's nuclearbusinesses. Brewer joined Combustion Engineering Inc in 1984 as vicepresident of operations for the Nuclear Power Systems Div.   In a related appointment, Peter S Van Nort is named president, ABBCombustion Engineering Nuclear Power, responsible for the operations of ABBImpell and the company's nuclear-power business units: systems, fuelservices, and associated staff. Van Nort has been with ABB for about ayear, serving in upper-management positions.   Boilers. Frank Fagan is appointed senior manager of ABB's boilerbusiness. Fagan, with over 30 years of experience in fossil-fueledsteam-generation technology and most recently president of ABB CombustionEngineering Services Inc, will concentrate on developing ABB's globalboiler strategies and on optimizing the implementation of those strategiesin the US marketplace.   Services. David M Gray becomes president, ABB Combustion EngineeringServices, replacing Fagan (see above). Gray, with extensive executive andoperations experience in the boiler business--most recently as vicepresident of fossil services--is responsible for all service-related workon operating boilers, world-wide. These services include all of the partsand components used to maintain, rehabilitate, and upgrade boilers; theengineering and design work to support that effort; field engineeringservices; and training, testing, and analysis services. Gray's group alsois involved in the construction of new boilers, precipitators, scrubbers,and related powerplant equipment, and provides commissioning services fornew boilers.   Gray told Power that he sees a large amount of clean-air-related servicework down the road, but that this activity has not yet started in earnestbecause federal and state regulations governing powerplant emissions arenot "final." Today, the boiler-service business essentially is in ano-growth period, with activity dominated by normal rehabilitationandpressure-part work. Considerable effort also is going into planning withcustomers to ensure a prompt response to regulatory requirements whenspecific clean-air guidelines are announced. One change in the servicesbusiness as it was envisioned only a few years ago, according to Gray, isthat many utilities are now looking to shut down old boilers rather than toextend their life--this to facilitate complying with expected clean-airstatutes.   Controls. Edward H Verdery is appointed president of ABB's new PowerPlant Controls business unit, incorporating the following preexistingcompany operations: fossil instrumentation and control operations fromABB's old Power Automation, Fossil Systems, and Fossil Services units andthe powerplant training simulator and computer businesses of the PowerAutomation and Nuclear groups.   In making this organizational change, Slember notes "In the past, thepowerplant operator had to use a piecemeal approach for plant control,using equipment from various vendors for each part of the plant--forexample, boilers, turbines, or environmental control. We now have greaterbreadth of offering in plant control and can match the control system tothe equipment, to optimize plant performance." The objective of integratedcontrols is to lower costs to the operator, increase plant availability,and minimize pollutant emissions.   R&D. Finally, in an effort to weave a technology network from Europe tothe US, Slember names Dr Gernot Gessinger vice president of research andtechnology. In his newly created position, Gessinger, a 20-yr ABB veteran,is responsible for the establishment of R&D programs for all ABB PowerPlant operation in the US.Photograph: SlemberPhotograph: GrayPhotograph: BrayPhotograph: FaganCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.IN AN UNDERTAKING AS COMPLEX AND COSTLY AS POWERPLANT DEVELOPMENT--WHERESTATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS CAN SIGNIFICANTLY AFFECT THE DESIGN ANDOPERATION OF A PLANT--PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS MUST BE AMPLY PREPARED FORREGULATORY AND PUBLIC OVERSIGHT.By:Marie LeoneAt least one industry expert, Peter Mason, Bechtel Corp, San Francisco,Calif, suggests the simple old-fashioned matrix system. He says thisevaluation tool has been successfully tested with nuclear powerplants, andcan easily be adapted to other types of facilities. In a talk to the recentASME Joint Power Generation Conference, Mason pointed out that manytechnical issues relating to power-project work originate as safety orenvironmental licensing concerns, often tied to legislation. He cites as agood example the nuclear industry's design review process which takes placebefore and after project completion. Often sparked by internal or externalaudits, inspections, reviews, and/or employee concerns, intervenorallegations, or hearing contentions, such issues can potentially delay, orin some extreme cases, terminate projects--as was the case with theShoreham nuclear plant in New York which was prohibited from operatingcommercially after construction and testing were complete.   Mason's proactive approach includes a review, resolution, and analysisof the issues and their root cause. By identifying and listing issues andsetting up cause matrices, project planners and plant-design experts canidentify problems before they become unmanageable, says Mason, who citesthe following example: The matrix evaluation method is used to design andbuild a new waste-to-energy plant. After the plant begins operation, apublic citizen's group raises safety concerns about the type of waste fuelbeing used and the toxicity of the ash. Local environmental regulatorsquestion the plant owners, who in turn, are able to use the matrix to roundup information and redirect the questions back to relevant technicaldocumentation. Asa result, a convenient record of consistent information issupplied to support the plant owner's decisions and safety-designstrategies.   The matrix approach is designed to prevent those involved in projectdevelopment from overreacting or being scarred off by problems that can besolved, notes Mason, adding that the issue-resolution step must remain atechnical, not a legal or quality-assurance matter, and thus must startwith a strong technical basis. More importantly, the process provides ahistory of potential problems and technical resolutions so there is areference file for new powerplants. Often, problems that management assumesare new have actually occurred before and have been solved, but the"corporate memory" fails, says Mason.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.RECENT COURT RULINGS AND LAWSUITS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE WASTE-TO-ENERGY(WTE) PLANTS, AS WELL AS COAL-FIRED FACILITIES, HAVE UNDERSCORED THE NEEDFOR DEFINITIVE REGULATION ON ASH FROM POWERPLANTS.By:Marie LeoneIn a decision that may go before the US Supreme Court, a federal appealscourt has ruled that ash generated by municipal-solid-waste (MSW) burningplants is subject to regulation as a hazardous waste (Subtitle C) under theResource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The decision by the US Courtof Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reverses a lower court decision based ona 1988 lawsuit filed by the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), Washington,DC, against the city of Chicago. The latest decision raises the possibilityof higher disposal costs for MSW facilities located in Wisconsin, Indiana,and Illinois--the court's jurisdiction. However, industry observers saythat the decision will not have a significant impact because most ashtested under the existing EPA procedures does not exceed the regulatorythreshold for hazardous wastes, reports Independent Power Report, aMcGraw-Hill Inc newsletter. But although this particular ruling may nothurt the industry, the fact that no clear-cut rule exists leaves the dooropen for future complications that could aggravate project development,warn industry sources.   For example, based on a 1980 EPA rule, Congress voted to exempt"household waste" from RCRA's definition of hazardous waste. In an effortto further clarify the exemption, Congress added a section to the law in1984 stating that a waste-to-energy plant "shall not be deemed to betreating, storing, disposing of, or otherwise managing hazardous wastes, solong as the plant receives and burns only household waste or solid wastefrom commercial or industrial sources that does not contain hazardouswastes." Since then, industry experts have interpreted this to mean that ifthe fuel-waste delivered to the plant is not hazardous, then it followsthat the ash coming out is non-hazardous as well, and should be categorizedunder RCRA's Subtitle D. However, the recent Chicago ruling disallowed thatinterpretation. Chief Judge William Bauer wrote in the majority opinionthat the "ash is fundamentally different in its chemical and physicalcomposition from the plastic, paper, and other rubbish that goes in."   Regarding coal, the Oregon-based Citizens Interested in Bull Run Inc issuing EPA to force a decision about whether to regulate coal-combustionwaste by electric-utility plants as hazardous or non-hazardous. Under the1980 RCRA amendments, EPA was ordered to complete a report oncoal-combustion wastes and finalize a rule no later than six months afterthe completion of the report. Although the report was completed in 1988,EPA has yet to make a decision on the classification of coal ash. Theprimary concern over disposal of the waste is the potential for leachate tocontaminate groundwater. Small quantities of arsenic, barium, cadmium,lead, mercury, selenium, and other contaminants are known to be present incoal ash.   A decision to characterize coal-combustion wastes as hazardous willsignificantly raise ash-disposal costs for coal-fired plants, say industryobservers. That becomes important when considering new generating capacityand comparing the cost of coal-fired plants with other options. Note thatkey members of Congress are pushing to amend RCRA sometime this year(Power, December 1991, p 9).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DRAFT LEGISLATION AIMED AT SUBSIDIZING THE RENEWABLE-ENERGY INDUSTRY ISDRAWING FIRE FROM INDUSTRY GROUPS.By:Marie LeoneThe House proposal would establish a 2.5 cents/kWh incentive payment for atotal of 10 years for electricity produced from solar, wind, biomass, andcertain forms of geothermal energy. To pay for the incentive, Congresswould impose a user fee averaging one-third of a mill (one-thirtieth of acent) per kWh on electric generation. The fee would be capped at one-halfmill per kWh.   The Edison Electric Institute, Washington DC, opposes the draft, sayingit is an energy tax that would skew the energy market. In addition, aspokesman for the National Assn of Regulatory Utility Commissions (Naruc)says Naruc will oppose the proposal, noting that although "we supportrenewable energy, our traditional policy is to oppose energy fees or taxesimposed by the federal government because in the end they are passed on tothe ratepayers."   Conversely, representatives from the renewable energy industry maintainthat the proposal would firmly establish the US as a leader in renewableenergy technology and help renewables find a permanent place in the USenergy supply mix.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.TECHNICAL PROFILES OF CURRENT PROJECTS AS REPORTED IN MCGRAW-HILL ENERGYGROUP'S ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK, INDEPENDENT POWER REPORT, AND NUCLEONICSWEEK NEWSLETTERSUtilities in the Western Systems Coordinating Council (WSCC) say peakdemand will increase by an average of 1.9%/yr through 1999. To meet thisgrowth, utilities plan to add 6631 MW of net operable capacity during thedecade. Figure includes new construction and reactivation of units now incold shutdown. The only utilities in the region planning more than 500 MWof new construction are Arizona Public Service Co (535 MW), Los AngelesDept of Water & Power (506 MW), Nevada Power Co (710 MW), SacramentoMunicipal Utility District (550 MW), and San Diego Gas & Electric Co (698MW). All of the new capacity would be gas-fired peaking or combined-cycleunits. The only base-load units in the forecast are the expected return toservice of Public Service Co of Colorado's Ft St. Vrain nuclear plant as agas-fired steam/electric unit in 1995 and Southern California Edison Co'sreactivation of the oil-fired, 320-MW Alamitos Unit 3 in 1996, oil-fired,126-MW San Bernardino Units 1 and 2 in 1997, oil-fired, 132-MW EtiwandaUnit 1 in 1998, gas-fired, 215-MW Huntington Beach Unit 3 in 1999, and thegas-fired, 180-MW Highgrove Unit 3 in 1999. Non-utility generation (NUG)additions in the region are expected to total 2655 in the 1991-1999period. Utilities planning more than 200 MW of NUGs are Nevada Power (377MW), Pacific Gas & Electric Co (498 MW), Public Service Colorado (628 MW),Puget Sound Power & Light Co (296 MW), and Southern California Edison (514MW). Major new-capacity additions by utilities in the WSCC region includethe following: Portland General Electric Co, a 210-MW combined-cycle plantfor operation in July 1998; Arizona Public Service, three 70-MW combustionturbines in 1998, two more in 1999, and another in year 2000; LADWP, a240-MW combined-cycle in 1994, plus unspecified additions of 100 MW in1997, 1999, and 2000 and 200 MW in 1998; Nevada Power, combined-cycleconversions of Clark Units 5 and 6 in 1993 and Units 7 and 8 in 1994, plus70-MW combustion-turbine additions in 1994, 1995, and 1996; San Diego Gas& Electric, 230-MW combined-cycles in 1995 and 1996 and 224-MW combinedcycles in 1998 and 2000; SMUD plans to add its 550 MW in 1996, but nodetails are available. Houston Lighting & Power Co plans a 160-MW,gas-fired cogeneration project at a DuPont Corp facility in LaPorte, Tex,that would be owned by the utility as a traditional rate-based plant.Commercial operation of the $120-million (not including land, switchyard,and transmission expenses) facility is expected in mid 1995 . . . BlackHills Power & Light Co asks the Wyoming Industrial Siting Council to waivea permit application for its proposed 80-MW, coal-fired Simpson Unit 2 sothe utility can begin construction by August 1993 . . . Thermo ElectronCorp, Energy Systems Div, Waltham, Mass, selects United Engineers &Constructors Inc to design a 21-MW, biomass-fired powerplant in Delano,Calif. A fluidized-bed boiler will be installed. Construction start isexpected in the spring of 1992; project completion by the end of 1993 . . .US Windpower Inc, Livermore, Calif, and InterCoast Energy Co, a unit ofIowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co, form a joint venture--WindRiverDevelopment Co, Davenport, Iowa--to develop at least 250 MW ofwind-generated capacity in the Midwest . . . Wheelabrator EnvironmentalSystems, Hampton, NH, joins Decker Energy International Inc, Winter Haven,Fla, as a partner in a 40-MW woodwaste- and waste-tire-fired project inPolk County, Fla, near Lakeland. Schedule calls for a January 1994startup, but state and federal air permits have not yet been obtained . . .Southern Electric International Inc, Atlanta, Ga, considersco-developing a $20-million office-paper recycling plant with DeNovo Corp,Washington, DC, that would use 60,000 lb/hr of steam from SEI's planned220-MW, pulverized-coal-fired cogeneration project near Fredricksburg, Va.The powerplant project was selected by Virginia Power in its 1989solicitation under the assumption that a steam host could be developed . . .General Electric Co, Schenectady, NY, estimates that about 69,000 MW ofNUG capacity will be ordered in the US between 1991 and year 2000, withthe Southeast the most significant market region in the 1990s. Estimate ishigher than those of others because the GE number is for plant ordersrather than completed facilities . . . East Kentucky Power Cooperative Incselects its own bid for 300 MW of gas-fired peaking capacity, needed bymid-1995, over those from 11 private developers. The utility based 60% ofthe bid scoring on price, remainder on non-price criteria such asreliability and environmental issues. . . Texas Utilities Electric Co's"information request" soliciting cogenerators and independent powerproducers for expressions of interest for long-term, firm generatingcapacity--the utility plans to add nearly 2200 MW by the end of thedecade--brings replies from 48 developers. The 102 projects proposedincluded 83 gas- and 12 coal-fired facilities . . . The village of GreenIsland, NY, selects American Ref-Fuel, Houston, Tex, to build a$250-million, 1500-ton/day waste-to-energy plant . . . Pinellas County,Fla, which operates a 3150-ton/day waste-to-energy plant shelves plans toexpand facility throughput by as much as 50% because actual volumes havefallen far below projections for several reasons, among them: drought andrelated water restrictions, the economic downturn (less new construction,fewer tourists, etc), little or no population growth, recycling of waste . . . Wisconsin Electric Power Co plans to build a 160-MW cogen plant at thelargest paper mill in the state--Repap Wisconsin Inc's Kimberly facility . . . KVA Resources Inc, Bellevue, Wash, agrees to joint-venture withColumbia Aluminum to build a 210-MW, gas-fired combined-cycle plant nearthe John Day dam on the Columbia River that would intertie at a substationat the smelter. If permitting proceeds according to plan, the plant couldbe in operation as early as September 1993 . . . Towner Electric LP,Minneapolis, Minn, and an unnamed utility plan to develop a 440-MW,coal-gasification project in New Jersey that would also produce 25-milliongal/yr of methanol for use as a gasoline additive or as an alternative tomotor fuel for areas--like New Jersey--where ozone levels must be loweredto comply with the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Power would be soldto Public Service Electric & Gas Co under an agreement specifying that an80% capacity factor be maintained by the new project or it would beresponsible for the cost of replacement power . . . Tennessee ValleyAuthority expects to add up to 220 MW of hydroelectric capacity over thenext 10 years by investing an estimated $100-million in a retrofit programto upgrade turbine runners. First contract in the program, for replacementrunners at Wilson and Chicamauga dams, was awarded last October to VoithHydro Inc, York, Pa . . . Montana Power Co's 150-MW solicitation fordeliveries beginning in 1996 attracts notices of intent to bid for 170projects totaling about 13,500 MW . . . Plans to develop two cogenerationand two geothermal projects totaling more than 110 MW are announced inOregon, including: James River Corp's (Westport) 50-MW, woodwaste-firedpowerplant that would power the expansion of the company's paper mill,Eugene Water & Electric Bd/California Energy's 30-MW geothermal plant inNewberry Crater, Vulcan Power Co's 30-MW geothermal plant in NewberryCrater, and PG&E Bechtel Generating Co's natural-gas-fired project inHermisten.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COAL HANDLING AND PREPARATIONAlthough the basics remain the same, the many elements comprising coalhandling and preparation in the powerplant have taken on a new luster--putthere by the 1990 Clean Air Act AmendmentsBy:Thomas C Elliott, Senior EditorCoal cleaning at the mine, transportation to the powerplant, siteunloading, stockout and storage, reclaiming, feeders and conveyors,preparation, blending and switching, overall instrumentation andcontrol--these are the key topics reviewed in this report. The underlyingtheme is the pervasive impact of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990(CAA), which has so altered the thinking about powerplant operation in theyears ahead (see Power Special Report, "Clean Air Act Amendments: TheEngineering Response," June 1991). Until these amendments became law,precombustion technologies were merely a part of the landscape, advancingmostly as the occasion demanded. Now they are at center stage, key playersin the struggle to slash powerplant emissions at the stack before theybecome problems.   Evidence of a renewed emphasis on precombustion technologies iscompelling (also see box, p 18). For example, the idea of constructing acommon coal-preparation plant serving several large power stations is beingdiscussed today as a business venture similar to independent powerproduction. In addition, at least one midwestern utility reportedly isinvestigating the construction of a centrally located coal-blending stationserving many of the utilities affected by CAA.COAL CLEANING   About one-third of US steam coal (over 200-million tons) is cleaned toremove ash and sulfur impurities and to increase the coal's heating value.Most of the costs of coal cleaning are borne by mining companies, who buildand operate the cleaning facilities and dispose of the refuse removed fromthe coal in the cleaning process (Figure 1). The mining companies pass someof these expenses along to powerplants in higher coal prices.Clean-coal benefitsUtilities are burning more cleaned coal each year because they find thatthe savings it offers in fuel handling, plant efficiency, availability, andenvironmental controls compensate for the added cost. More specifically,improved coal quality can result in:   --A reduction of up to 20% in transportation costs.   --Reduced pulverizer operation and maintenance (O&M) costs because therewill be less hard mineral matter to pulverize.   --Increased boiler availability, efficiency, and life expectancy becauseof reduced slagging, fouling, corrosion, and erosion.   --Reduced electrostatic-precipitator or fabric-filter O&M costs becausethere will be less particulate matter to capture.   With the tighter controls on SO subscript 2 emissions mandated by theCAA, it will be interesting to see in which direction utilities lean withregard to the precombustion alternatives of coal cleaning, blending, andpurchasing of low-sulfur coals. Since the latter two are generally lessexpensive, the scales may tip toward them. Even now, low-sulfur westerncoals are becoming increasingly attractive compared to flue-gasdesulfurization.Commercial techniques   Basic coal-cleaning techniques are covered in detail in McGraw-HillInc's Standard Handbook of Powerplant Engineering, "Coal Cleaning," Sec 4,Pt 1, Ch 2, and in Power's Special Report, Coal cleaning, September 1981;also, March 1987, p 76, and August 1990, p 77. However, two leading-edgecommercial techniques worth mentioning are these:   --Improved hydraulic jig effectively cleans fine coal--a growingchallenge as new mining methods produce finer coal particles for greatersulfur liberation. This fine-coal jig uses hydraulic separation to stratifya bed of different-density particles through the application of a pulsatingwater stream. Microprocessor-controlled air valves regulate the length ofpulsation strokes, allowing raw-coal cleaning down to 100 microns.   --Conventional heavy-media coal-cleaning process has been refined inthis fashion: (1) A new type of magnetite is used with optimized physicaland mechanical properties, (2) the cyclone separation step is enhanced, and(3) the recovery of magnetite has been significantly improved. Theseprocess refinements pertain to the fines cleaning circuit only; thecoarse-material circuit is the same as a conventional prep plant.   Processes nearing commercial status are the thermal drying of low-rankcoals, principally low-sulfur western coals, and the production of pelletsfrom these dried coals, which typically crumble and become very dusty. Inboth cases, the objective is to reduce transportation costs and make thecoal more attractive to eastern markets.Advanced techniques   Some advanced techniques are these, which are at the bench-scale, pilot,or demonstration stages:   --Agglomeration. Here, a light hydrocarbon--such as heptane--isintroduced to agglomerate spherical coal particles. Wet, raw coal is groundto 20 mesh, is mixed vigorously with heptane in a high-shear contactor,then enters a low-shear mixer where asphalt is added as a binder. Afteragitation, the agglomerates are drained of water and refuse particles. Atthis point, steam sparging captures the heptane for reuse. Finally, theresulting coal pellets are water-washed to remove any trace of impurities.   --Froth flotation. This is a physical/chemical process that depends onthe attachment of air bubbles to high-carbon-content hydrophobic solids.Separation of coal occurs as dispersed air bubbles pass through asuspension of fine raw-coal concentrate. Additives are usually required toenhance the hydrophobic character of the coal particles relative to thehydrophilic nature of the mineral matter.   --Column flotation. This process takes advantage of the differences insurface chemistries of coal and mineral matter, which affect the way theseparticles interact with water and air bubbles. The fine-refuse slurry isintroduced into an 8-ft-diameter, 22-ft-high column. Air bubbles risingfrom the column's bottom help to separate coal particles from wastematerial and carry them to the top of the column, where they are skimmedoff.   --Chemical process. Here, mine-cleaned coal is treated with sodiumhydroxide and potassium hydroxide to transfer organic and pyritic sulfurand mineral matter into the molten alkali. Because of the high density ofthe caustic melt, the clean coal floats to the surface of the reactor andis separated out. Molten caustic is recycled; the cleaned coal is furtherwashed with water and dilute acid.   --Biological process. Still in the embryonic state, bioprocessinginvolves the use of micro-organisms, such as bacteria and fungi, tocatalyze sulfur-removal reactions. Studies show that 99% of pyritic sulfurcan be removed by the micro-organism thiobacillus ferroxidans. Especiallyattractive is the use of bioprocessing for the removal of organically boundsulfur, which is resistant to conventional coal cleaning; in the US,research centers around removal using model compounds (dibenzothiophene,polysulfides, and humic acids) to determine the mechanism of directcleavage of sulfur from coal. High cost may be an obstacle to selectingthis process.TRANSPORTATIONTransportation from mine to powerplant is via unit train, barge, truck,overland conveyor belt, or any combination of these modes. The systemselected depends on such factors as distance from mine to plant, daily"burn rate," location of plant site, and relative economics of competingtransportation modes.Unit trains   More than half of the nation's coal-fired steam generators are fed byunit-train coal delivery (Figure 2). A typical coal train is comprised ofabout 110 cars, with each car carrying about 100 tons of coal--an11,000-ton-capacity train continuously operating back and forth betweencoal source and plant like a shuttle. Many utilities own their unit trainsoutright, with these benefits: reduced freight rates, better railcaravailability, greater degree of control over scheduling and maintenance.   Of interest today are shipments of low-sulfur coal from the Powder RiverBasin in Wyoming to eastern destinations. Because of CAA, this coal (atroughly $4/ton) is becoming increasingly attractive. Fears that shortagesand bottlenecks in moving this coal eastward in the years ahead, spurred byburgeoning demand, appear to be groundless.   These questions most often arise: Will shipment costs rise precipitouslyin a demand economy? Will there be enough railcars to handle the risingload? Will there be enough trackage? Will scheduling be a problem? Theanswers are encouraging.   Railroad management is not about to take advantage of its goodcustomers, especially since coal suppliers/users form a solid base for itsoverall business (annual tonnages are more than three times greater thanthe second largest commodity, farm products). Although costs may rise, theywill reflect competitive conditions and not those of a captive marketplace.While it is true that railcar manufacture annually is considerably lessthan 15 years ago (100,000 cars plus vs 40,000 or so today), most cars canaccommodate more coal and weigh less (being aluminum-bodied), thus cancarry an extra five to 10 tons of coal without exceeding track weightlimitations. New routes shouldn't be necessary, although reinforcements inselected areas, upgrading of some trackage, extended siding lengths, anddouble trackage may be required. Most important, railroads generally arerun better--they operate faster, more efficiently, with better scheduling.   With regard to freeze control, thaw sheds at the plant site are stillthe most common solution to arriving shipments of frozen coal, although thehigh operating costs associated with these systems restrict their use tothe largest utilities. Friable western coals are more prone to hardfreezeups because of their high fines concentrations.   Freeze-conditioning agents (FCAs) are receiving increased attentionbecause of their effectiveness in many applications. Some act as ananti-freeze while others weaken the crystalline structure of ice. Arecently introduced FCA consists of50% glycol with special wetting agentsfor freeze conditioning during rail transport. A recent field studysuggests that treating the sides of a coal car with FCAs could be moreeffective than treating the coal itself.Barges   Where feasible, barge delivery usually offers the lowest cost perton-mile, whether for coal or other bulk materials. As a result, US inlandwaterways have been extensively developed, with most coal traffic on theOhio, Monogahela, Mississippi, and Tennessee rivers. A typical barge forcoal transportation is an open hopper vessel measuring 195 ft long, 35 ftwide, 12 ft deep, and loaded to about 1500 tons at an 8- to 10-ft draft.Typically, 15 barges are ganged together, pushed by a tugboat, in anarrangement called a "unit tow," which carries 22,500 tons of coal.   While inexpensive, barge transportation is slow-moving, which cancomplicate scheduling. Waterway freezeups during winter months can be aproblem, as can drought conditions when they become severe enough tothreaten water levels. The crippling drought in the Midwest in 1990 is agood example.   With the anticipated surge in coal traffic--expected to reach more than180-million tons by the mid-1990s--a need exists now for larger fleets,bigger-capacity barges, and continued maintenance and constructionimprovements on the inland waterway system.Trucks, overland conveyors   These modes of transportation are used primarily for coal deliveries toplants near coal mines, although coal for small industrial boilers areoften supplied by trucks covering greater distances. Overland conveyorscommonly move coal up to 15 miles from mine to plant, or from mine tostorage or transportation facilities. Longer distances are feasible but maynot be economical compared to truck hauls or short-haul rail transport.Aerial tramways are sometimes used instead of conveyors to cover relativelyshort distances.   Deliveries by truck account for about 13% of the total amount of coalshipped annually. Three-axle dump trucks hold about 20 tons of coal,tractor/trailers up to 35 tons. The maximum load a truck can carry onhighways is limited by state regulations. Trucks sometimes see service forhauling coal on the spot market; that is, when plants are able to buyrelatively small amounts of desirable coal from distant suppliers.Normally, however, they cannot compete against rail or bargetransportation.SITE UNLOADINGOnce the coal shipment reaches the unloading area at the plant, equipmenttailored for this function comes into play.Railcar unloading   Here, the unloading system is designed to accommodate the specific typeof hopper car that delivers the coal: (1) conventional bottom-dump hoppercar with multiple doors, (2) rapid-discharge bottom-dump type wherevirtually the entire car bottom is opened for quick unloading, and (3) atop-dump gondola car that is unloaded by a rotary-car dumper (Figure 3).   The first design is intended for small users. Designs two and three areintended for larger coal-fired powerplants that require unit-traindelivery. Unloading with the rapid-discharge bottom-dump type is usuallyperformed while the train is in motion. When cars pass over the unloadingarea (a long underground hopper or an elevated trestle), car doors areautomatically opened and closed. Speed is the advantage here; a 110-carunit train can be dumped in 40 minutes--an unloading rate of 16,500tons/hr. This can be attractive for short hauls (less than roughly 500miles).   At most utilities, rotary dumping is the preferred unloading method,mainly because it offers better control of fugitive-dust emissions--alwaysa problem with low-sulfur coals. Major components of a rotary-car dumperinclude the large circular end rings that support the rails on which thedumper turns, and the platen, which carries the track rail. Each end ringrotates on a set of trunions consisting of four or eight crane wheels. Thedumper is rotated by a gear reduction drive through a rack-and-pinionarrangement or a chain. The unloading rate is typically 3500 tons/hr.   Ironically, when hauling low-sulfur western coals, unloading equipmentis subject to little, if any, redesign. This is because train speeds andsizes remain essentially the same. A rotary-car dumper, for example,unloads whatever kind of coal arrives at the unloading area. A largershipment of western coal may take a little longer, but dumper retrofitisn't necessary.Barge unloading   Primary types of barge unloaders are: (1) clamshell-bucket type, inwhich a bucket is suspended from a set of hoisting cables and opened/closedby a set of control cables; and (2) the bucket-ladder type, in which aseries of buckets are supported between two strands of roller chain runningin a loop. In the latter, the buckets are filled by being dragged throughthe coal in the barge and emptied as they pass over a discharge sprocket(Figure 4).   Since significant barging of low-sulfur western coals is notanticipated, unloading is not affected. Bucket redesign might be necessaryif western coals were to be barged, however, to accommodate the dustier,subbituminous material. Low-sulfur eastern coals pose no specialchallenge.   Another type of unloader, called the Siwertell screw-type unloader, isattractive at sites where noise and dust levels can be a problem. Rated at1000 tons/hr, it consists of three totally enclosed screw conveyors, whichtransfer the coal from collier to belt conveyor quietly and dust-free. Ifbarging of dusty low-sulfur coal increased, this unloader should beconsidered.STOCKOUT, STORAGEThe unloading and stockpiling of coal--both active and reserve--are closelyrelated, since the continuous unloading operations require the simultaneouswithdrawal and conveying of coal from the unloading point to the plantstorage areas. Conveying rates of coal to storage must correspond with themaximum unloading rates, so that both operations can be carried out as asingle, continuous process.Stockout equipment   Stockout equipment includes a fixed-boom conveyor, radial stacker, orstacker/reclaimer for, in most cases, stockpiling coal outdoors on theground. A fixed-boom conveyor is a stationary inclined conveyor with theend cantilevered to allow the formation of a conical pile beneath theconveyor discharge. Similar to this is a radial stacker, except theconveyor can rotate horizontally in a semicircle to form a kidney-shapedpile. Linear stackers and stacker/reclaimers (Figure 5) are rail-mountedmachines served by a conveyor that feeds coal to the machine (stockout) ortraveling tripper that delivers coal to the machine (reclaim).Storage piles   Active coal storage is the reclaiming of coal for combustion that hasbeen stored for a relatively short period of time, usually one week or less(Figure 6). Coal from an active pile is normally reclaimed withoutresorting to mobile equipment. The amount of coal stored in an activecoal-storage pile is usually a three-day supply at maximum burn rate.   Reserve storage is a long-term storage pile for supplying coal to thepowerplant on an emergency basis in the event of an interruption of coalshipments. Capacity of the reserve pile is a minimum 60-day supply at 75%of the maximum burn rate. Coal in the reserve pile is compacted. Because ofits dusty qualities, low-sulfur coal requires special treatment in bothactive and reserve storage. It must be wetted down or sprayed withchemicals to prevent undue losses from fugitive-dust emissions. Also, FCAshave been formulated for stockpiled coal applications.Enclosed storage   Enclosed storage of the active pile includes silos and storage barns.The storage silo encloses a vertical concrete-cylinder coal-pileconfiguration usually 70 ft in diameter (Figure 6). The pile is formedwithin the silo by means of an overhead conveyor discharging at the centerof the silo. Reclaiming is via a belt conveyor--normally loaded byvibrating feeders--at the silo's bottom.   An inverted-V-shaped storage barn encloses a long, straight coal pile.The pile is formed within the barn by means of an overhead conveyor with atraveling tripper or a reversible shuttle conveyor. A belt conveyor in aconcrete tunnel below the coal pile does the reclaiming. It emerges frombelow-ground outside of the storage barn and conveys the reclaimed coal tothe desired location.   In the foregoing stackout/storage activities, handling of low-sulfurcoal will require some equipment redesign. Equipment must be larger tohandle the larger quantities of low-sulfur coal, and must also be speededup.COAL RECLAIMINGIn general, coal reclaiming systems may be classified as either below- orabove- grade, depending on whether the coal is removed from the bottom ortop of the storage pile. The tunnel conveyor is the principal form ofbelow-grade reclaiming and is paired with a variety of feedsystems--vibrating feeders, pile discharges, rotary-plow feeders, andmobile equipment.   Above-grade reclaiming systems include the bucket-wheelstacker/reclaimer and bridge-mounted bucket-wheel reclaimers--the latterused almost exclusively for bed-blending operations. As shown in Figure 5,the main components of a stacker/reclaimer are the stacking/reclaiming boomon which is a reversible-belt conveyor, boom counterweight, bucket wheel,traveling rail-gantry mechanism with track wheels, and the travelingtripper. The bucket wheel removes coal off an active storage pile anddischarges it onto the boom conveyor belt. It has a series of bucketsarranged around the circumference of the wheel. The buckets arescoop-shaped with two open faces--one at the leading edge, for digging; theother where the bucket is attached to the wheel, for discharge to the boomconveyor.COAL CRUSHING, STORAGEIn general, the average size of coal received at large powerplants is3-in. x 0. The size required by pulverizers feeding large pulverized-coal(p-c) boilers is 1 1/4-in. x 0. Thus, reclaimed coal must be reduced insize by crushing before it is transported to the unit silos (Figure 7).   The crusher most commonly selected to reduce 3-in. x 0 coal to 1 1/4-in.x 0 coal is the ring granulator.It consists of two end plates mounted onopposite ends of a drive shaft. Smaller shafts are mounted between theseplates around their periphery. On these shafts are small round cuttingrings that perform the crushing or grinding action. This assembly ismounted in a steel housing, the bottom of which is a curved grate. As theyrotate, the rings force coal through the grates in the bottom. Gratespacing is adjustable to compensate for wear.Bunkers, silos   After crushing, the coal is conveyed directly to the unit to fill thebunkers or silos. The bunkers are large-capacity, rectangular-shaped binswith multiple hopper-type outlets. Because coal tends to hang up on theslopes and hopper valleys of bunkers, cylindrical concrete or steel siloswith conical outlets are an alternative. The capacity of in-plant silos isusually 8-10 hours at maximum burn rate (all silos in the plant).   Although bunkers have a greater capacity, a steady gravitation towardsilos at larger powerplants has occurred in recent years. Key reason: Lesspotential for fires and explosions, especially for the low-rank coalsfrequently selected today. Steeper bottom-discharge angles in the silochutes are being specified to make up for the increased use of poor-flowinglow-rank coals.   Methods to feed coal bunkers or silos include fixed trippers, travelingtrippers, shuttle conveyors, reversible conveyors, and en-mass chainconveyors. A primary concern for carbon steel silos and bunkers is metalloss caused by corrosion and wear. Fortunately, carbon steel can beprotected with a gunite lining.FEEDERS, CONVEYORSFeeders deliver coal from a storage area to a point where a conveyor canhandle it conveniently for transport. Of the several different types(apron, bar-flight, vibrating, etc), the gravimetric feeder is the mostsophisticated. It weighs material on a length of belt defined by two fixedrollers (span) precisely located in the feeder body (Figure 8). A thirdroller supports half the weight on the span. As material passes over thespan, the load cell generates a signal proportional to the weight supportedby the center roller. A microprocessor takes samples of the amplifiedoutputs of each cell. The samples are converted into binary numbers, whichare compared to parameters stored in memory. If the outputs are withinexpected range, each is converted into a signal equivalent to weight perunit of belt length, then added to obtain total weight per unit of beltlength.   Friable western coals require special consideration in conveyor-systemdesign (Figure 9). Field experience has shown that the equipment sized tohandle a given quantity of eastern coal will not handle equivalentquantities of western coal, even though speed adjustments are made tocompensate for the lower density of these fuels. The reason is that thehigher speeds necessary to provide an equivalent heat-rate input to theboiler may create a significant fugitive-dust problem when conveyingwestern coals. Speeds in excess of 550 ft/min are not recommended becauseof the high shear velocity along the coal's boundary layer, which has awind-blown effect on fines. Athough expensive, enclosed conveyors are asolution.COAL PREPARATIONIn p-c firing, coal preparation consists of reducing the incoming stream ofcoal to powder in a pulverizer (Figure 10), so that it will burn moreefficiently. Key pulverizing methods are these, which differ on the basisof their drying, feeding, and transport characteristics (also see box, p28):   --Storage or bin-and-feeder. Coal is pulverized and conveyed by air orgas to a collector, where the carrying medium is separated and coal istransferred to a storage bin and then fed to the furnace, as required.   --Direct-fired. The most common arrangement for new units, coal ispulverized and transported with air (or air-diluted gas) directly to thefurnace. The hot air used is called primary air (PA), which is a portion ofthe combustion air.   --Semi-direct. Coal is pulverized and transported to a cycloneseparator, then the separated coal is supplied directly to the furnace bythe independent PA system.Pulverizer types   Basic principals of particle-size reduction with pulverizers (or mills)are impact, attrition, and/or crushing; speed classifications are low,medium, and high. Most commonly used pulverizers are the ball-tube,ring-roll or ball-race, impact or hammer mill, and attrition types. Thefirst two types are most often selected for coal preparation inpowerplants, although ball-tube mills are not suitable for intermittentoperation and tend to be noisy, requiring noise attenuation.   With ring-roll or ball-race mills, two general classes are these: (1)the roller assembly is driven and the ring is stationary, or (2) the rollerassembly is fixed and the ring rotates. Generally, mills are equipped withself-contained or integral classifiers to regulate the fineness. Exhaustersor PA fans are used for flow of hot air through the mills.Recent advances   A new series of coal mills reportedly reduces maintenance cost anddowntime. Features are an independent removable planetary gearbox,vane-wheel primary classifier, heavy-duty grinding-roller assembly,grinding-roller tilt-out mechanism, long-wear-life grinding elements,spring cartridge assembly, and tall top classifier.   A promising device for fine grinding of coal is a ball mill that grindscoal from a nominally 3/16-in. topsize to a 10- to 20-micron size range ina single stage using coarse grinding media. Key features: verticallyoriented, batch operated, intermediate-energy density, stirred bed. Themill can lead to more efficient operation; also anticipated: reduced costof $29/ton vs $51/ton for conventional grinding under comparableconditions.   Coal-mill retrofits based on the principles of two-phase flow instead ofthe usual air-only approximation are now possible. A computer model, usingfluid-mechanical calculations and physical interpretations of theinteractions between solid particles and a gas, help to identify a regionin the classifier with unstable flow characteristics and recommend hardwarechanges that stabilize it. End result: Improved performance of thep-c-fired boiler.   A new, low-cost dry-cleaning process for removing pyrites from coal canbe integrated directly into a p-c powerplant, interfacing with existingcoal bunkers, mills, and burners. It uses a room-temperature, fluidized-bedparticle separator to perform the coal purification process.What about FBC?   Several large bubbling and circulating fluidized-bed boilers areoperating at utility powerplants. The need for carefully characterizing andpreparing coal for FBC application has only been recognized in the last fewyears. It is not unusual to see sizing specifications of 1/16 in. or lessfor low-volatile high-ash coals and coal wastes. High moisture contentaggravates existing prep problems. Top size for highly volatile coals maystill be rather liberal, however. To handle moisture-laden coal, extensivecoal blending is one solution. Fuel dryers can also be considered toalleviate pluggage and combustor instability problems that result whenwetter-than-anticipated coal is fired.BLENDING, SWITCHINGCoal blending can be achieved at either the mine or at the utility. At themine, it is mainly a matter of mixing higher-quality coals with those lessdesirable to produce a blend attractive for purchase. At the utility, thetask is more formidable. Typically, coals are received by train or bargeand stocked in separate piles, by type, using an overhead tripper system. Acoal analyzer is installed downstream of the blending point. Each minute,the analyzer assesses whether or not the mixture is on target; deviationscan quickly be corrected by making an adjustment in the feed rates from thevarious stockpiles. The fuel is then blended by rotary-plow feeders beloweach coal pile, which places pre-determined amounts of each type of coal onthe same conveyor belts--layered in a reasonably blended mix. Thus, coalsof various qualities from different mines can be combined for subsequentcombustion in a boiler.Key advantages   Blending offers these advantages:   --Yields a uniform fuel possessing better combustion properties than theindividual coals making up the blend.   --Allows western coals to be burned in boilers that would otherwise beunable to fire subbituminous coals efficiently.   --Either alone or with physical coal cleaning, can be a valuable methodfor controlling the mineral content of coal.   --Most important of all, by combining low- and high-sulfur coals, ithelps powerplants meet the new SO subscript 2 emissions limits.   Blending is just as much a software as a hardware challenge. Coalsuppliers and powerplants can use commercially available software to selectcoal sources for blending purposes, evaluate the effects of blending onoverall product quality, determine the amount of each coal type needed tomeet product specifications (sulfur, ash, heating value, etc), and designthe least-cost blend.Fuel switching   Switching from high-sulfur coal to a low-sulfur fuel, such as gas, oil,or coal, represents a key option when developing a compliance strategy tomeet the new SO subscript 2 emissions limits. Remember, however, largecoal-fired utility boilers in service today have been custom-designed forselected fuels; changing the fuel may have significant impact on theoperation and reliability of not only the boiler but also many of theauxiliary systems.   Assuming that the original fuel source is an eastern or midwesternhigh-sulfur bituminous coal, fuel-switching alternatives are these: naturalgas, low-sulfur oil, co-firing (usually with gas), low-sulfur coal (eitherwestern or central Appalachian), coal blending. Since the CAA is quiteflexible in how utilities meet emissions limits, the options for fuelswitching are many and diverse among the units and plants in the utility'ssystem.PRECOMBUSTION I&CInstrumentation and control of coal-fired powerplants is becomingincreasingly critical: Emissions limitations, better heat rates, and lifemanagement have imposed this new challenge (see box, p 18). Plantwidenetworks for weighing, sampling, and analyzing coal as it flows from mineto boiler are an integral part of precombustion I&C.Plantwide networks   To move data between field devices and control/monitoring systemsrequires a hierarchy like this (Figure 11):   --Field bus to transmit data from field device to control system andthen transmit commands from control system to final control element.   --High-speed data highway as a means of communications between controland monitoring subsystems, and control-room interface with the operator.   --Plant network to extract information from the data highway andtransmit it to management, operational support, and data-archivingsubsystems.   --Communications gateways to interface between the plant informationnetwork and systems outside the plant proper, such as the utility's energy-and environmental-management systems, corporate computer network, etc.Weighing, sampling   Coal is weighed between bunker and boiler by a scale or feeder. Instoker firing, scales are used exclusively; in p-c firing, either may beselected. Typically, coal scales handle between 10 and 40 tons/hr, whilefeeders process up to about 100 tons/hr. The gravimetric feeder (see above)is among the most accurate weighing mechanisms. Also see the modular beltscale shown in Figure 12, which is controlled by a microcomputer.   Of the many types of p-c sampling systems, most provide isokineticsampling of the full cross-section of the coal pipe between bunker andfeeder. One vendor offers a portable sampler comprising a manual rotatableprobe with collecting cyclone and control box, making it possible to solvefireside problems caused by coal imbalance between burners and minimize NOsubscript x emissions--as well as to measure mill performance withaccuracy.Coal analyzers   Continuous on-line coal analyzers are broadly classified as moisturemeters, ash meters, and elemental analyzers. All of them subject the coalto energy from the electromagnetic spectrum, then correlate the response tomeasure or to infer the coal's constituents and properties. The instrumentsdiffer in accuracy, energy source used to excite the sample, amount ofmaterial that can be sampled, potential analyzer locations, frequency anddifficulty of calibration, and installation costs.   Moisture meters incorporate infrared- or microwave-energy excitation andcapacitance- or conductance-based measurement techniques. Commercialinstruments generally rely on microwave attenuation or capacitancemeasurement because of their higher accuracy. Moisture meters can generallybe mounted directly onto conveyor belts.   Ash meters are based on gamma-energy excitation to determine the coal'smean atomic number (Figure 13). Because ash constituents have much higheratomic numbers than combustible constituents, determining the coal's meanatomic number provides an indirect measure of the ash content. Depending oncoal properties and other variables, ash meters may or may not require asampling system as opposed to direct mounting on coal transport devices.   Elemental analyzers have a higher degree of measurement capability. Theymeasure the content of sulfur, carbon, nitrogen, and many other elementsdirectly. Also, properties such as calorific value, ash fusion temperature,and fouling and slagging indices can be inferred from the elementalcomposition.   Prompt gamma neutron activation (PGNA) is the heart of elementalanalysis (Figure 14). Coal passing through a chute is irradiated withneutrons, which are captured by the various nuclei of the elementscomprising coal. The resulting gamma rays emitted by each nucleus areunique to that nucleus.   The rays are transformed into photons at the gamma-ray detectorassembly, then converted into electronic signals and processed to revealeach element's contribution to the spectrum. Elemental analyzers require asampling system.   Systems available commercially may incorporate one of more or theinstruments mentioned above. For example, an elemental analyzer can becombined with an ash meter, or ash content can be inferred from theanalysis given by a single elemental analyzer. Slurry analyzers areavailable to monitor the composition of coal/water mixtures. Most measureonly ash and solids content, but some under development also are capable ofmeasuring sulfur and iron content.Coal quality--and NO subscript x   Virtually all experts concede that, unlike sulfur, it is impractical toremove nitrogen from coal. But recent investigations underscore theinfluence of coal properties on NO subscript x emissions; morespecifically, how coal properties can be manipulated to reduce NO subscriptx formation. Thus, it is critical that the impact of any coal type orpreparation technique on NO subscript x emissions be thoroughly understoodbefore a change is made to reduce SO subscript 2 emissions.   Already, it is clear that today's low-NO subscript x burners requiremore precise operation if combustion efficiency, CO emissions, bottom-ashquality, flame stabilization, and other factors are not to be compromised.Coal properties are likely to influence operation profoundly.Under investigation   In light of the improved I&C required to meet the new emissions andreporting requirements of the CAA, at least one instrument manufacturer isseeking to provide some answers. Major elements of its exploratory programinclude the application of continuous, real-time coal- and flue-gasanalysis equipment (along with advanced control algorithms run by aminicomputer) that relate coal characteristics to flue-gas parameters. Thegoal is to document how true on-line feedforward and feedback controlschemes can be implemented--showing how precombustion control cancontribute significantly to the lowering of flue-gas emissions frompowerplant stacks.   To test an on-line continuous coal calorimeter from anothermanufacturer, the selected PGNA instrument actually burned the coal andmeasured heating value directly. Different bituminous coals were testedfrom different mines. Sulfur content inthe coal was calculated by measuringSO subscript 2 concentration in the exhaust gas. Moisture in the sample wasdetermined by drying the coal and measuring total moisture (as burned) withan automatic moisture-measurement device.   Ash content was measured by X-ray fluorescence while coal was moving onthe belt feeder. An on-board computer controlled calorimeter operation andcalculated all air- and coal-mass flows as well as coal sulfur, moisture,ash, and heating value.   Key application: determining the proper mix of high- and low-sulfurcoals in coal yards.Acknowledgments   Clark Harrison, CQ Inc; Walter C Womack, William J Ward, Jr, Burns &McDonnell Consulting Engineers Inc; Kevin D Jennison, John H Pavlish,Richard B Rinehart, Richard H McCartney, Black & Veatch; William Weber,Electric Power Research Institute.Figure 1: Coal cleaning reduces ash, sulfur impurities, increases coal'sheating value. Most cleaning facilities are on premises of miningcompaniesFigure 2: Unit train consists of about 110 cars, with each car carryingabout 100 tons of coal--an 11,000-ton-capacity per trainFigure 3: Rotary-car dumper is preferred at most utilities, mainly becauseit offers better control of fugitive-dust emissionsFigure 4: Barge unloader is clamshell-bucket or bucket-ladder type, eitherof which efficiently empties barge coalFigure 5: Stacker/reclaimer is served by a conveyor that feeds coal to themachine (stockout) or traveling tripper that delivers coal to the machine(reclaim)Figure 6: Active coal storage defines coal that has been stored for arelatively short period of time, usually one week or less. Note concretestorage silosFigure 7: Crusher reduces reclaimed coal in size by crushing action priorto pulverizerFigure 8: Gravimetric feeder delivers coal from storage area to locationwhere a conveyor can handle it conveniently for transport (left)Figure 9: Conveyor in plant moves coal from unloading points to storageareas, finally to boiler island (above)Figure 10: Pulverizers reduce the incoming stream of crushed coal to powderso that it will burn more efficiently in the boilerFigure 11: Plantwide networks for weighing, sampling, and analyzing coal asit flows from mine to boiler are an integral part of precombustion I&CFigure 12: Belt scale weighs coal on moving conveyor using load cells,idlers, computer controlFigure 13: Ash meter is based on gamma-energy excitation to determine thecoal's mean atomic number (left)Figure 14: Elemental analyzer depends on prompt gamma neutron activation tomeasure coal passing through chute (right)Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COMING: EXPERT SYSTEMS TO PREDICT IMPACT OF COAL QUALITY ON PLANTOPERATIONWith the continuing sophistication of software, expert systems to relatecoal quality to plant performance are becoming increasingly attractive. Forexample, under the US Clean Coal Technology Program, DOE and EPRI arefunding development and demonstration of a computer softwareprogram--called the Coal Quality Expert (CQE)--that will predict the impactof coal quality on powerplant performance and cost, including emissionscontrol. Already underway, it's a $17.4-million project.   Integrating more than 20 computer models into a single workstation, CQEwill predict the effects of a particular coal on each facet of powergeneration--from mine to stack. To determine the most cost-effective coaland the least-expensive system to control emissions for a given plant, itwill evaluate a range of options, including various coals (26 are currentlyunder investigation), available transportation methods, and alternativeemissions-control strategies.   The expert system will include cost-estimating models for new andretrofit coal-cleaning processes, power production equipment, andemissions-control systems. Individual models will be made available as theyare developed. The first of these models, called the Acid Rain Advisor, isready for use; over 70 EPRI members have models.   When CQE is complete in 1994, users will be able to develop the mosteconomical emissions-control strategies, identify fuel options based onoverall plant economics, and evaluate alternative powerplant engineeringdesigns.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.MICRONIZED-COAL MILLS YIELD PRODUCT 10 TIMES FINER THAN PULVERIZED COALMicronized coal (MC) is normally any coal pulverized to a fineness of 80 to90% less than 325 mesh (43 microns), with an average particle diameter of15 to 20 microns. By grinding the coal some 10 times finer thanconventional pulverized coal, the effective particle surface area isgreatly increased. As a result, the combustion chemistry speeds up stillmore, leading to a reaction that begins to act like a gas or oil flame.   Because of this reaction, the MC mill's best application is withexisting oil/gas-fired plants. Modifications are minimal--mostly theaddition of the MC mill, coal-storage/handling and ash-cleanout equipment,and new controls. Boiler-tube modifications aren't necessary. A recentadvance is the simultaneous micronization of limestone and coal in the samemill, leading to a significant reduction in SO subscript 2 emissions   Key mill designs are these:   --Disc and hammer. The mill houses a vertical shaft, four rotating discseach supporting impact hammers, and a radial fan. As coal, entering at thetop, descends to each disc level, coal-particle sizing is progressivelyreduced. The fan creates a downdraft, discharging the micronized coal atthe bottom.   --Centrifugal-pneumatic. There comminution sets up a turbulent flow oflarge and small, fast and slow particles, which impact on each other,causing attrition and fine pulverization. A centrifugal classifier assurescoal with an optimal particle-size distribution.   --Fluid energy. In this mill, a hollow, elongated torus has a lower zonefor grinding, an upper for classifying. Fluid (air or steam) enters thegrinding chamber through nozzles at pressures to 250 psig. As the fluidexpands, it picks up speed, reaching supersonic velocities. Crushed coalenters the grinding chamber, becomes entrained in the rapidly circulatingturbulent flow, and is pulverized by mutual impaction and attrition. Theclassifier passes finer particles, sends larger particles back.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.SUPPRESSANTS CONTROL DUST IN ALASKAN MINEAn Alaskan coal mine produces 1.5-million tons/yr of ultra-low-sulfursubbituminous C coal for domestic and export markets. The coal is crushedin two steps, and then dropped onto a 660-ft-long enclosed belt conveyor,which moves it to a 7500-ton storage bin. To operate year-round in severeconditions, the mine had to be innovative in all aspects of the operation,including dust control.   Dust is generated at the crushers, transfer points, and loadout. Toimprove dust control at these places, a proven method is the use ofchemical dust suppressants that are either water- or hydrocarbon-based.Chemicals are added to increase the wettability of the coal and toagglomerate small airborne particles into larger particles.   After considerable investigation by mine and vendor personnel, theproduct selected had a combination of wetting, foaming, and residual agentsto provide highly effective dust suppression--not only at the treatmentpoint (just upstream of the primary crusher), but throughout the minefacility.--Martin Marietta Magnesia Specialists Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ON-LINE COAL ANALYZER INSURES SO SUBSCRIPT 2 COMPLIANCENewly mandated emissions standards led Ohio Power Co's Muskingum Riverplant to blend coal from an existing AEP-owned mine with low-sulfur coalpurchased from an outside supplier. To blend the coals efficiently, anon-line analyzer was selected to provide constant readings of the sulfurlevel in the mine-supplied coal to the plant, helping the utility to avoid"overblending" large quantities of low-sulfur coal.   With the analyzer (photograph), the plant was able to comply with thenew emissions standards by purchasing only 7% low-sulfur coal annually(percent of total) as opposed to an estimated 30% that would be neededbased on traditional statistical blending methods.--Gamma-Metrics.Photograph: On-line coal analyzer insures SO subscript 2 complianceCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.BARGE UNLOADER MOVES COAL INLAND IN A HURRYCompany was selected to design/erect a barge-unloading and yard-handlingsystem for Baltimore Gas & Electric Co's Brandon Shores powerplant, whererun-of-mine coal arrives in open-top barges from transloading facilities inNorfolk, Va. The 1700-ft-long dock accommodates three barges.   A pivoting-arm continuous bucket unloader is capable of unloading a7000-ton barge at the rate of 4000 tons/hr onto the 72-in. collectingconveyor. This conveyor transports the 2 in. x 0 coal to conveyor No. 2,sending it over the water and inland to transfer building No. 1, 2100 ftaway. The control-cab operator on the barge unloader can then direct thestream to either conveyor No. 3, which conveys to the existing Wagnerstation stockpile, or to main conveyor No. 4, which terminates at transferbuilding No. 2.   From transfer building No. 2, coal can be directed to the inactivestorage pile, or go on to the bucket-wheel stacker/reclaimer serving twolive storage piles.--Roberts & Schaefer Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.VALVE ISOLATES BURNER/PULVERIZER LINEThe NFPA code states that every burner line must have at least oneisolating valve between pulverizer and burner for pulverized-coal firing.At Dayton Power & Light Co's 2400-MW Stuart station, the valve is closed toisolate the pipe from the furnace during maintenance of a pulverizer or aleaking coal pipe. A leaking pipe can be repaired while the pulverizersupplies the furnace with coal through the remaining pipes.   Called a knife gate valve (photograph), it can withstand thetemperatures associated with burner lines (up to 1700F in some cases). Thetight-fitting valve comes in diameters from 4 to 18 in., and can bemanually operated or fitted with an actuator.--Stock Equipment Co.Photograph: Knife gate valve isolates burner/pulverizer lineCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FEEDERS PROVIDE CONTINUOUS, DEPENDABLE TRANSFER OF COALVibrating feeders provide continuous and dependable transfer of coal fromstorage to generating plant at rates up to 1500 tons/hr (photograph).Ruggedly designed, many of them have been in service for more than 15years.   Coal from the storage facility is delivered via these vibrating feedersat a fixed rate onto the main conveyor belt and into the powerplant. Theyeasily fit into existing systems where other types of feeders have failedto perform.--Renold Inc.Photograph: Vibrating feeders provide continuous and dependable transfer ofcoal from storage to generating plant at rates up to 1500 tons/hr.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FAMILY OF DUST SUPPRESSANTS BASED ON RESEARCH, TESTINGThe Dust-Buster family of dust-suppressant products is the result ofextensive research and field testing under a range of actual conditions.Products include surfactants, single-application foams for localized dustsuppression, and single-application foams for continued dust suppressionthrough downstream operations.   Since each operation for mining and handling of coal is unique in itsmethods and requirements, a comprehensive site survey is conducted toidentify problem areas and to determine specific dust-suppression needs.Then the company considers where suppression is needed most and whichapplication technique will provide optimum suppression at lowest cost.   Company provides a full-service program from equipment design,installation, and service through on-site performance testing. Equipment isinstalled during normal shutdown times, thereby eliminating costly delays.Personnel remain until all systems are functioning properly.--MartinMarietta Magnesia Specialists Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.RING HAMMERMILL OFFERS DIVERSE SERVICEThe ring hammermill is primarily a coal crusher, but it is not limited tosuch service in powerplants. Its rugged construction makes the hammermilladaptable to the reduction of coal middlings, lignite, gypsum, softlimestone, chemicals, and other friable materials.   To minimize wear and avoid generating excessive fines, the machine isdesigned to operate at relatively low rotor speeds. Ring hammers providemaximum wearing surface and eliminate the necessity of manually turning thehammers. This feature, along with the adjustable cage, reduces maintenancecost and ensures control of product size throughout the service life of thecrushing elements.   The mill is available in sizes ranging from 20 up to 3000 tons/hr ormore, making it suitable for small industrial plants or the largest centralstations. If desired, the machine can be furnished with a built-in bypass,which requires very little extra floor space, no extra headroom, andpractically no extra initial investment.--Allis Mineral Systems, GrindingDiv.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PAIR CRUSHER/DRYER WITH FLUIDIZED-BED COMBUSTORS FOR EFFICIENT FUELPREPARATIONAt this California powerplant, a crusher/dryer is the heart of what isreportedly the first fuel-preparation system to be integrated withfluidized-bed combustors. Hot flue gas at a temperature of 1500 to 1700F isdrawn into the machine, where 23%-moisture fuel is simultaneously crushedand dried to meet the requirements of Combustion Power Co's circulatingfluidized-bed (CFB) boiler at GWF Power Systems' 20-MW powerplant nearHanford, Calif (schematic). CFB-boiler requirements are 228,000 parts/hrfines.   The system features the ability to produce a dry, free-flowing fuelusing the energy available from the combustors for drying, thenclose-looping the exhaust gases back to the boiler with no loss in unitefficiency, while also eliminating a dedicated fabric filter for the dryingprocess. Because of the low O2 content of the flue gas, crushing and dryingtake place in an inert atmosphere. Equipment meets NFPA 69 and 85Frequirements.--Williams Patent Crusher & Pulverizer Co.Schematic: Pair crusher/dryer with fluidized-bed combustors for efficientfuel preparationCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.SAMPLING WITHIN BIAS-TEST ACCURACY LIMITSAt Ireland's Moneypoint generating station, Clean Sweep sampling systemswere selected to replace nonfunctioning, three-stage falling-streamsystems. The new systems are guaranteed to perform reliably, handling wetcoal without hangups and providing sampling results within specifiedbias-test accuracy limits.   The automated belt-sampling system has (1) a primary sampler, whichmounts on the conveyor truss or stringers; and (2) a secondary module,which is at ground level alongside the conveyor. Crushed coal is sampledfrom both stopped and moving belts. A "contoured support" assures correctbelt height, which also corrects for sags and valleys.   At Moneypoint, all Clean Sweep systems are equipped with mechanicalintermediate sampling to recover uncrushed samples without stopping theprimary belt. Also, all systems have crushers capable of single-stagereduction to 1/8 in. x 0 size. Commissioning was completed in October 1990.The systems have been successfully bias-tested and in continuous servicesince installation.--John B Long Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PULVERIZER UPGRADES BOOST PERFORMANCEA Midwest utility experienced problems with its six 1975 coal pulverizers.Mechanical failures led to frequent downtime, resulting in substantial lossof unit availability. The company made an evaluation and installed six newmills, one at a time (photograph), allowing the steam generator to remainon line. Each pulverizer was subassembled into major sections, offeringquick installation. Pulverizerreliability and availability have improveddramatically, while maintenance costs have plunged.   In some retrofits, noncompany mills have been upgraded by re-using asmuch as 30% of the existing components and installing company internals incustom-engineered, modified housings. Improved performance, reduced capitaland maintenance costs were the result.--Babcock & Wilcox Co.Photograph: Installation of six new mills--pulverizer upgrades boostperformanceCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.MILL EFFICIENTLY GRINDS WET OR DRY COAL FINESThis vertical-type mill can be a continuous or batch-type stirred-mediamachine that can efficiently grind wet or dry coal fines. Grinding mediasuch as steel balls, ceramic or natural pebbles, or other material isstirred by an overhung double-helix screw (or charge agitator) in anopen-circuit configuration. Material to be ground is fed in at the topalong with mill water. A continuous upward flow of slurry is maintained byan external recycle pump. Small feed particles rise and large particlesfall to the media charge, where they are drawn into the media forgrinding.   Media rises within the screw flights and falls downward in the annularspace between the flight tips and the inside diameters of the mill body.With steel balls as media, typical media depth is 6 to 8 ft. Duringoperation, the lower portion of the mill body is packed with media exceptfor a small space directly below the screw flights. Pulp overflows from themill body into an integral classifier. The overflow is either product orfeed for subsequent classification. Underflow is recycled.--Allis MineralSystems, Grinding Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.TWO-PASS RO EASES DEMINERALIZER REGENERATION BURDENMembrane applications to makeup-water treatment continue to expand. Redesignof a utility pretreatment system, described here, introduced manyimprovements, not least among which was a major reduction in chemical costsBy:Compiled by Sheldon D StraussIon-exchange (IX) demineralization is a common, effective method used forsupplying makeup water for steam production. As one utility learned,however, system modification as a result of open-minded analysis can leadto product improvement and reduction of operating cost.   The utility is TU Electric, and the case in point is the Stryker Creekgenerating station. As described at the recent International WaterConference, the opportunity for improvement arose when deterioration of thetreatment system reached a point where reliability, maintenance costs, andavailability of replacement parts became a source of major concern. Severalother factors compounded the problem: limited availability and rising costof sodium hydroxide, and the impact of IX waste discharges on theenvironment. The need for reduced silica input to the station's twohigh-pressure boilers was another consideration.(Reference 1)   These problems were resolved by substituting membrane treatment for thecation/anion resin-bed combination used to pretreat makeup water for thestation's mixed-bed demineralizer. In almost a year of operation, it hasprovided a better influent for polishing, reducing the frequency ofmixed-bed regeneration. Although the product flow is less, this has beenmore than compensated for by an increase in the pretreatment duty cycle.   The treatment system initially consisted of greensand filters,strong-acid cation and strong-base anionIX units, and a mixed-resin bed; adegasifier following the cation unit provided for CO subscript 2 removal.Operating to a 100-micro-S/cm endpoint, the two-bed (cation/anion) sectionprovided water quality typically in the range 10 to 80 micro-S/cm. Themixed bed was operated to an endpoint of 1 micro-S/cm or 10 ppb silica,concentration of the latter ranging from 10 to 20 ppb SiO subscript 2during service runs.   Several options, all involving membrane treatment with reverse osmosis(RO) in various configurations, were proposed when the need for improvementbecame apparent. To process raw makeup with 400 mg/L dissolved solids,several membrane types were considered, including "seawater" polyamidemembranes because of their 99.5% salt-rejection capability.(Reference 2)Other choices were between single-pass and two-pass RO systems and possibleelimination of the cation/anion-bed combination as opposed to rebedding.   Compared to a single-pass RO with two new cation/anion trains, asingle-train system with two RO passes offered advantages with respect toboth capital and operating costs; service runs of the mixed bed with asingle-pass seawater RO array, moreover, was not judged to be satisfactory.The cost premium for using seawater elements in the first pass of atwo-pass unit was not justified, on the basis of salt passage relative tobrackish-water elements.   These considerations led to the configuration of choice: A two-pass,single-train RO featuring thin-film composite (TFC) polyamide membranes.The dominant factor in this decision was the chemical consumption inoperating the original treatment system--over 462,000 lb of sulfuric acidand 274,000 lb of sodium hydroxide in more than 600 regenerations of thecation and anion beds each year. Substitution of the membrane units wasprojected to reduce IX-bed regenerations by 98% overall.   The new system retains greensand filtration and degasification in thepretreatment section. New greensand media is used, and permanganate isadded continuously to reduce the iron content of the feed; sodium bisulfiteis fed downstream to remove residual free permanganate for protection ofthe thin membranes from oxidation (Figure 1). Sulfuric acid injectionreduces influent pH to 4.5, converting the initial 130-ppm bicarbonatealkalinity to CO subscript 2 for reduction (to about 10 ppm) by thedecarbonator. Subsequent pH elevation to 8.3 by caustic addition furtherreduces CO subscript 2 pass-through and improves membrane rejectioncapability.   Cartridge filters provide 5-micron filtration of solids, followed byinjection of antiscalant/dispersant for additional protection of themembrane system. Under a 500-psi pressure differential supplied by amultistage centifugal pump, makeup flows in sequence to the two passes,each of which comprises two stages. Each of the membrane pressure vesselscontains six FilmTec Corp (Minneapolis, Minn) type BW30-840 membraneelements (Figure 2). Because the second-pass reject is of high quality, itis returned to the first-pass feed stream. First-pass reject is normallydischarged, but held for neutralization if pH is excessive. The membranesystem has averaged 75% recovery.   The system modification and quality improvement of treated makeupaccount for 96% reduction in the cost of chemicals (over $2/1000 gal ofproduct water), more than offsetting the added cost to operate and maintainthe system membranes, pumps, membranes, filters, etc (about $1.7/1000 galto date, and projected at $1.3/1000 gal). Indicative of the water-qualityimprovement is the 1.2-micro-S/cm conductivity and 3-ppb silica leakage(average values) of the two-pass RO vs 30 micro-S and 15 ppb, respectively,for the two-bed ion exchangers.   Resulting improvement of the final product has been the reduction ofconductivity from 0.5 to 0.08 micro-S/cm and silica from 5-10 ppb down tobare detectability. As added benefits, the modification has obviated theneed for new bulk chemical storage tanks, reduced labor costs dramatically,and has reduced the accident potential inhandling of regenerant.Figure 1: New pretreatment for mixed-bed demineralizer substitutes two-passreverse osmosis for two-bed ion exchangeFigure 2: Both passes in RO pretreatment system feature six 8-in. 40-in.polyamide TFC membrane elements per vesselReference(s):1 C Henry and S Parker, TU Electric, and D Reed, Medro Systems Inc,"Benefits of Replacing Two-Bed IX with Two-Pass Reverse Osmosis inHigh-Pressure Drum Boiler Application for the Power Utility Industry,"International Water Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, October 19912 D Reed, personal communicationCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.UTILITIES CONTEND WITH COPPER TO ENHANCE CYCLE RELIABILITYRemedies for corrosion and fouling include replacement of copper-bearingcomponents, improvement of condensate polishing procedures, intensivechemistry monitoringBy:Sheldon D Strauss, Senior EditorThe advantages of copper for heat transfer in steam generating systems areindisputable. At the same time, corrosion of copper and copper alloyspresent in condensers, feedwater heaters, etc can impact heavily on othersystem components. Evidence of the problem in steam and cooling cycles isdescribed repeatedly in the literature and at technical meetings, andremedial steps range from eliminating the source to removal of depositaccumulations.   Copper-related problems in various forms have been encountered at manynuclear and fossil-fueled installations. Both reactor coolant andsecondary-cycle water are involved at nuclear stations. In BWR(boiling-water reactor) plants, copper has impacted on recirc-pipingcorrosion control--through interference with hydrogen water chemistry(HWC)--and on fuel-rod integrity. Crud-induced localized corrosion (CILC)of fuel rods results from interaction between a tenacious scale (mostlycopper-rich oxide crud) and nodular zirconium oxide deposits formed oncladding surfaces. Ensuing thermal stresses, cracking of the oxide layer,and spalling results in formation of pits, which can penetrate the claddingif not arrested.   Identified with plants having copper-alloy condenser tubing and usingfilter/demineralizers for condensate cleanup, the phenomenon was reportedin 1985 to have affected 12-15% of operating BWRs.(Reference 1) While someutilities have replaced copper-alloy condenser tubing with titanium orstainless steel, remedies sought by others--or applied for furtherperformance improvement--include tightened control over the production ofZircaloy tubing and control of copper transport to the reactor. Modifiedlayup and startup procedures and improved water-chemistry monitoring havebeen helpful, but the area receiving greatest emphasis has been treatmentof condensate returns for removal of ionic and particulate matter.   Considerable attention has been given to improving the design andoperation of condensate filter/demineralizers (CFDs), which incorporatepowdered ion-exchange resins for both purposes (as opposed to separatefilters and deep resin beds). Approaches taken have focused on modificationof both precoat septa and CFD vessel designs, and on improvement of theprecoating technique.(Reference 2) The latter includes use of inert fiberin the precoat mixture, protective cellulose fiber overlays, andbodyfeeding of precoat mixtures during service runs. These methods haveproven successful for Georgia Power Co at Plant Hatch, PhiladelphiaElectric Co (Limerick and Peach Bottom), and others, with reactor-feedwatercopper levels reported in the range of 0.1 to 0.3 ppb together withlengthened service runs.   Step precoating, a variant on bodyfeeding, is a procedure applied atVermont Yankee because of deteriorating polisher performance at summerwater temperatures. To improve performance, especially for copper removal,the utility has been using one or more step-precoat operations involvingthe addition of powdered resin, fiber, and resin-fiber mixtures toindividual vessels over short periods of time with the vessels in service.As shown in Figure 1, step precoating after 10 days has been extremelyeffective.(Reference 3) On the average, use of this method has reducedinfluent copper from about 4 ppb to less than 0.7 ppb, and extended summerservice runs to 20 days.   A novel variation on this technique makes use of Ionex cationfiber(Toray Co, Tokyo, Japan), which has excellent crud-removal properties.Applied together with the standard coating mixture (Ecodex P-202H, GraverCo, Union, NJ) in a second step precoat, it has been effective in removing90% of the undissolved copper present in the condensate. Note that othertechniques are being followed for improved copper removal--unprecoatedelements, backflushable filters, and hollow-fiber filtration forparticulate matter, deep-bed vessels for dissolved copper. Limerick stationis in the process of adding the latter to supplement its CDF for twopurposes: protection from condenser inleakage, and copper reduction to 0.5ppb.(Reference 4)   At PWR (pressurized-water reactor) plants, corrosion problems arecentered in steam generators and take several forms: pitting under sludgepiles, denting at tube supports, and intergranular-attack/stress-corrosioncracking (IGA-SCC). Representative of PWR experience is the history atNortheast Utilities' Millstone Unit 2, where tube denting occurred afterthe first year of operation, pitting after six years, and IGA-SCC four tosix years later (1986).   Copper has been implicated to some degree in each of these problems,leading to major steps by the utility to eliminate it. These includereplacement of 70/30 copper/nickel (Cu/Ni) tubing in condensers withtitanium, and in feedwater heaters and moisture separator with stainlesssteel. The heater-drains cooler, the only copper-bearing componentremaining in service, will be retubed during a scheduled steam-generatorreplacement outage in 1992.   Steps are also being initiated to remove copper that has plated out onsecondary-cycle piping surfaces during the life of the plant. The preferredapproach is elevation of secondary-system pH to at least 9.6 duringoperation by increasing ammonia additions. Recirculation of a high-pHsolution (ammonia plus air) during the outage is another possibility, withthe use of a more effective amine (such as di-aminoethane) for copperdissolution as an alternative.(Reference 5) A similar procedure, describedas an elevated pH rinse, was applied to Consumers Power Co's Palisadesstation to remove residual copper from the hotwell and feedwater pipingpreparatory to installing new steam generators.(Reference 6)   Fossil-fueled plants. Recognizing the sensitivity of high-pressurecycles to copper, industry chemical guidelines limit its content infeedwater to 2 ppb.(Reference 7) In cycles containing copper-bearingcomponents or lacking adequate condensate polishing, the degree ofcorrosion-product transport and deposition in piping, boilers, and theafterboiler circuit can be surprising. Attesting to this is recentexperience at Laramie River station, operated by Basin Electric PowerCooperative.(Reference 8) The cycle is replete with copper--Admiralty brassand 90/10 Cu/Ni in the condensers and low-pressure (l-p) feedwater heaters,70/30 Cu/Ni tubing in the high-pressure (h-p) heaters. Affected areasincluded the station's 2400-psig boilers, high-pressure turbines and f-wheaters, pumps, valves, etc.   Boiler-waterwall leaks that began in 1989 caused particular concern.Examination of a section cut from a leaker in Unit 3 early in 1990 revealeda deep pit adjacent to thick copper-colored deposits (Figure 2); analysisindicated under-deposit caustic gouging. Subsequent visual examination ofUnit 2 revealed tiny copper particles uniformly scattered over almost theentire surface of every tube inspected--probably typical of all threeunits. It was decided to chemically clean Unit 2, and to make severaloperational changes to minimize further damage from copper deposits:increase condensate pH from 8.6-8.7 to 8.8-9.2, blanket h-p heaters withnitrogen during outages, and shorten run lengths for deep-bed condensatepolishers.   As a prelude to cleaning, deposit densities were determined byenergy-dispersive X-ray analysis to range from 13 to 28 g/ft superscript 2,with copper and copper oxides constituting 61 to 80% of the total (and ironoxide 12-14%). Screening tests indicated thata two-stage cleaningconsisting of ammoniacal oxygen solvent followed by EDTA for iron oxideremoval would effectively clean and passivate tube surfaces.   Cleaning began by filling the boiler with demineralized water at pHabout 9 to the normal operating level. After the primary superheater wasbackfilled through the attemperator sprays, the boiler was heated slowly toabout 150F, with draining to keep the swelled volume from rising abovenormal drum level. Water was then drained to make room for the ammoniumhydroxide and ammonium bicarbonate solutions; these were pumped to theboiler, and circulated through the economizer and boiler. Whenconcentrations appeared uniform, O subscript 2 gas was injected through thedowncomer drains while circulation (at about 150F) was continued.   After some eight hours, with dissolution apparently complete, the boilerwas drained hot and rinsed with demineralized water through the superheaterattemperator sprays, overflowing through the drum down to the pump suctionand pumped to waste tanks. The boiler was then refilled with hot deminwater and rinsed until copper and ammonia levels allowed for discharge tothe station ponds. Next, boiler and economizer were filled again with deminwater, heated, the expansion drained, and an EDTA solution circulated withtemperature held at 275F maximum. The solvent was cooled to 150F when irondissolution was complete.   The last stage, passivation and dissolution of residual copper withgaseous O subscript 2 admitted to the downcomer drains, was completedwithin 45 minutes--an important point, because boiler-tube steel cancorrode rapidly in the process.   An astounding amount of copper was removed from the station economizersand boilers, ranging from 2616 lb from Unit 2 to 7508 lb from Unit 1.Inspection after cleaning showed the drums and headers of all units to beclean and passive. Waterwall tube sections were coated with 3-4 g/ftsuperscript 2 of mixed iron oxides, typical of freshly cleaned andpassivated steel surfaces.   This experience sharpened understanding of earlier episodes involvingplugging of boiler-feedpump screens (1982-84), turbine copper deposits(first detected in 1983), and pressure losses across h-p heater tubes(1984-89), all treated by chemical or physical cleaning. With regard to theh-p turbines, for example, a need for inspection and cleaning was notindicated until a capacity-loss trend became evident early in 1990. It wasalso noted that Unit 2 did not exhibit a capacity loss; that unit had lesssteam attemperation, accounting for lack of copper deposits in theturbine.   In sum, the evidence indicates that the 70/30 Cu/Ni is de-nickelizing onboth tube and shell sides of the h-p heaters, and that the copper remainingflakes off. This would explain the presence of copper in the attemperationwater of Units 1 and 3, and in the water of all three boilers, andidentifies the h-p heaters as the problem source.   This resulted in two operating changes as a short-term fix: Dumping ofh-p heater drains to the condenser on startup until copper levels dropsignificantly, and increasing hydrazine injection at the economizer (to 40ppb) to encourage production of a less volatile copper form (cuprousoxide), to minimize carryover to the turbine. A decision has already beenmade to retube the h-p feedwater heaters. Additional steps initiatedinclude extensive monitoring for copper throughout the cycle and locationand elimination of all possible points of air ingress. Injection ofhydrazine scavenger into the crossover pipe between intermediate- andlow-pressure turbines is also under consideration.Figure 1: Step precoating of individual demineralizers between days 10 and20 produced sharp copper drop in effluent of vessels B, C, D, smallerreductions for three-year-old vessels A and E. Dotted line indicatestransitionFigure 2: Boiler-tube section from Laramie River station shows heavy copperdeposit plus caustic gougingReference(s):1 M O Marlowe and others, "Nuclear Fuel Cladding: Localized Corrosion,"American Nuclear Society International Topical Meeting onLight-Water-Reactor Fuel Performance, Orlando, Fla, April 19852 E Salem and M O'Brien, "Body Feeding, Design Advances Aid Precoat-FilterPerformance," Power, June 1991, p 903 R P Gerdus, "Step Precoating with Powdered Resin and Cation Fibers,"EPRI Workshop on Filtration of Precipitates in LWR Systems, King ofPrussia, Pa, September 19914 P D'Angelo, Philadelphia Electric Co, personal communication5 V Jones, Northeast Utilities, personal communication6 W Ciccarelli and J McElrath, "Use of Elevated pH and Cation Resin forRemoval of Residual Copper from a PWR Feedwater System," InternationalWater Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, October 19917 "Interim Consensus Guidelines on Fossil Plant Cycle Chemistry," ElectricPower Research Institute Report CS-4629, June 19868 T Fitzsimmons and others, "Copper Problems at Laramie River Station,"International Water Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, October 1991Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Energy & Environmental Research Corp appoints Dr Anu Sanyal director ofEnergy & Environmental Research Corp appoints Dr Anu Sanyal director ofperformance engineering...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.STONE & WEBSTER ENGINEERING CORPStone & WebsterEngineering Corp names Philip Garfinkel chairman, BenCarlson president, and Jean L McCluskey board member...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Stone & Webster Inc elects James N White senior vice president...Stone & Webster Inc elects James N White senior vice president...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Foster Wheeler Energy Corp appoints Elias Gedeon manager of internationalFoster Wheeler Energy Corp appoints Elias Gedeon manager of internationalsales...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Osmonics Inc appoints Andrew T Rensink vice president of technology...Osmonics Inc appoints Andrew T Rensink vice president of technology...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Hadson Power Systems Inc names Lawrence S Folk president and CEO and ScottHadson Power Systems Inc names Lawrence S Folk president and CEO and ScottA Noll president of Hadson Development Corp...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Gibbs & Hill Inc names Irvin E Richter president...Gibbs & Hill Inc names Irvin E Richter president...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.UNITED ENGINEERS 7 CONSTRUCTORS INCUnited Engineers & Constructors Inc names Peter A Russo vice president ofinternational development...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Power Generation Inc appoints Harvey Padewer president of its gasABB Power Generation Inc appoints Harvey Padewer president of its gasturbine division and Jim R Thompson vice president of sales andmarketing...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CRS Sirrine Engineers Inc appoints Gary F Payne senior project director ofCRS Sirrine Engineers Inc appoints Gary F Payne senior project director ofits power division...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Flexitallic Inc names Michael Berry president...Flexitallic Inc names Michael Berry president...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research Cottrell, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies Corp, names DrResearch Cottrell, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies Corp, names DrRobert H Caldwell vice president of operations...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.The Atlantic Group names W H Robinson manager of valve services for itsThe Atlantic Group names W H Robinson manager of valve services for itspower division.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Newport News Industrial Corp, Newport News, Va, receives a major valveNewport News Industrial Corp, Newport News, Va, receives a major valverepair contract from Houston Lighting & Power Co's South Texas Project.Also, the company will provide specialty valve services to Public ServiceCo of New Hampshire during Seabrook nuclear station's first refuelingoutage...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Power Safety International will train NRC inspectors to recognize andPower Safety International will train NRC inspectors to recognize andcorrect electromechanical problems associated with motorized-valveactuators in nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Combustion Engineering Services, Windsor, Conn, will supply theABB Combustion Engineering Services, Windsor, Conn, will supply thefollowing equipment: a low-NO subscript x concentric burner system to UnionElectric Co's Labadie Unit 4; a replacement economizer for Utah Power &Light Co's Hunter station; design and engineering services for themodification of steam generators at Consolidated Edison Co of New YorkInc's Astoria and Ravenswood generating stations; and reheater andsuperheater assemblies for Unit 4 of Atlantic Electric Co's Englandstation. In addition, the company will install coal pulverizers at NewEngland Power Co's Brayton Point Units 1 and 2; replace an economizer andretrofit a low-NO subscript x concentric-firing burner system at KentuckyUtilities' Brown station; retrofit a low-NO subscript x firing system atIndianapolis Power & Light Co's Stout station; and supply two3.8-million-lb/hr boilers, a plant-wide control system, auxiliaryequipment, engineering services, and training to Korea Electric Power Cofor the utility's planned 1000-MW Taean station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Resource Recovery Systems, Windsor, Conn, supplies threeABB Resource Recovery Systems, Windsor, Conn, supplies threedry-scrubber/fabric-filter emissions control systems for the GreaterDetroit Resource Recovery Authority's waste-to-energy plant...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Power Generation Inc, Manufacturing Div, begins manufacturingABB Power Generation Inc, Manufacturing Div, begins manufacturinggas-turbine combustor sections at its Richmond (Va) facility...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, conducts an audit ofHalliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, conducts an audit ofTemlin nuclear station's Units 1 and 2 for the Czechoslovakia ElectricityBoard...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, will construct a 135-MW,Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, will construct a 135-MW,combined-cycle cogeneration plant in Newark, NJ, for the Newark BayCogeneration Partnership...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Chas T Main Inc, Boston, Mass, will construct a 54-MW, gas-turbine-basedChas T Main Inc, Boston, Mass, will construct a 54-MW, gas-turbine-basedcogeneration plant at Mobil Oil Corp's Beaumont (Tex) refinery...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,is working with the Czechoslovakian manufacturer Orgrez to build asimulator for training operators at the Temelin nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Chem-Nuclear Systems Inc, Columbia, SC, supplies water filtration andChem-Nuclear Systems Inc, Columbia, SC, supplies water filtration anddemineralization equipment to GPU nuclear's Oyster Creek station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PaR Systems Group, a subsidiary of Cimcorp Precision Systems Inc, St. Paul,PaR Systems Group, a subsidiary of Cimcorp Precision Systems Inc, St. Paul,Minn, will replace the existing control systems on the Unit 2 refuelingplatform of Niagara Mohawk Power Corp's Nine Mile Point nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Stone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass, is awarded contracts byStone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass, is awarded contracts byPotomac Electric Power Co (Pepco), Potomac Edison Co (PE), and MonongahelaPower Co (Mon Power) to improve the performance--through clean-coalretrofits and/or upgraded controls--of certain coal-fired stations,including: Pepco's Chalk Point Units 1 and 2, PE's Smith station Unit 4,and Mon Power's Rivesville station Units 5 and 6. The company's Denveroffice will engineer and construct a 20-MW addition to an existinghydroelectric station near Ione, Wash. Also, Central Hudson Gas & ElectricCorp contracts Stone & Webster, New York, NY, to convert two 600-MW,oil-fired units to oil/gas firing...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research-Cottrell, Branchburg, NJ, a subsidiary of Air & Water TechnologiesResearch-Cottrell, Branchburg, NJ, a subsidiary of Air & Water TechnologiesCorp, is part of a team selected by DOE to design and build a full-scalemicronized-coal reburn system for controlling NO subscript x emissions fromwall-fired steam generators...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Primesouth Inc, Columbia, SC, will operate and maintain a 19-MW, wood-firedPrimesouth Inc, Columbia, SC, will operate and maintain a 19-MW, wood-firedcogeneration plant being built in Lewis County, NY, by Diamond Energy Inc,Los Angeles, Calif...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Metric Constructors Inc, Charlotte, NC, will build a 340-MW,Metric Constructors Inc, Charlotte, NC, will build a 340-MW,gas-turbine-based peaking powerplant in DeBary, Fla, for Florida PowerCorp, St. Petersburg, Fla...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Papco Industries Inc, Northvale, NJ, supplies non-metallic expansion jointsPapco Industries Inc, Northvale, NJ, supplies non-metallic expansion jointsfor FGD systems at Ratcliffe station, Nottinghamshire, UK, Northern IndianaPublic Service Co's Bailey station, and Taiwan Power Co's Hsintastation...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Resorcon Inc, a division of Niagara Blower Co, Pittsburgh, Pa, suppliesResorcon Inc, a division of Niagara Blower Co, Pittsburgh, Pa, supplieswet-surface air-cooled condensers to the MassPower combined-cyclecogeneration plant being built in Springfield, Mass, by Bechtel Power Corp,San Francisco, Calif...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Conversion Systems Inc, Horsham, Pa, provides a system to stabilize FGDConversion Systems Inc, Horsham, Pa, provides a system to stabilize FGDscrubber waste at Allegheny Power System's 1920-MW Harrison station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Foxboro Co, Foxboro, Mass, will supply hardware for a prototype nuclearFoxboro Co, Foxboro, Mass, will supply hardware for a prototype nuclearpowerplant control system being developed by B&W Nuclear Service,Lynchburg, Va...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Walnut Creek, Calif, will develop aHalliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Walnut Creek, Calif, will develop areliability-centered maintenance (RCM) workstation for EPRI; supplymanagement software to Public Service Electric & Gas Co, Newark, NJ; andhelp develop an RCM program for Ontario Hydro'sBruce-A nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research-Cottrell Companies, Environmental Services & Technologies Div,Research-Cottrell Companies, Environmental Services & Technologies Div,Branchburg, NJ, will install noncatalytic NO subscript x-reduction systemson two boilers at Garden State Paper Co, Garfield, NJ...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Custom Coals International, Pittsburgh, Pa, a joint venture of DuquesneCustom Coals International, Pittsburgh, Pa, a joint venture of DuquesneVentures, Pittsburgh, Pa, and Genesis Research, Carefree, Ariz, is selectedby DOE to build a 250-ton/day coal-processing plant, which will remove80-90% of the sulfur from high-sulfur coals...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Foster Wheeler Energy Corp, Clinton, NJ, will supply 12 low-NO subscript xFoster Wheeler Energy Corp, Clinton, NJ, will supply 12 low-NO subscript xburners to West Penn Power Co's Armstrong station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Black & Veatch, Kansas City, Mo, will install continuousBlack & Veatch, Kansas City, Mo, will install continuousemissions-monitoring equipment on two coal-fired cogeneration plants--onein Ewa Beach, Oahu, Hawaii, and one in Jacksonville, Fla...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FMC Corp, Chalfont, Pa, will supply coal unloading, storage, and reclaimFMC Corp, Chalfont, Pa, will supply coal unloading, storage, and reclaimsystems for the Chamber Works cogeneration project, Carney Point, NJ...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.GEC Alsthom, Paris, France, will supply a 285-MW steam turbine/generatorGEC Alsthom, Paris, France, will supply a 285-MW steam turbine/generatorfor the Chamber Works cogeneration project...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Leeds & Northrup, a unit of General Signal Corp, North Wales, Pa, willLeeds & Northrup, a unit of General Signal Corp, North Wales, Pa, willsupply a distributed control system for the new 42-MW cogeneration facilitybeing built in Pawtucket, RI, and two distributed control systems for the850-MW, oil-fired Units 3 and 4 of Pennsylvania Power & Light Co's MartinsCreek station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Vortec Corp, Collegeville, Pa, receives a DOE contract to develop anVortec Corp, Collegeville, Pa, receives a DOE contract to develop anadvanced, multifuel-capable, combustion-and-melting system to vitrify andrecycle various hazardous and nonhazardous wastes...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Environmental Elements Corp, Baltimore, Md, will supply an electrostaticEnvironmental Elements Corp, Baltimore, Md, will supply an electrostaticprecipitator for a 350-MW unit at Public Service Co of Indiana's WabashRiver station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Johnston Pump Co, Nuclear Services Div, Chattanooga, Tenn, will supply 11Johnston Pump Co, Nuclear Services Div, Chattanooga, Tenn, will supply 11replacement service-water pumps to Carolina Power & Light Co...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research-Cottrell Companies' subsidiary KVB, Branchburg, NJ, will supplyResearch-Cottrell Companies' subsidiary KVB, Branchburg, NJ, will supplycontinuous emissions-monitoring systems to Indianapolis Power & Light Co'sPetersburg and Pritchard stations...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.United Engineers & Constructors Inc, Englewood, Colo, will provideUnited Engineers & Constructors Inc, Englewood, Colo, will provideengineering services for the addition of an FGD system to DakotaGasification Co's Great Plains synfuels plant...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,will provide a training system for the soviet-designed Leningrad nuclearstation, St. Petersburg, USSR...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.BW/IP International Inc, Long Beach, Calif, will provide maintenance andBW/IP International Inc, Long Beach, Calif, will provide maintenance andreplacement parts to four reactor coolant pumps at Florida Power Corp'sCrystal River Plant.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, acquires ResourcesHalliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, acquires ResourcesConservation Co, Bellevue, Wash, and joins with Precision MechanicalAnalysis Inc to form a predictive maintenance applications department inTampa, Fla...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Aquagenics Inc, Londberry, NH, is established to provide engineering andAquagenics Inc, Londberry, NH, is established to provide engineering andconsulting services for utility/industrial water and wastewatertreatment...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Ronan Engineering Co, Woodland Hills, Calif, Honeywell Inc, IndustrialRonan Engineering Co, Woodland Hills, Calif, Honeywell Inc, IndustrialAutomation & Control Div, Phoenix, Ariz, and Rosemount Inc, Eden Prairie,Minn, will jointly develop and manufacture an integrated-circuit chipset tosupport the emerging Fieldbus communications standard...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.B&W Nuclear Services Co, Lynchburg, Va, opens a new nuclear parts serviceB&W Nuclear Services Co, Lynchburg, Va, opens a new nuclear parts servicecenter in Lynchburg...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Bergmann USA Inc, Houston, Tex, establishes Bergmann Heavy Industries Inc,Bergmann USA Inc, Houston, Tex, establishes Bergmann Heavy Industries Inc,Houston, to manufacture large pressure vessels for use in power generationand other industries...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.BURNS & MCDONNEL ENGINEERING COBurns & McDonnell Engineering Co, Kansas City, Mo, and W S Atkins Ltd, UK,agree to cooperate on international architectural and engineeringprojects...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, and IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, formWestinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, and IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, forma partnership to integrate IBM's PS-2 and RISC-6000 computers intoWestinghouse distributed control systems...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Coppus Murray Turbomachinery Corp, Burlington, Iowa, signs an agreementCoppus Murray Turbomachinery Corp, Burlington, Iowa, signs an agreementwith Blohm & Voss GmbH, Hamburg, Germany, to market and service eachother's steam turbine/generator packages...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Mobay Corp, Miles Inc, and Agfa Corp merge to form Miles, Inc, Pittsburgh,Mobay Corp, Miles Inc, and Agfa Corp merge to form Miles, Inc, Pittsburgh,Pa...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PRECISION SAMPLERS INCMoved: Because of a fire, Precision Samplers Inc moves to 900 MacCorkle AveSW, Charleston, WVa 25303-1319.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CIRC-WATER PIPING REPLACEMENT: GIVE IT THE ATTENTION IT DEMANDSWhen a vital piping system runs out of life, there is a chance to rethinkpossibilities, reconsider principles, and even to come up with uniquesolutionsBy:Ronald D Vering and John A Bugni, Burns & McDonnellEdited by W O'KeefeCirc-water piping between condensers and either cooling tower (CT) or otherheat sink is a lifeline for unit operation. Failures occur in theselarge-diameter piping systems, of course, requiring repair. The repairsusually call for little or no engineering effort. After several failuresand repairs, however, the system may become a candidate for replacement. Atthis juncture, the situation justifies extensive study and engineeringwork. The result is often a decision for replacement.   Preparing for the retrofit will present several challenges, comprisingthe key engineering questions about the proposed project. Look at thesechallenges and then at their influence on an actual retrofit operation at autility station:   --Optimizing the pipeline route. Economics require that you keepoperating-facility disruption to a minimum, and considerations concerningspace for plant operation and future expansion are three factors here.Changes in the plant or additions to structures and equipment since theoriginal circ-water piping went in may influence planning, and the verticaldimension of route is important, as well. Decision may be for anabove-ground or a below-grade installation.   --Optimizing piping configuration. After route selection, theconfiguration or layout of the piping calls for attention. An above-groundline is quite different from a below-grade one, as one example of theconsiderations. The configuration must suit site-specific conditions andplant-operation philosophy. At this stage, primary objectives may bereduction in disruption of plant operations and limitation of generationdowntime. Give thought, too, to how much of the retrofit lines the plantcan install without interrupting the existing circ-water lines.   --Accommodating thermal expansion. Conventional longitudinal expansionjoints and anchors are available. Flexible couplings are also worthconsidering.   --Reducing pipe-support costs. These components of the system allowthermal movement and relieve beam bending stress in the pipe. They alsomust prevent excessive pipe movement. Pipe-support costs can be animportant factor in installation cost for the retrofit system and deserveengineering attention.   --Retrofitting with minimal downtime. If generation is not to be lost,pipe installation needs care. Should an outage for installation be long,then perhaps the plant can wait for a fairly long outage for otherrepairs.Retrofit follows precepts   The city of Lakeland's 333-MW McIntosh Unit 3 was equipped with7-ft-diameter circ-water pipes between condenser and cooling tower. Afterseveral failures had occurred in the below-grade system, the Floridautility's engineers decided to replace the lines. The study followed theprinciples outlined above, and both engineering and installation facedseveral unique situations.   Optimizing the route in this case came down to a choice between twopossibilities. One was a repeat of the original below-grade choice,following an existing secondary road in the plant. The other was anabove-ground installation through an open space in the plant's 230-kVswitchyard.   Decision was for the above-ground configuration. Figure 1 pictures thepiping and the switchyard during construction. The decision was a difficultone. From a plant-operation standpoint, a below-grade installation waspreferable, as even casual study of Figure 2 makes clear. Nevertheless,going below the surface would call for extensive trench shoring to protectexisting structures and for dewatering, because of a high groundwatertable. In addition, a below-grade installation would have needed trenchdepths to 15 ft in some areas to clear existing electrical duct banks.   Because of the cost impact of these site-related installationconditions, the above-ground configuration won out. The projected costsaving of the above-ground over the below-grade installation was about$3.5-million.   Pipe-material cost was an important component of total project cost, andtherefore required evaluation during the route-selection process. Concrete,fiberglass, and steel were the possibilities, judged on a comparable basisthat considered strength, corrosion resistance, and maintenance. Decisionwould have been for concrete as most economical for a below-gradeinstallation. Steel was the choice for the selected above-ground system.   Running the lines above-ground posed many unique challenges. Theconfiguration finally chosen, however, allowed installation of most of thepipeline without upsetting the old circ-water system. The amount of pipeawaiting installation during a Unit-3 outage finally amounted to only thatfor tie-in at the condenser, the circulating-water pumps, and the coolingtower, plus some pipe under a 69-kV electrical bus and a 230-kV transferswitch in the switchyard area.   Figure 2 outlines major considerations affecting piping configurationand details four of the most critical design areas. It gives the choices ofroutes and makes clear the pipe stretches installed during unit outage.   Maximum access and laydown space in the area between Unit 1 and Unit 3resulted from the stacked pipe arrangement along the west side of Unit 3(Figure 3). Jointing of the pipe in this area, by couplings and flanges,makes possible the dismantlement of the pipe and thereby the accommodationof future removal of such major equipment as Unit-3 transformers. Eyeswelded at the tops of pipe spools help in this.   The crossing (Figure 4) under both the existing 230-kV switch structure,which transfers Unit-3 generated power to the switchyard, and the 69-kV tiebus connecting the switchyard for Units 1 and 2 to the Unit-3 switchyard,demanded special consideration. Clearance needs mandated raising of bothstructures.   Pipeline clearance from overhead power lines throughout the plant site,as well as electrical bus inside the switchyard, was another concern. Thedesign met fault-current potential considerations by grounding the pipelineat approximately 40-ft increments, at each pipe joint.   Reaching the cooling tower required crossing the main plant-entranceroad. Partial burying of the pipes in this area reduced installation costs.Although setting the bottom of the pipe about 4 ft below existing gradeeliminated need for extensive shoring and dewatering here, the concept madenecessary an adjustment to the existing road's profile to accommodate the3-ft abovegrade projection of the 7-ft-diameter pipe, plus 30 in. of fillover the pipes.   Existing facilities near the road crossing further complicated roadrevisions. Nevertheless, the completed change of road grade added minimalcost without impairing existing facility access.   At the CT, setting the replacement pipe header outside the existing CTpipes (Figure 5) allowed installation of the new CT header during operationof the old pipeline. In addition, maintenance cranes placed either outsidethe new CT header or in the alleyway left between the new header and the CTcan remove CT equipment or work on the circ-water pumps.   Thermal expansion of piping can make longitudinal-expansion elements andanchors necessary, but these devices would have cost too much for theMcIntosh project. Anchoring the 7-ft above-ground pipe against its possible470-kip internal-pressure thrust load combined with a possible 150-kipfriction load resulting from pipe movement would have been expensive. Therequired route included five bend points, raising costs even higher.   Part of the solution was to allow the pipe to move near bend points,which eliminated need for anchors. Pipe geometry still had to be flexibleenough to give the needed thermal-stress relief, however, and there wereseveral locations where the geometry fell short. Inserting a set offlexible couplings at pipe joints at these locations gave flexibility atlow cost. The couplings relieve pipe thermal stress by functioning ashinges that allow point rotation at consecutive pipe joints. Anotherpurpose for flexible couplings was reduction of loads on connections toexisting equipment and piping.   Flexible couplings for pipe-stress relief make necessary jointharness-rod assemblies to transmit the pipe-pressure thrust force acrossthe couplings. Conventional multi-bolt tie-rod assemblies restrict freerotation at the coupling, however, so the arrangement of Figure 6, withonly two bolts, one on each side of the plane of joint rotation, waspreferred. There is free hinge rotation at the coupling. The speciallydesigned ring-girder stiffeners in the figure are necessary to preventlocal pipe buckling in the vicinity of the harness-rod attachment.   Four regions of interest from the thermal-expansion standpoint arehighlighted in Figure 2. Near the circ-water pumps, a tee branch instead ofa wye gives a better distribution of thermal loads on the pump connections.At the west end of the cooling tower, an expansion loop in the connectionto the CT blowdown line reduces thermal loads on the blowdown-lineconnection.   Pipe-support costs were a key factor in installation costs. To keepcosts to a minimum, designers chose three types of supports, each intendedto accommodate pipe thermal movement and relieve beam bending stress in thepipe.   One type exploited the ring girders already employed at theflexible-coupling harness assemblies, adding steel-plate support-legattachments welded to the girder (Figure 6). Another type, for the vicinityof pipeline bend points, was a steel saddle welded to the pipe's hauncharea.   The base plates for both of these support types have slide surfaces withtetrafluoro-ethylene on both faces to permit pipe movement in alldirections. Guides prevent excessive movement.   The third type of support, the concrete cradle, is in the straight runsof pipe, where longitudinal movement is the sole concern.Graphite-impregnated felt between pipe and concrete cradle eases pipemovement on the support surface.   To reduce costs, the pipe-support foundation system received shallowspread footings except where loads were excessive. Where pipe loadstransmitted large moments into the foundation, pile foundations becamenecessary. Only two locations required them: the stacked pipe arrangementat the condenser and the riser pipes at the cooling tower.   It was important in the Lakeland replacement project to minimize loss ofgeneration during pipe installation. The final design configuration allowedinstalling most of the pipe while Unit 3 was operating. The estimate ofoutage time for tie-in of that pipe was four to six weeks, assumingdouble-shift work and separate crews for the condenser, switchyard,circ-water-pump, and CT areas.   Tie-in was set for a planned annual unit outage, but the outage durationhad to be extended beyond the normal period to allow the tie-in. For bettermaintenance-time utilization during the longer-than-normal outage, Lakelandscheduled a turbine overhaul to coincide with the tie-in.   A single crew, working a normal 40-hr work week during a four-monthperiod, put in the 2220 ft of pipe scheduled for pre-outage installation.The pipe to be installed during the outage required four weeks, withdouble-shift work for the first outage week and then three weeks of single12-hr shifts.   During the outage, four separate crews worked in the four areasmentioned above. Curing the coating on the pipe's field-welded closurejoints and filling and hydrotesting took about a week.   There were no significant problems during hydrotest and return toservice of the circ-water line. Weld inspection and testing of individualjoints, done during installation of the pipe, contributed to the freedomfrom trouble in the hydro test. Minor leakage occurred at one 7-ft andseveral 24-in. flexible couplings, but retightening the coupling bolts tocompress the joint gaskets properly stopped the leakage.   High vibration occurred on one circ-water pump during startup. The newpump discharge pipe's stiffness differed from that of the old, aggravatingan inherent pump-column/pipe-system resonant frequency condition. Addingweight to the top of the vertical circ-water pump's motor lowered thenatural frequency and eliminated the high vibration.   Data obtained after startup indicates that pipe movement is in thedirection and of the magnitude foreseen by the system design. Long-termreliability can be expected from the replacement system.Figure 1: Circ-water pipe run at McIntosh station follows above-groundroute from cooling tower in background toward Unit 3, but planning keptdisruptions to unit operation to a minimumFigure 2: Support and provision for expansion are important followup todecision on basic route. Four critical zones at McIntosh illustratesolutions required for a troublefree jobFigure 3: Stacked pipe arrangement in close quarters improves access butcalls for provision for future dismantlement of the large-bore pipeFigure 4: Crossing under switch structures and tie buses demands study ofclearances, assured at McIntosh by raising existing structuresFigure 5: Air flow and maintenance accessibility are two added subjects forconsideration in header and riser layout at the cooling towerFigure 6: Two-bolt tie-rod arrangement gives hinge effect at couplings,avoiding restrictions of the usual multi-bolt tie-rod assembliesCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.LOOK AT SUCTION SPECIFIC SPEED FROM A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVERework of experience-based limits for impeller performance makes theconcept more helpful in practical pump selectionBy:D H Cavi, Sargent & LundyEdited by W O'KeefeIt has been said that engineering is a blend of art and science. Hence,phrases such as "if it looks right, it probably is" were coined.Centrifugal-pump hydraulic design is a technology that has typified thisblend of art and science in engineering. In the hydraulic-design process,the impeller is of primary concern. In addition, the pump's casing isdesigned to accommodate the performance requirements and characteristics ofthe impeller and therefore has a supporting role in the hydraulic-designprocess.   A well-designed impeller is proportioned to accelerate liquid smoothlyand uniformly from point of entry at the impeller eye, through the vanepassages, and on out to the discharge side of the impeller. If the inleteye is disproportionately large, the liquid acceleration may not be smoothand uniform. In consequence, eddies can form within the impeller and causehydraulic instability. In severe cases, the eddies cause cavitation-likeerosion of the impeller and the casing near the impeller eye, along withharmful pressure pulsations and vibrations.   Certain centrifugal pumps are designed for low required net positivesuction head (NPSH subscript r). These pumps are in industrial, process,and powerplant services where specified available net positive suction head(NPSH subscript a) at the pump suction is relatively low. The impellers inthese pumps, typically identified as "large-eye" impellers, have had theabove-described unstable and damaging characteristics when the pumpsoperate at flows away from the best-efficiency flow region on theperformance curve.   Pump-application guidelines that caution the user on potentiallimitations for impeller-inlet and -discharge design interrelations are thefocus here. Previously published guidelines, based on specific speed,developed head, and suction lift (or suction head), can be simplified andrealigned to conform with current industry parameters of suction specificspeed (S subscript s) and specific speed (N subscript s).   Early researchers recognized that actual performance of centrifugalpumps deviated from the theoretical. Main causes of the deviations arenatural and inescapable phenomena--such as fluid friction, turbulence,pre-rotation, and slip. There were no high-confidence analytical means tocompensate for the effects. Consequently, researchers quantified andcorrelated the performance deviations with physical design parameters. Thecorrelations became a basis for design factors to bridge the gap betweentheoretical and actual performance. Parameters such as "specific speed" ofan impeller (N subscript s = rpm x gpm superscript 0.5 divided by Hsuperscript 0.75, based on conditions at the best-efficiency point, BEP, onthe performance curve--see Reference 1) came into use to facilitateapplication of design factors to the variety of impeller types that wereand still are widely used. (Note that H is head in feet of liquid.)   Impeller specific speed N subscript s is an indication of three factors:the shape of the flow path through the impeller, whether axial, radial, ormixed-flow; the design proportions of the impeller at the outer (ordischarge) diameter; and the spacing between the shroud and back disc ofthe impeller. Specific speed therefore concerns primarily the configurationof the discharge side of an impeller. Figure 1 makes clear the correlationbetween impeller geometry and specific speed.   The suction capability of a pump was designated as the maximum "suctionlift" that the pump could produce at a specified flow. When this suctionlift was exceeded, the pump was said to have "lost its prime." In realterms, the pressure at the eye of the impeller had fallen below the vaporpressure of the liquid, causing the liquid to flash. The resulting vaporbubbles choked the liquid flow at the impeller eye, so that the flow surgedor completely stalled.   "Suction lift" was an adequate means of defining suction capability ofan impeller in situations where vapor pressure of the pumped liquid waslow--such as with ambient-temperature water. The concept is not adequate,however, when vapor pressure approaches suction pressure. To account forvapor pressure of the liquid, the concept of "net positive suction head"(total absolute suction head minus vapor pressure of the liquid, in feet ofliquid) was devised (Reference 1).   NPSH subscript r characteristic of a pump is determined by test. It is afunction of pump-inlet design, impeller-eye diameter, impeller-vane inletgeometry, and speed. Researchers have found that conditions at the impellerdischarge also affect NPSH subscript r (Reference 2,3). Some pumpmanufacturers clearly indicate in published performance curves thatreduction of impeller diameter can increase NPSH subscript r at aparticular flow condition.   The Hydraulic Institute recognized that a relationship exists between animpeller's specific speed which, as discussed above, pertains to theimpeller discharge configuration, and suction conditions. Exceeding certainlimits would increase the potential for serious trouble from "vibration,noise, and pitting."(Reference 4)   In 1932, the Hydraulic Institute first published charts for "upperlimits of specific speeds," correlating the specific speed of an impellerwith its developed head and either the maximum suction lift that should beproduced or the minimum suction head needed to avoid serious trouble.   The Hydraulic Institute Standards had four charts, each for a family ofcurves applying to double-suction pumps, single-suction shaft-through-eyepumps, single-suction overhung impeller pumps, and axial and mixed-flowpumps. Figures 2 and 3 are those for the first- and last-mentioned types.The last version was in 1975.(Reference 4) They apply to operation at ornear BEP and base on statistics of the Institute reflecting operatingexperience in industrial applications.(Reference 5)   Of late, the concept of suction specific speed S subscript s has comeinto use. An impeller's S subscript s derives from pump test data andrelates flow entering the impeller eye to operating speed and NPSHsubscript r at BEP. In a comparison of different pumps or differentimpellers for a particular pump, S subscript s is a useful indication ofrelative size of the impeller eye. An impeller with higher S subscript swould require lower NPSH and would typically have a larger inlet eye thanan impeller with lower S subscript s. S subscript s therefore indicates theinlet configuration of an impeller in the same sense that N subscript sindicates the impeller discharge configuration.   The curves in Figures 2 and 3 are for clear water at 85F and sea level.This establishes vapor pressure and atmospheric pressure, allowingconversion of lift or suction-head conditions to equivalent NPSH values.Vapor pressure of water at 85F is 0.6 psia or 1.4 ft, and atmosphericpressure is 34 ft of water at sea level. NPSH for conditions in Figures 2and 3 equals 34 - 1.4 + suction head (or - suction lift).   Additionally, for any point on the curves, there is an N subscript svalue and a corresponding head value. From these, the quantity: rpm x gpmsuperscript 0.5 can be calculated from the specific-speed equation. Lift orsuction head conditions are convertible to NPSH, so S subscript s iscalculable for any curve point by dividing rpm x gpm superscript 0.5 byNPSH subscript r superscript 0.75. For a double-suction impeller, dividefurther by (2) superscript 0.5.   Figure 4 is an example of the conversion of points in Figure 2 toequivalents relating S subscript s to N subscript s. The family of curvesin Figure 2 reduces to a single curve for the parameters of N subscript sand S subscript s. For other types of pumps, Figures 5-7 hold, each plottedsimilarly from the Hydraulic Institute charts for the particular pump type.The equivalent "safe" region that corresponds to the upper limit of Nsubscript s on the Hydraulic Institute curves would be the area below theFigure 4-7 curves.   Admittedly, some pump designs may exceed the limits in the curves. Insuch instances, review of test data and operating experience is advisableto prove capability for the required duty and range of flow.   Typically, pumps that exceed the limits have a relatively large impellereye (in a multistage pump, the first stage). Experience indicates that suchpumps have a comparatively narrow stable operating range, near the BEP.Operation outside the stable range can result in liquid recirculation atthe impeller eye (eddies), causing high vibration, pitting on the impellerand adjacent casing areas, and axial shuttling of the shaft. Prolongedoperation this way can lead to bearing and shaft-seal failure, and damageto impeller and casing.   The condition may not be a concern if the pump runs only in theoptimum-efficiency flow range or handles viscous liquids. Pumps below thecurve limits generally have a broader stable operating range.   Conversely, if a pump's S subscript s vs N subscript s characteristicfalls far below the curves, the impeller eye would be comparatively small,leading to a choking condition at certain flows. Choking can result in lowefficiency, degraded head, inlet cavitation, and recirculation (eddies) atthe impeller discharge.   The latest edition of the Hydraulic Institute Standards (Reference 1)does not include curves such as Figures 2 and 3. Instead, an S subscript svalue of 8500 is assumed satisfactory for most applications. The Ssubscript s equation is rearranged to solve for rpm, using NPSH, and theresulting pump speed is the suggested maximum operating speed. For pumpswith constant-speed motor drive, the next lower synchronous speed wouldapply.   Figures 4-7 indicate that a S subscript s of 8500 would be conservativefor some pumps but needs examination for others. The 8500 value isquestionable for impellers with N subscript s from around 2000 up, exceptfor end-suction single-inlet pumps, where 8500 would be questionable for Nsubscript s of 2500 and up.   For impellers of higher N subscript s design, Figures 4-7 indicate thatS subscript s is lower than 8500. Figure 1 makes clear that high-Nsubscript s impellers have relatively small outer diameters. If S subscripts is high, then the impeller's inlet-eye diameter is large.   Combination of high S subscript s and high N subscript s for an impellerindicates a relatively short flowpath between inlet and discharge, causingan abrupt acceleration of the liquid and adversely affecting hydraulicstability of the impeller. The slope of the Figure 4-7 curves agrees withthis analysis. According to the Hydraulic Institute standards committee(Reference 5), impellers of low N subscript s can be designed for high Ssubscript s values; this agrees with the trend of Figures 4-6 curves.   The Hydraulic Institute curves typified by Figures 2 and 3 stemmed fromfield operating experience, and the S subscript s/N subscript s curves ofFigures 4-7 have the same basis, because they were calculated directly fromthe Hydraulic Institute curves.Figure 1: Specific speed primarily concerns the discharge side of theimpeller and indicates impeller cross-section geometryFigure 2, 3: Recommendations for necessary suction head for double-suctionimpeller (left) and for single-suction mixed-flow and axial-flow pumps(right) stemmed from Hydraulic Institute statistical dataFigure 4: Conversion of points such as Point A in Figure 2 give a curveforsuction-specific-speed limit for double-suction impellersFigure 5: Shaft-through-eye impeller, such as in higher stages of feedpumps, has similarly derived suction-specific-speed limitsFigure 6: Single-inlet, end-suction pump also has descending curve derivedfrom charts resembling those of Figures 2 and 3Figure 7: Axial-flow and mixed-flow pumps, with inherently high values ofspecific speed, have a flat limit on suction specific speedReference(s):1 Hydraulic Institute Standards, 14th edit, 19822 W H Fraser, "Recirculation in Centrifugal Pumps," ASME Winter Meeting,November 19813 D Konno and Y Yamada, "Does Impeller Affect NPSH subscript r?" FirstInternational Pump Symposium, Turbomachinery Labs, Texas A&M Univ, May19844 Hydraulic Institute Standards, 13th edit, 19755 Discussions with H A J Greutink, chairman, Hydraulic Institute standardscommitteeCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.KNOW CAUSES OF, SOLUTIONS TO CFB-BOILER REFRACTORY PROBLEMSRefractories are used extensively in CFB boilers. Because early systemswere prone to failures, advanced refractory systems have been developed andapplied successfullyBy:M S Crowley, ConsultantEdited by Steven CollinsCirculating fluidized-bed (CFB) boilers use extensive amounts ofrefractories to withstand harsh operating conditions--includingtemperatures topping 2000F, frequent thermal cycling, and continuous attackby erosive high-velocity particles. Thermal cycling alone, encountered on adaily basis by many units, can eventually destroy almost any refractory.Specific areas requiring protective refractories include the combustor,cyclones, external heat exchanger (EHE), ducts, and transfer lines (Figure1).   Correct selection and installation of materials is critical tominimizing refractory failures. The following material provides valuableinsights into the construction and repair of CFB refractories.Typical CFB linings   Refractory selection is complicated by reciprocal physical properties.Example: Good insulating materials often have poor erosion resistance. Tomake up for trade-offs, refractory systems are often made of severalmaterials applied in layers.   Three general types of liner designs are used in advanced CFBs:Waterwall and thin or thick linings for non-waterwall surfaces. Waterwalllinings, used in the combustor and cyclone areas, use short studs to holda thin, 1/2-2-in.-thick layer of dense refractory to the flue-gas side ofboiler tube assemblies. Conventional insulation is affixed outside tomaintain high water/steam temperatures. The linings withstand rapidthermal upsets better than thick lining. Steel fiber is often added towaterwall liners for toughness and shock resistance.   Thin linings, typically 6 in. or less in total thickness and usuallyhave both dense and insulating layers. They are more economical to installand maintain than thick linings. However, a hotter shell--ranging from 300to 500F--can make thin-lined components less efficient and uncomfortable towork around.   Thick linings usually consist of two or three layers totaling 12-18 in.A dense, "hot face'' of abrasion-resistant brick, plastic, or castableprotects against the erosive action of hot, high-velocity particles. Backuplayers of insulating material reduce heat loss, decrease shelltemperatures, and improve overall efficiency.Refractory materials   Refractories consist of mineral combinations--usually oxides--formedinto rigid shapes with the aid of a binder. They are classified as eitherpreformed or unformed. Preformed refractory materials--brick and tile--arefired before installation. Unformed materials--castables and plastics--arefired after installation to create seamless monoliths. Castables differfrom putty-like plastics in that they must be mixed with water at the worksite.   Physical properties. To obtain desired physical properties--such asstrength, erosion resistance, and volume stability--refractorymanufacturers blend the appropriate prefired aggregates with suitablebinders. The latter includes raw clay, calcium aluminate cements, orphosphate-based materials. The important physical properties of brick,tile, plastic, and castable refractories differ, depending on chemicalcomposition and manufacturing and installation techniques used (see table).Thermal stability, a measure of how well a material resists repeatedthermal cycling, is perhaps the most important property for CFBapplications. However, erosion-resistance, hot-strength, creep-resistance,heat-transfer, and shrinkage characteristics must also be considered for agiven application.   Clay binders are often added to ceramic oxides before firing when makingbrick or tile. With some materials, a ceramic bond can be formed withoutthe help of binder by firing them at a higher temperature. Otherwise amaterial that promotes bonding such as monoaluminum phosphate, may be usedto form a strong bond after firing temperatures reach 1000F.   Because they are easy to apply and shape, monolithic refractories--bothcastables and plastics--are most commonly used. Castables are composed ofcalcined mineral aggregates and a calcium-aluminate or hydraulic cement,along with additives that ease wetting and placement.   Castables are shipped dry to the site. Water is added in a mixer if thematerial is to be cast in a form, or at the gun nozzle if "gunning'' isused to place the lining (Figure 2). Advanced castables are becoming morepopular because they offer minimal shrinkage and enhanced formability.   Plastics are similar to castables in formulation. Both use calcinedaggregates and a binder. However, plastics--which are premixed at thefactory--use phosphates or other heat-setting agents to cause the materialto bond or "setup'' when fired. Castables use hydraulic cements which formthe permanent bond when mixed with water and fired.   Fibers. Stainless steel fibers and organic "burn-out'' fibers are oftenadded to both plastics and castables. Stainless steel fibers improvetoughness and crack resistance. Organic fibers, which are finer than sewingthread, melt or burn-out the first time a refractory is fired, leaving amaze of tiny tunnels behind. These allow steam to escape and reduce theoccurrence of explosive spalling--particularly during the initial firing ofmoisture-laden materials. Virtually no detrimental changes in physicalproperties result from adding organic fiber.   The use of ceramic fiber by itself as a refractory material is generallylimited to packing around metal components such as door jams to allow forthermal expansion. The erosive action of sand, limestone, and ash generallyprecludes the use of ceramic fiber in most areas of a CFB boiler.Installation techniques   To ensure that a finished castable product comes out as planned, excesswater must be kept to a minimum, manufacturer's curing instructions closelyfollowed, and anchors correctly positioned. Slow initial dryingperiods--where temperaturesare raised at a rate of about 100-deg-F perhour--are recommended to ensure that a new lining will not explode uponstartup. Anchors should be spaced at intervals equal to two to three timesthe thickness of the lining and extend two-thirds to three-quarters of theway through the refractory.   A pneumatic rammer is often used to work putty-like plastics andcastables into the desired area (Figure 3). While most plastics are stillinstalled using rammers, advanced gunning machines are now available thatapply certain plastics by a pneumatic technique that does not require wateraddition at the gun nozzle. The new gunning techniques are likely to becomemore popular because they are faster, require fewer people to operate, andallow some of the rebound to be reused rather than thrown away. Inaddition, these pneumatically installed materials are said to be stronger,denser, and longer lasting.   Vibratory casting, a relatively new placement method, uses vibratoryaction to force thick material to flow into forms. Vibratory castables havespecial additives which greatly improve flowability, strength, and erosionresistance without increasing the water content of the mixture. Gunning orvibratory casting are the installation methods preferred for large areaswhile ramming or hand-packing may be acceptable for small ordifficult-to-reach areas.   Brick and tile are installed with little mortar using a "dip-joint"technique. The brick is dipped into a pool of gravy-like mortar, theninstalled. Only a thin coating of mortar remains on its surface. Joints aretypically 1/16 in. thick or less. This reduces the chances of creep or theentry of pieces of slag and particulate matter.   Contractors. The use of third-party inspectors to monitor theinstallation and repair of refractories is recommended. Most owners do nothave the necessary in-house expertise to effectively oversee theinstallation of advanced refractories. Preliminary testing of both thematerials and the skill-level of installation personnel will go a long waytowards reducing future maintenance costs (Figure 4).   Refractory testing. When purchasing a refractory, it is important torequest the manufacturer's test results. Most refractory tests are based onASTM procedures which can be performed by many independent laboratories(see Reference 7). Generally, flexural and compressive strengths, thermalconductivity, erosion and thermal-shock resistance, and thermal expansionare the main items of concern. Strengths should be measured at expectedoperating temperatures to ensure an adequate service life.Areas of most concern   The combustion zone in many CFB units reaches temperatures of 1600 to1800F, is usually oxygen-deficient, and is generally under a slightpositive pressure of 1 to 3 psig. Severe thermal shock and cycling arecommon. Combustor temperatures may swing by 1000-deg-F in a few minutes. Adozen or more startup/shutdown cycles in a week are possible.   The reducing atmosphere here may call for refractories low in free ironor iron oxide. Chemically, iron catalyzes the subsequent breakdown of COinto CO subscript 2 and carbon. This process results in the deposition ofcarbon inside refractories, which causes internal expansion and thegradual destruction of the material.   In most CFB units, sand, limestone, and ash act as the primary heatexchange media to combust the coal or other organic matter. If possible,sand should be removed after startup because it is extremely erosive. Thicklinings, consisting of 3 to 6 in. of dense erosion-resistant castable orplastic covering a similar thickness of insulating material, frequentlyfail by excessive cracking and "pinch-spalling.'' Shrinkage upon drying,thermal shock, and creep of the hot face under compressive stresses are themain causes of cracks. Stainless steel fibers help to reduce cracking, butcan not stop it completely. Pinch spalling occurs as bed material becomestrapped and the lining experiences repeated thermal cycling (Figure 5).   Phosphate-bonded mullite-based plastics stand up well in combustion-zoneservice because of their good volume stability (resistance to thermalexpansion and contraction) in cyclic service and excellent erosionresistance. These materials can be used to repair defective areas becausethe phosphate binder adheres well to existing materials. To ensure that thepatch holds, a minimum of two anchors should be used. Ceramic or cast alloyanchors are recommended for holding plastic linings exposed to extremetemperatures. Additional anchors may also be needed to retain theinsulating layer independently.   In the freeboard area above the combustion zone, silicon carbide (SiC)tiles have been used to reduce erosion of waterwall tubes. Often, a siliconcarbide mortar is used behind the tile to improve heat transfer to thetube. The tile is usually held onto the tubes with welded inserts. Indesigns where the waterwall tubes extend down to the combustor floor,linings often include a thin layer of a dense high-thermal-conductivity,abrasion-resistant plastic or castable.   Often SiC-based castables are initially specified on studded tubes.These can be repaired with phosphate-bonded plastics--preferably containingSiC aggregate for high thermal conductivity. Phosphate-bonded materials arealso recommended if the feedstock or recycle ash is high in alkali content.Reason: Calcium aluminate cements break down under high-temperature alkaliattack.   Cyclone inlet and barrel. Combustor roofs and cyclone inlets experiencetemperatures of 1000 to 1800F, with occasional excursions above 2000F.Here, a two-component lining of insulating material covered by a denseabrasion-resistant layer containing stainless steel fiber has providedacceptable service life. If severe thermal shock causes excessive cracking,a fused silica-based castable may be used instead.   The cyclone barrel and cone experience very severe conditions, includingtemperature swings of 1000 deg F within a few minutes, repeated cycling,and some erosion. For many thick linings, the repeated thermal shock andcycling coupled with erosion and pinch-spalling have caused large sectionsto fail. Poor results with various repair schemes have led some operatorsto replace thick castable linings with brick ones made of insulating brickor block covered with abrasion-resistant mullite brick. Repairs to theselinings can be made with phosphate-bonded plastic.   Another possibility is to use a thinner lining made from material with alow coefficient of thermal expansion--such as a fused silica castable.However, most fused silica castables have low erosion resistance comparedto phosphate-bonded mullite plastics. Thus, service life is shorter.   The cyclone cone experiences conditions similar to those of the barrel.However, here the lining rests on the shell. Vibratory casting isrecommended for strength, erosion resistance, and low thermal expansion ofcastables placed in the cone.   Cyclone dipleg and loop seal. This area has been a source of continuingproblems in some units. Thermal shock coupled with severe erosion andthermal cycling have resulted in repeated failures. Many of the initialdesigns employed thick layers of both dense and insulatingcastables--difficult materials to install properly, given the area'sconfined spaces and limited accessibility. When installing linings,insulating castable covered by vibration-cast, shock/abrasion-resistantcastable with both stainless-steel and burn-out fibers should beconsidered. Erosion-resistant brick with a backup layer of insulating brickor castable has also worked well. Phosphate-bonded plastic with stainlesssteel fibers is typically used to repair existing units.   External heat exchangers (EHE), used in some CFB designs, often employrefractory-covered internal division walls to force ash to flow in apattern of hair-pin turns over a bed of heat-transfer tubes. Unlikeexternal walls, division walls are heated on both sides and are notfastened to a cool shell. Lack of a supporting shell with anchors means thewall can bend in and out of its original plane under the influence ofthermal stresses. This out-of-plane movement allows large cracks to open upand trap circulating bed media, which aggravates the bending action (Figure6).   Transfer lines. The insides of transfer lines are covered withrefractories that resist erosion and thermal cycling. The most popularchoice consists of vibration-cast material having excellent volumestability and erosion resistance. Adding stainless steel and organic fibersis advisable. Phosphate-bonded plastics, preferably with mullite-basedaggregate for volume stability, can be considered for repairs.Failures and repairs   Cracks wider than 1/16 in. can trap limestone and ash particles andeventually cause a lining failure as thermal cycling induces a wedgingaction. The loss of thin layers--down to the anchor tips--can often betolerated if the lining is not separating from the shell. Fusedsilica-based castables and phosphate-bonded plastics are popularcrack-repair materials.   Spalling. There are two forms of spalling that are likely to occur inCFB linings. Explosive spalling usually occurs on the initial heat-up of anew installation when the water present in the castable or plastic isconverted to steam faster than it can escape from the lining. The buildupof steam pressure exceeds the tensile strength of the material, at whichpoint the lining explodes. Organic burn-out fibers used in both castablesand plastics can greatly reduce the chance of explosive spalling. Bricklinings are usually not subject to this failure because the bricks areprefired and moisture in mortar can escape out the joints between adjacentbricks. Thermal-shock spalling can occur in both brick and monolithiclinings when sudden changes in temperature force the lining to expand orcontract faster than the material can accommodate the stress.   Repair methods for spalled areas vary. Brick linings should be replacedwith more spall-resistant brick if large areas fail. Small areas can berepaired using a phosphate-bonded plastic if an adequate number of anchorscan be installed. Monolithic linings are repaired using eitherphosphate-bonded plastics--for small areas--or low-thermal-expansioncastables.   Erosion. In general, erosion values below 10 cm superscript 3--based onASTM test C-704--are required for severe erosion service. A better testruns at operating temperatures using the actual abrading media (Reference4). Equipment for this test is not yet widely available.   The best materials for erosion resistance are the new vibration-cast,low-moisture castables and phosphate-bonded plastics. The erosion valuevaries, depending on the material, the placement method, and the percentwater used.   Anchor failures can be caused by several factors (Figure 7). Faultywelding, incorrect spacing, poor anchor selection, corrosion, andoverheating are the most common causes. Ceramic and cast alloy anchors arerecommended for plastic linings because of their superior holding power andresistance to high temperatures. Stainless steel anchors are used forcastable linings because they cost less and have excellent holding powerwhen properly designed. Welding specifications should be carefully reviewedto avoid premature failure.   Ceramic anchors usually extend all the way to the hot face while metalanchors are held back at least an inch from the hot face. Thus, if an inchor more of metal anchor is exposed because of erosion or spalling, anestimate of the amount of lining left can be made. A decision on whether ornot to reline is then made based on the desired run time until the nextmajor shutdown.Figure 1: Circulating fluid-bed combustors (CFB) require extensive amountsof refractory to combat high temperatures, erosive forces, and thermalcyclingFigure 2: Gunningrefractory into place is popular because large areas canbe covered quicklyFigure 3: Pneumatic rammers are used to work castables and plastics intoplace. Both ceramic and metallic anchors are shown hereFigure 4: Training and testing refractory installers before a job helpsensure correct placement of materials and longer service lifeFigure 5: Pinch spalling can occur as shown when an area undergoes repeatedthermal cyclingFigure 6: External heat exchangers may develop large cracks because theirwalls are heated on both sides, not fastened to a cool external shell.Here, steel plates help hold sections togetherFigure 7: Anchor failures can cause large sections of refractory to failTable: Physical properties of CFB refractories (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see January, 1992 issue.)Reference(s):1 M S Crowley (Crete, Ill), "Guidelines for Using Refractories inCirculating Fluid-Bed Combustors,'' Electric Power Research Institute,Research Project No 979-27, 19912 D A Bell, "A Computer Simulation of Cracking in MonolithicRefractories," British Ceramic Transactions Journal 1987, p 133, 19893 C A Schacht, "Influence of Lining Restraint and Nonlinear MaterialProperties in Predicting Thermal Shock Fracture in Refractory Linings,''UNITECR 1989 Proceedings, p 1286, American Ceramic Society, 19894 R C Johnson and M Seshamani, "Refractory lining Systems for CircualtingFluidized Bed Water-cooled Cyclones,'' ASME 10th International Conferenceon Fluidized Bed Combustion, San Francisco, Calif, 19895 M S Crowley, "Steel Fibers in Refractory Applications,'' NPRA Refiningand Petrochemical Plant Maintenance Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, February19816 M S Crowley and J S Young, "Evaluation of Thermal Film Coefficients inFurnace Walls,'' Ceramic Transactions (Vol 4),1 p 547-556, The AmericanCeramic Society, May 19887 E Ruh, "Refractories for the Chemical Process Industries, MaterialsTechnology Institute of the Chemical Process Industries, Manual No. 9,19848 L P Krietz and others, "Evolution and Status of Refractory CastableEntering the 1990s,'' American Ceramic Society Bulletin 69, p 1690, 19909 M S Crowley, "Anchors for Refractory Concrete Linings,'' Oil & GasJournal (Vol 80, No. 35), p 122, 198910 L P Krietz and others, "A Review of International Experiences inPlastic Gunning,'' Advances in Ceramics (Vol 13), The American CeramicSociety, 198411 S F Rahman, "Advances in Vibration-Cast Refractories for Application asAbrasion-Resistant Linings,'' UNITECR 1989 Proceedings, p 955, AmericanCeramic Society, 198912 C E Semler, "Thermal Shock Evaluation of Refractories,'' 14th AnnualSymposium on Refractories, American Ceramic Society, 197813 "Extensive Review of Current Refractory Technology,'' UNITECR 1989Proceedings, American Ceramic SocietyCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.STOKERS KEEP PACE WITH MODERN COMBUSTIONOften-subtle design and operating details ensure maximum performance fromspreader stokers firing most types of coal and solid waste fuelsBy:Neil H Johnson, Detroit Stoker CoEdited by Steven CollinsFor boilers up to 300,000 lb/hr of steam output, the traveling-gratespreader stoker remains a viable process for burning coal or waste (Fig 1).To keep pace with the requirements of modern steam production, improvementshave been made in many areas of the spreader-stoker system-- includingcontrol of fuel and air flow, and emissions reduction.   Fuel types. The spreader-stoker-fired boiler can burn a wide range ofcoals, regardless of their free-swelling characteristics or Hardgroveindex. In general, bituminous, sub-bituminous, and lignite all can beburned in a given unit to generate similar heat-release rates. Unlike otherboiler types, the requirements of the furnace and gas path, not thefuel-feed systems, are the main concerns when contemplating a fuel switch.However, the volatile-matter content of any fuel burned in a spreaderstoker should be above 20% on a dry, basis.   Theoretically, the coal burned in spreader-stoker-fired boilers shouldbe sized to include equal proportions of 3/4-in. x 1/2-in., 1/2-in. x1/4-in., and 1/4-in. x 1/8-in. particles. This ensures even spreading ofthe fuel thrown out onto the moving--or vibrating--grate. However, thesesizing recommendations are impractical. To ease the task of sizing coalcorrectly, empirical correlations are used. These include: "Distribution ofSizes of Coal and Recommended Limits of Coal Sizing for Spreader Stokers''published by American Boiler Manufacturers Assn (ABMA), Arlington, Va.   In general, coal that is too coarse is more troublesome than coal thatis too fine. Coarse coal requires slower grate speeds and more combustionair. Many plants are successfully burning coals finer than those specifiedby the ABMA curve. However, combustion of fines does create higher levelsof unburned carbon in the flyash, especially as the percentage ofminus-16-mesh coal increases. Higher NO subscript x emissions have alsobeen linked to excessive fines.   Spreader-stoker-fired boilers have also been used extensively to burnmany types of waste fuels, including:   --Wood--from hogged trees to sawdust.   --Garbage--as refuse-derived fuel (RDF).   --Bagasse--sugar-cane residue.   --Industrial wastes--paper, plastics, and wood.   --Furfural residue.   --Peanut shells.   Water-cooled vibrating-grate spreader stokers burning waste fuels aremore reliable and require less maintenance than do traveling-grate units.   Grate types. The main functions of grates in a spreader-stoker-firedboiler are to provide a platform on which to burn fuel, to pass combustionair, and to remove ash. Many different types of grates have been used. Butonly the traveling and vibrating grates are able to balance today'srequirements for cost, efficiency, emissions control, availability, andsafety.   With the traveling grate, fuel is propelled into the furnace towards therear wall of the boiler. Some of the fuel is burned in suspension, theremainder on the grate, which moves towards the fuel-feed end of theboiler. The speed of the grate is varied according to load. However, speedalso depends on the amount of fuel being burned per square foot of gratearea--an important design value.   Systems can be designed to produce a heat release rate of up to 750kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr for most bituminous coals, subbituminous coal, andlignite. For firing low-volatile bituminous coals, maximum heat releaseshould be 600 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr to minimize unburned carbon loss.   The heat-release rate for refuse fuels such as wood or bagasse canextend up to 1-million Btu/ft superscript 2/hr. Grate speeds must be slowerfor RDF to reduce wear associated with the high amount of abrasivenon-combustibles found in this fuel. Therefore, the maximum design heatrelease should be limited to 750 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr.   Design heat release rates for vibrating grate stokers are moreconservative because the vibrating action can over-agitate the fuel and ashbed, hampering complete combustion. Units burning waste fuels having amoisture content less than 40% have been designed for release rates up to250 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr. Coal-burning vibrating-grate units can employheat-release rates up to 650 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr.   Combustion air. Because the goal of the spreader stoker is to achieveuniform burning over the entire active grate surface, evenly distributingair flow throughout the grates is necessary. Careful attention must be paidto the design of the plenum chamber under the grates. Abrupt changes inflow direction or other hardware configurations which might cause air-flowimbalances should be avoided. High-resistance grates, which put most of theresistance to air flow across the grate rather than the ash bed,significantly improve air distribution.   Inlet-air temperature can be at ambient or preheated up to 350F whenburning bituminous or subbituminous coals. If moisture content exceeds 25%,preheated air is recommended. Lignite, for example, requires preheated air,typically to 400F.   Virtually all refuse contains more than 25% moisture and requirespreheated combustion air. Air temperature should be limited to 350F forsystems burning RDF because of the varying characteristics of this fuel.Water-cooled vibrating-grate units burning high-moisture refuse--above35%--utilize air preheated to 650F.   Until recently, overfire-air systems for coal-fired spreader stokerswere limited to supplying 15-18% of the overall air. In light ofincreasingly restrictive NO subscript x regulations, new systems use threelevels of overfire air--supplying up to 35% of total air input--to achievestaged combustion. Overfire air must be supplied with sufficient energy toproduce turbulence and thoroughly mix fuel with oxygen to completecombustion. Nozzle design is the most important factor affecting theefficient utilization of overfire-air fan energy.   Flyash reinjection. The two factors controlling efficiency of thespreader-stoker combustion system are excess air and carbon loss. Unitsshould be able to operate at 25% excess air or less if air plenums andnozzles are designed correctly.   Carbon loss is the sum of carbon lost in flyash and bottom ash. Awell-run and well-designed spreader stoker exhibits a very low bottom-ashcarbon loss. Therefore, efforts to minimize carbon loss concentrate onflyash. The most popular technique is reinjecting the flyash caught by thefirst-stage of ash removal--usually the mechanical dust collector.   In the case of units burning eastern bituminous coals, the combustiblecontent of flyash caught in mechanical dust collectors is about 60%.Properly designed reinjection systems can reduce this value to about 25%.Reinjection can improve efficiency significantly and reduce the amount ofash requiring disposal.   Emissions. Several factors influence the amount of NO subscript xproduced by a spreader stoker, including: (1) amount of excess air, (2)design heat-release rate, (3) air temperature, (4) fuel size distribution,(5) method of fuel feed, and (6) furnace temperature. When possible, followthese suggestions for reducing NO subscript x output:   --Limit design heat release to 700 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr.   --Maintain under-grate air temperatures near ambient.   --Keep coal fines--particles below 0.1-in.--to a minimum.   --Reduce furnace temperature by staging overfire air or recirculatingflue gas.   Spreader-stoker-fired systems convert virtually all of the sulfur foundin the fuel to SO subscript 2. Thus, some sort of post-combustion SOsubscript 2-control device is necessary. Both wet and dry scrubbers havebeen used successfully. There are also many emerging technologies aimed atcombined SO subscript 2 and NO subscript x control (Power, September 1990,p 26).Figure 1: Stoker-fired boilers have been popular since the 1930s. Shown isa modern moving-grateunit under constructionCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DIAGNOSTIC MONITORING--AN OVERVIEWDiagnostic engineering is a recognized plant-maintenance function. Thisarticle outlines the use of diagnostic monitoring for detection ofincipient failure, to facilitate predictive maintenanceBy:Otakar Jonas, Jonas IncEdited by Sheldon D StraussUtilities are in constant pursuit of methods to increase plant availabilityin their ongoing effort to improve power generation and reduce operatingcosts. A fast-developing approach makes use of diagnostic monitoring of keyplant components and systems as a basis for forecasting incipient failuresand for predictive maintenence. Either continuous on-line or periodic,diagnostic monitoring includes non-destructive evaluation (NDE) techniques,while expert systems, knowledge bases, and other computer-based toolscontribute to forecasting of failures.   Upwards of 30 monitoring techniques are available for use in detectionof problems having potential impact on the integrity of almost everycomponent in a nuclear or fossil-fueled powerplant. Established techniquesare based on analysis of stress, crack growth, leakage, vibration,metallic-particle content of lube oil, temperature change and distribution,water chemistry, and corrosion. Across-the-board application of thismonitoring technology could enhance plant availability by at least 2%.Their application to predictive rather than scheduled maintenance cancontribute to reduced forced-outage rates, shortened scheduled outages,reduced maintenance and operating costs (through damage reduction andefficiency increases), better record-keeping, and easier licensing.   The value of the approach lies in its ability to diagnose abnormalmechanical behavior at an early stage as a focal point for preventiveequipment maintenance. Thus, the information provided can help avoid aforced outage and makes it possible to perform repairs on a scheduledbasis. It also is used to ensure that the needed parts and tools are athand when the equipment is taken out of service. At the same time,monitoring systems can reduce plant downtime by avoiding unnecessarycomponent maintenance during a scheduled outage. Still another benefit isassessment of equipment life.   Incipient failure detection and predictive maintenance are addressedperiodically by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) at theirperiodic "Incipient Failure Detection Conferences." (Refs 1-3 are typical.)EPRI's Monitoring and Diagnostic Center at Philadelphia Electric Co'sEddystone station (Philadelphia, Pa) and Non-Destructive Evaluation Center(Charlotte, N Car) are in the forefront of development of applicablediagnostic methods. Much can be learned from proceedings and reportsemanating from these and other sources, some of which are referencedbelow.4-12 Technical Briefs issued periodically by EPRI are anotherparticularly useful source.   Rather than an in-depth review of the subject, this discussion islimited to a brief overview of practical diagnostic monitoring methodsavailable to the industry. Diagnostic monitoring involves a range of sensortypes and signal forms covering the entire electromagnetic spectrum.Depending on the particular component under study, a predictive maintenancesystem will usually make use of several of these diagnostic monitoringsystems, grouped according to application.   Crack, leak detection. (1) Helium and SF subscript 6 are used as tracersto locate leaks in steam condensers and general air inleakage, inconjunction with a mass spectrometer. (2) Acoustic monitors (resonant100-900 kHz transducers) detect minute shock waves generated by cracks,material and weld defects, rubbing, or plastic deformation; audible- andultrasonic-frequency microphones or acoustic-emission transducers detectenergy generated by a leaking fluid; broad-band acoustic sensors mounted onpiping downstream of valves detect noise produced by flow turbulence. (3)Fatigue monitors are used to calculate fatigue stresses and life fromtemperature and pressure transients. (4) Special electrical conductivityprobe measures moisture on vessels and piping.   Bearing condition. (1) Ultrasonic piezoelectric sensors embedded inbearings enable detection of wear through measurement of bearing-padthickness. (2) Spectrophotometry is used to monitor non-metallic compoundsin oils by infrared absorption; ferrography is a technique for examiningthe composition, size distribution, and quantity of metallic particles inlubricating oil. (3) Oil temperature is monitored in comparison to baselinetemperature as indicative of a problem, but the method may not havesufficient sensitivity in particular cases.   Rotating machinery. (1) Vibration signature analysis is used formonitoring vibration frequencies, amplitudes, and phases; rotor cracks(including shallow, transverse types) are detected by use of 1st, 2nd, and3rd harmonics to separate vibration signals from background noise;rotor-dynamics balance technique uses vibration signature analysis to trackand diagnose rotor/bearing vibration problems; laser doppler vibrometerscan be used to scan rotating surfaces periodically to measure vibrationamplitude and frequency. (2) Rotor/shell stress analysis is used to computethermal stresses from steam and metal temperatures to determine fatiguedamage in thick sections of turbines, nozzles, headers, and piping. (3)Turbine-blade condition monitor uses acoustic techniques to detect bladecracks, row damage, flutter, and torsional events in turbines. (4)Surface-layer activation involves implantation of radioisotopes into metalsurface, plus collection and analysis of debris for nuclide content, tomonitor wear and solid-particle erosion; remaining surface radioactivitycan also be monitored continuously for same purpose.   Electrical-equipment condition. (1) Motor-current analyzers monitor thefrequency spectrum of electric current supplied to electric components. (2)Thermography is a method for pictorially recording emission of infraredradiation by hot spots. (3) Radiofrequency analyzers monitor generatorradio waves to detect arcing.   Water level, induction, chemistry, corrosion. (1) Water level ismonitored in comparison to reference level by various methods includingultrasound, conductivity probes, and gamma gauges. (2) Water induction andwaterhammer in steam pipes are monitored by gamma gauges, conductivityprobes, and fast-response thermocouples. (3) On-line, in-line pH monitorstrack acidity/alkalinity inside components under operating conditions;variety of specific ion, gas, particle, temperature, and pressure detectorsare used to analyze water and steam composition throughout the cycle, helpdetermine sources of impurities and corrosion and deposition in components,with computerized expert systems providing useful adjunct. (4) Corrosion istracked by monitoring H subscript 2 concentration in water and steam;corrosion-current or water-resistance monitors make use of in-line probesfor same purpose; in-line corrosion-potential probe relates corrosionpotential to type of corrosion under way.   Miscellaneous. (1) Filter malfunction is detected by monitoring leakagethrough filters by particle impact and other methods. (2) Flow ratemonitors compare fluid-flow rate to baseline rate. (3) Particle detectorsprovide qualitative or quantitaive information on flow of particles andliquid droplets in steam lines and air and gas systems. (4) Transformer oilcondition is tracked by monitoring H subscript 2 produced by oildegradation. (5) Valve-stem strain sensors measure force on valve stems.References from Fourth EPRI Incipient-Failure Detection Conference,Philadelphia, Pa, October 1990Reference(s):1 D Anderson, "Predictive Maintenance by Oil Analysis"2 R Leon, "Monitoring System for Steam Turbine Blade Faults"3 J Guillet, "EDF Studies on Predictive Maintenance of Motor-OperatedValves"Additional references4 "Monitoring and Diagnostic Center: An Overview of OperatingActivities," EPRI Report GS-7407, July 19915 "Life Extension and Assessment: Nuclear and Fossil Plant Components,"American Society of Mechanical Engineers Transactions, PVP-V138 NDE, Vol 9,June 19886 D Zwingelstein, "EdF Experience in the Maintenance and Monitoring ofNuclear Powerplants," Seventh Powerplant Dynamics, Control, and TestingSymposium, Knoxville, Tenn, May 19897 T Elliott, "Monitoring Surface Deterioration of Powerplant ComponentsOn-Line," Power, May 1990, p 718 "Aging Assessment and Monitoring Method Evaluation," ORNL Report 6193,Vol 2, April 19919 "Solid-Particle Erosion of Steam-Turbine Components," EPRI ReportGS-6535, September 198910 Y Asakura and others, "Structural Material Anomaly-Detection SystemUsing Water-Chemistry Data," Journal of Nuclear Science & Technology,September 1990, p 81511 D M Sopocy and others, "Expert Systems to Improve Plant Operability,"American Power Conference, Chicago, Ill, April 198912 D Wach, "Early Fault Detection and Diagnosis of Primary CircuitComponents in German Nuclear Powerplants," Tenth International Conferenceon Power Stations, Liege, Belgium, September 1989Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.GAS TURBINES PACE NEW CAPACITY ADDITIONSThe relentless march of gas turbines into the powerplant arena results fromcontinued advances in efficiency, ultra-low NO subscript x emissions, coalcompatibility, and unit output. The latest target: base-load power supplyBy:Steven Collins, Assistant EditorGas turbines have long been popular as prime movers for a variety ofgas-compression and power-generation applications. Since the 1950s, theyhave been used in remote oil and gas fields, on offshore drillingplatforms, and in gas-pipeline pumping stations. In these locations, wherefresh water is often scarce, premium fuel supplies cheap, or spacerequirements limited, compact gas-turbine sets have proved invaluable. Andthanks to its quick-start capabilities--as little as 10 minutes fromstartup to full load for large machines and less for smallerones--gas-turbine/generator packages also found a niche in the market forbackup- and peaking-power systems.   More-recent advances, such as increased efficiency and fuel flexibility,have enabled large gas-turbine-based combined-cycle systems to compete withconventional powerplants for new base-load generating capacity in manyareas. Gas-turbine-based systems below 100 MW have gained widespreadacceptance for industrial power and cogeneration applications (Fig 1).   Increased efficiency. Large industrial machines--100 MW and up--are nowbreaking the 35% simple-cycle efficiency mark. Natural-gas-firedcombined-cycle facilities based on these gas turbines have net efficienciestopping 50%. And a recently introduced 40-MW aeroderivative reached a newmilestone--the first commercial gas turbine with a reported simple-cycleefficiency above 40% (see box, p 64).   Efficiency of large gas turbines continues to be improved today byraising turbine-inlet temperatures (TIT). When increasing TIT, it isnecessary to increase the compressor pressure ratio, which is thecompressor-outlet pressure divided by its inlet pressure. The newest largemachines feature TITs as high as 2370F and pressure ratios up to 16:1.   To withstand these extreme temperatures, advanced gas turbines dependupon state-of-the-art materials, component designs, and manufacturingtechniques. An improved class of superalloys allows metal components tooperate at temperatures only 600 deg F below their melting point forthousands of hours--even under severe centrifugal, thermal, and vibratorystresses.   Because even superalloys begin to melt once temperatures near 2200F,internal air-cooling circuits are used to cool components in a turbine'shot gas path. They draw air from the compressor outlet or interstagelocations to cool the combustor liner, the outer shell of thecombustor-to-turbine transition piece, and the first few stages of movingblades and stationary nozzles. One manufacturer uses ceramic tiles andair-cooled heat shields to protect gas-path liners from high temperaturesand related thermal loading.   Thermal barrier coatings protect combustion liners on newhigh-temperature units. These coatings are plasma-sprayed onto the hot sideof the combustion liner in thicknesses up to 0.015 in. For each 0.001 in.of coating, there is a reported 8- to 16-deg-F drop in the liner's surfacetemperature. Finally, a manufacturing process known as directionalsolidification is used by select manufacturers to improve the low-cyclefatigue properties of cast components.   Low emissions. Several methods are used to reduce gas-turbine NOsubscript x emissions, including: (1) injecting steam or water into thecombustion zone, (2) using dry low-NO subscript x burners, or (3) includinga selective catalytic reduction (SCR) system in the exhaust train. Dryburner systems--which reduce NO subscript x production through advancedcontrol of combustion parameters--have several obvious advantages: (1)Steam and water injection reduce overall thermal efficiency, and (2)catalytic reduction entails handling ammonia and disposing of spentcatalysts that contain heavy-metal oxides.   Two manufacturers reportedly have developed dry burners which can reducegas-turbine NO subscript x emissions to below 10 ppm--at 15% excess Osubscript 2--for natural-gas-fired machines (see box, p 63). Machines usingthese advanced burners also display near-zero CO emissions and unburnedhydrocarbon levels below 10 ppm when operating at full load. However, COemissions may suffer at less than 50% load. One manufacturer estimatesthat, compared to a coal-fired plant of similar size, a combined-cyclepowerplant based on these gas turbines outputs 53% less CO subscript 2.   For units firing distillate fuels, steam or water injection has beenused to cut NO subscript x emissions to 25 ppm. In areas such as Californiaand Japan, where NO subscript x-control regulations are stringent,selective catalytic reduction (SCR) with ammonia injection has been used tofurther reduce NO subscript x levels. SO subscript 2 emissions from gasturbines burning premium fuels are negligible.   Increased unit outputs. The scale-up of gas turbines has played a majorrole in the machine's penetration into the base-load powerplant market.What may be the world's most powerful gas turbine, a 212-MW machine for50-Hz service, was chosen by Tokyo Electric Power Co to anchor a 2600-MW,combined-cycle plant--the largest facility of this type planned to date--tobe constructed in the mid-1990s. The most powerful 60-Hz machine inoperation exceeded its base-load design output of 150 MW in 1990 when itentered service at Virginia Electric & Power Co's Chesterfield station (Fig2). The unit is part of a 214-MW, combined-cycle powerplant.   Coal compatibility. Perhaps the most important advancementsunderway--upon which the future confidence of gas-turbine users mayhinge--are those being made in coal combustion technologies (Power specialreport, Combined-Cycle Powerplants, June 1990). The most promising ofthese, coal gasification (CG) and pressurized fluidized-bed combustion(PFBC), utilize gas turbines in efficient, environmentally sound,combined-cycle schemes.   Commercial-scale coal-gasification/ combined-cycle (CGCC) plants havebeen successfully demonstrated in the US. While the installed cost of thesefacilities is still significantly higher than that of a natural-gas-firedcombined-cycle plant, the economic viability of CGCCs is sure to increaseif and when the price of natural gas escalates, as many industry observersbelieve it will. Developers of CGCC plants have already found niche marketsfor their facilities--such as in areas where coal is readily available andnatural gas is not, or as part of utility repowering projects, whichincrease overall plant output and efficiency while reducing SO subscript 2emissions. Several large-scale CGCC plants are now being developedworldwide.   The world's first PFBC/combined-cycle facility is currently operating atthe Vartan district-heating facility in Stockholm, Sweden. Main componentsinclude two PFBC modules, two gas turbine/generators, two turbine-exhausteconomizers, and one steam turbine/generator. At full load, the newfacility delivers 135 MW to the electric grid and 225 MWt to the districtheating system at an overall thermal efficiency of close to 90%. The gasturbine/generators supply about 25% of the electric power output from theplant, the steam turbine/generator the balance. Parasitic power is 11 MW,including the power needed to operate the heating circuits's hot-waterpumps. Two similar units are operating-- one in Spain and one at AmericanElectric Power Service Corp's Tidd station (Power, April 1991, p 103).Figure 1: Mid-sized gas turbines, such as this 60-MW unit, are very popularfor cogeneration and independent power applicationsFigure 2: High-power machines, such as this 150-MW unit, now anchorefficient, base-load combined-cycle powerplantsCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ADVANCED BURNERS REDUCE NO SUBSCRIPT X EMISSIONSDry low-NO subscript x burners represent an area of gas turbine technologywhere significant improvements have been made recently. To illustrate: Onegas-turbine manufacturer guaranteed San Diego Gas & Electric Co (SDG&E)that NO subscript x emissions from a newly installed 100-MW gas turbinewill not exceed 9 ppm for natural-gas firing--without water/steam injectionor an SCR system. The "hybrid'' burner used on this unit can operate in twomodes--as a conventional diffusion burner or as a low-NO subscript x premixburner.   In conventional diffusion burners, fuel and air are mixed and combustedin the same space. This can lead to poor mixing and cause correspondinglyhigh thermal-NO subscript x production. With low-NO subscript x burners,premixing of fuel and air allows combustion to occur with a uniform andrelatively high degree of excess air, promoting lower flame temperaturesand reducing NO subscript x production.   The hybrid burner represents the current state-of-the-art in dry low-NOsubscript x combustion technology (Fig A). Hybrid burners operate asdiffusion burners in the 0-40% load range, because the premix-burner flamesare too unstable to support combustion at low loads. At 40% of base load,changeover to the premix burners occurs. In this mode, natural gas is mixedwith the primary air by a series of jets upstream of the burner's diagonalswirler. Flame stability and low emissions are maintained throughout theremainder of the load range by: (1) maintaining pilot flames on all burnersbetween 90 and 100% load, (2) using variable-pitch guide vanes on initialcompressor stages, and (3) using mechanical secondary-air shutters in thecombustion chambers to further reduce primary air flow at lower loads.   The hybrid arrangement allows all four of the machine's burners tooperate identically throughout the unit's load range. When operating ondistillate fuels, steam or water can be injected through ports in theburners to maintain NO subscript x levels below 50 ppm. At least two othermanufacturers have recently developed premix burners capable of holding NOsubscript x levels below 25 ppm.   The main difficulty to overcome with premix burners is achieving astable flame, especially during load changes. One design accomplishes thisby using adjacent groups of identical dual-fuel conical premix burners (FigB). In this system, the stability of premix burner flames is maintained intwo ways: First, the burner's conical design causes a stabilizingvortex-breakdown region at the center of the flame. Second, during startupand low loads, groups of the premix burners are operated in a pilot modeand act to stabilize adjacent burners.   Another type of premix burner utilizes staged-combustion techniques tomaintain flame stability and low NO subscript x levels over a machine'sentire load range (Fig C). During startup and low loads, fuel is suppliedonly to the burner's first stage, which operates in the diffusion-flamemode.   In this mode, combustor metal temperatures limit the amount of heatreleased and thus lower the firing temperature and NO subscript xproduction. As load continues to increase, a flame is ignited in the secondstage. It is initially a diffusion flame as well--in the lean/leanmode--but fuel splitting limits flame temperatures and residence times tocontrol NO subscript x production. At 75% load, all fuel is transferred tothe second stage and the first stage flame extinguishes. Then up to 80% ofthe fuel is slowly metered back to the first stage, which acts like amixing chamber, with the premix flame residing only in the second stage.Flame stability is maintained by a small diffusion-flame subpilot in thesecond stage.Figure A: Hybrid burners (above) have been used to drop NO subscript xemissions below 10 ppm.Figure B: Dual-fuel low-NO subscript x burner (figure below, left) has noseparation between premix and combustion zones, and is said to becompatible with both annular and external combustors.Figure C: Staging of fuel between two combustion regions is another methodof minimizing NO subscript x formation (below right)Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.AERODERIVATIVE UNITS FEATURE HIGH EFFICIENCY, AIRCRAFT-ENGINE PARTSCOMPATABILITYThe thermal efficiency of one recently introduced 40-MW aeroderivative gasturbine tops 40%. Approximately 80% of its components are borrowed from anaircraft engine used in modern wide-body jets. The unit's 14-stagehigh-pressure (h-p) compressor, two-stage h-p turbine, five-stagelow-pressure (l-p) turbine, and combustor are identical to those used inthe aircraft engine-- except for minor seal changes and a modification tothe turbine shaft needed for coupling to the generator. Its five-stage l-pcompressor is borrowed from an existing aeroderivative design.   A variable-inlet guide-vane system modulates air flow during startup,shutdown, and part-load operation. A variable bleed system is also added tomatch air flows between the l-p and h-p compressors during off-loadconditions. The modified rear frame area of the engine provides anl-p-rotor thrust-balance system, necessary to offset the 60,000 lb ofthrust lost with the elimination of the engine's fan.   The unit weighs over six tons and is only 14 ft long. Fornatural-gas-fired units, NO subscript x emissions are expected to be heldto 25 ppm by using steam injection and 42 ppm by injecting water. Forbase-load service, 25,000 hours of operation is expected betweenhot-section maintenance outages, and 50,000 hours between overhauls.   Another manufacturer of aeroderivative gas turbines has developed a26-MW unit with a simple-cycle thermal efficiency of over 39% (photo). Apopular combined-cycle configuration for this model includes two gasturbines driving a single generator, an HRSG, and a steamturbine/generator. For this arrangement, gross plant output is 67 MW andefficiency tops 50%.   Major advantages of this aeroderivative engine include:   -- Gas-turbine changeout requires only eight hours.   -- Starting time--cold start to power generation--is three minutes.   -- Auxiliary components are of a modular design.   -- Site required is small--105 x 130 ft for a 33-MW plant, 140 x 160 ftfor 67 MW.Photograph: Modern aeroderivative units have attained high efficiencies byincreasing operating temperature, mass flow, and compression ratiosCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ICE MAKER ADDS LOW-COST KILOWATTS TO PEAKING UNIT   The move beyond evaporative coolers to stretch gas-turbine output(Power, July 1991, p 27) is most recently, and perhaps most vividly,illustrated by the installation of a large inlet-air chiller at LincolnElectric System's (Lincoln, Neb) Rokeby station (Figure 1). Although theproject was completed last September, only one day of testing and shakedownwas possible before the cold, according to officials from Burns &McDonnell, Kansas City, Mo, the owner's engineer for the project. But foraround $165/kW and no expected increase in operating costs, Rokeby's outputwill be increased by up to 22% during hot weather. A 4% reduction in heatrate is anticipated.   The objective at Rokeby, like several other recent projects, is toovercome a fundamental shortcoming of gas-turbine peakers--that poweroutput is inversely proportional to inlet air temperature. But the Rokebyproject is distinguished by the use of thermal energy storage (TES) insteadof mechanical, absorption, or hybrid chillers integral to the gasturbine/generator. This way, low-cost, off-peak nuclear- or coal-basedpower is used to drive the TES system, not power from the peaking unit.Rokeby's TES system is believed to be the largest for this type ofapplication in North America.Hungry for mass flow   The gas turbine/generator at Rokeby is an early-vintage MS7001B,supplied by General Electric Co, Schenectady, NY. Peak rating of themachine, 65 MW when firing distillate fuel at ISO conditions, deterioratesto 53 MW at 100F inlet air temperature. An evaporative cooler originallyincluded with the gas turbine maintained output at 57.8 MW at thistemperature. Although installed in 1975, the gas turbine has operated atotal of only 1500 hours.   Being a mass-flow machine, the gas turbine's output improves as inletair temperature decreases and density increases. Reducing inlet airtemperature to 40F increases output by 11 MW above that obtained with theevaporative cooler operating. To do this, ice is produced, stored as anice/water bath, then used to cool inlet air when the gas turbine operates.Harvesting ice   Main components of the Rokeby TES system are a refrigeration unit,ice/water storage tank, and air cooling coils. A traditional ammonia-basedcycle is employed for refrigeration. It consists of a compressor, threeevaporators, and one evaporative condenser.   System works this way: Cold water from the bottom of the storage tank ispumped to the refrigeration unit on top of the tank. The three ice-makingevaporators (Figure 2), spaced symetrically around the top of the tank,cycle between freezing and shedding. That is, ammonia refrigerant passingthrough the evaporator coils allows ice to form on the outside of thecoils, then a hot-gas bypass off the low-pressure refrigerant compressorpasses through the coils, melting the ice which subsequently drops directlyinto the storage tank (Figure 3). Ice-making capacity is around 23tons/hr.   Gas-turbine inlet air passes through the shell side of a heat exchangerwith chilled water pumped from the ice/water tank through the coils.Indirect heat transfer was selected over direct contact because it wasthought to provide superior protection of the gas turbine againstimpurities in the chilled water.   Cooling coils are spiral-wound copper tubes with aluminum fins. Designchilled-water inlet temperature is 34F, design turbine-inlet-airtemperature drop is from 101 to 40F. Maximum allowable pressure drop is0.5 in. H subscript 2 O. Water that condenses out of the turbine inlet airis collected and routed to site drainage.   An inlet air temperature of 40F is considered the lowest safetemperature for avoiding icing of the compressor. As combustion air isdrawn into the compressor, static air pressure drops because of frictionand increased velocity; a corresponding drop in temperature is experiencedas well. Thus air below 40F could eventually drop below freezing by thetime it reached the first stage of compressor blades.   Another concern was differential expansion of the compressor rotor andstator as inlet temperature decreased by 60F. To guard against this, afive-minute, air cooldown ramp will be used after the engine reaches fullspeed. In addition, the cooling system is shut down along a five-minuteramp.   The ice/water bath is stored in a cast-in-place concrete tank installedbelow grade to take advantage of the insulating effect of the soil and toprovide piping-system drainage in the off-season. Ice is distributed bygravity and floats like a iceberg until the portion below the waterlinereaches the bottom of the tank. This stabilizes the ice pile and allows itto accumulate in a cone shape. Rotating water sprays continuallyredistribute the ice as the size of the cone increases to prevent build upunder the ice-making evaporators.   Control of the TES system is based on monitoring the inlet airtemperature to the gas turbine. As it increases, a programmable logiccontroller signals two butterfly valves to open proportional to the changein air temperature. The butterfly valves regulate the flow of chilled waterto the coils. Safeguards were added to ensure that the turbine is protectedagainst minimum temperatures that could lead to ice ingestion into theturbine's compressor. Interlocks are also provided for periods of reducedair flow during startup and shutdown.Exercising the system   Rokeby's TES system operates on a weekly cycle. It produces ice for 148hours and melts ice by cooling turbine inlet air 20 hours a week. Eachweekday, ice typically is produced 20 hours and melted four hours; weekendsare dedicated to ice-making. This cycle meets the requirements of Lincoln'spower pool for peak-capacity accreditation.   Establishing a weekly cycle, instead of a daily or yearly one, involvedoptimization among refrigeration capacity, off-peak power consumption, andice-storage capacity. The weekly cycle calls for less refrigeration andpower but more storage. An added benefit of greater storage is more thermalinertia that helps assure a low water-supply temperature to the coilsthroughout the operating cycle.Machine modifications   Although not required, Lincoln engineers decided to replace theturbine's inlet guide vanes with ones capable of passing higher air flow.This increased the turbine's output by an additional 2 MW or 4% above themachine's capacity at 100F inlet air temperature. The original evaporativecooler has been removed.   Also, as part of the Rokeby retrofit, natural gas was brought to thesite and the machine outfitted for dual-fuel firing. The move allowed theplant to offset what the state authorities considered an increase in theabsolute NO subscript x emissions that would occur with the TES operatingin conjunction with a distillate-oil-fired gas turbine.   According to Byron Bakenhus, project engineer, Rokeby is now expected tobe among the lowest-cost producers of peaking power in the Mid-ContinentPower Pool. As such, operating hours for the unit should increase.Figure 1: Chilled water from underground ice/water-bath storage (right,showing three evaporators) containment is routed to the gas-turbineinlet-air heat exchanger, leftFigure 2: Ice-making evaporator, one of three, employs ammonia as arefrigerant, leftFigure 3: Ice builds up on coils, then drops into ice/water bath and formslarge pile, belowCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DEVELOPMENTS TO WATCHBy:Jason MakansiThe fortunes of coal-bed methane, like many alternative fuels, seem to riseand fall in the sea of conventional fuelprices. When trouble erupts in theoil/gas market--the most recent being the Persian Gulf War--and pricesrise, development of coal-bed methane gets attention. When prices fall,activity dissipates. In the guise of an environmental liability, however,coal-bed methane has piqued the interest of some engineers in recentmonths.   Methane has been labeled a greenhouse gas with a potential warmingeffect up to 10 times that of CO subscript 2, the most voluminousgreenhouse gas.CO subscript 2 makes up about half of the so-called atmosphericgreenhouse-gas inventory, methane around 18%. Based on these twoparameters, anyway, methane emissions should be causing more alarm than COsubscript 2 emissions.   EPA studies have estimated that more than 10% of the worldwide emissionsof methane are associated with coal mining activities. Traditionally,methane from coal mines is vented to the atmosphere to protect miners andproperty around mines from catastrophic explosions and health hazards.   Coal-bed methane exists naturally in varying quality levels--rangingfrom essentially air with trace quantities of methane to ahigh-heating-value product that rivals natural gas. And, it must becollected and distributed to potential user sites. If not of high-enoughheating value, this proposition becomes uneconomic.   At least one company, O'Brien Energy & Environmental Systems,Philadelphia, Pa, is pursuing firm business plans for coal-bed methane thatincludes cogeneration at the site or the distribution of the gas toexisting and future cogeneration and small-power sites. In addition to manylandfill-gas-powered generating systems, O'Brien owns severalnatural-gas-fired cogeneration facilities ranging up to 100 MW capacity inConnecticut, New Jersey, Florida, and California.   The firm's initial foray is a joint venture with Cosap Inc, Dallas, Tex,to develop 15,000 acres of coal-bed methane reserves in southwesternPennsylvania. An estimated 40-billion ft superscript 3 of gas is availableat this site. According to O'Brien officials, when fully developed, thisfield could supply one-third of the fuel consumed at the company's twolarge New Jersey cogeneration facilities, representing a total of nearly140 MW.   Whether by O'Brien or others, extensive development of coal-bed methaneinvolves some knotty legal and institutional roadblocks. Uncertaintiesexist about who owns the rights to methane recovered during coal miningoperations. Also, unsound recovery techniques could lead to groundwaterpollution.Water/fuel emulsions may be the answer for controlling NO subscript xemissions from oil-fired gas turbines, especially if the unit is operatedinfrequently. Tests at two sites with different machines confirm high NOsubscript x removal levels.   Process-wise, the technique is similar to conventional water injectioninto the combustor. In both, the vaporization of water reduces peak flametemperature in the combustors, adds mass flow to the turbine, but alsopenalizes system heat rate.   Emulsified residual fuel oil has been proven to control particulate andNO subscript x emissions from boilers. Nalco Fuel Tech, Naperville, Ill,and Public Service Electric & Gas Co, Newark, NJ, have extended thetechnology to gas turbines firing liquid fuels, such as distillate oil.   Initial work was conducted at PSE&G's Burlington station on anearly-1970s FT-4 gas turbine supplied by Turbo Power & Marine Systems Inc,Farmington, Conn. Firing pre-emulsified fuel containing 10-15% waterreduced NO subscript x emissions by 50% or more. Stability of the fuel wasunacceptable, however.   Further work took place at the Kearny station, also equipped withearly-1970s machines. An emulsification system--consisting of a water pump,control valve, chemical metering pump, and an in-line emulsifier--wasdesigned and installed. A proprietary surfactant/stabilizer package is usedto keep fine water droplets well-dispersed in the oil, particularly as ittravels under high temperatures and pressures. The emulsifier system feedsa single A-4 engine operating as part of a 35-MW Twin-Pak.   Results were encouraging. Immediate NO subscript x reductions wereobtained when small amounts of water were emulsified into the fuel. Whenthe water level reached 35%, close to 70% NO subscript x reduction wasmeasured. Plume opacity disappeared when the emulsion contained between 13and 17% water.   These results appeared even more favorable when compared to conventionalwater injection rates employed by another utility on a recent-model gasturbine with hybrid burners. Around 50% more NO subscript x reduction wasaccomplished using emulsions with equivalent water-addition rates.   Tests of the PSE&G gas turbine in a natural-gas/fuel-emulsion co-firingmode were also revealing. When oil comprised 15% of the total fuel inputand was emulsified with around 85% water, NO subscript x emissions werereduced by 77% over the baseline value. No problems operating the unit weredocumented as a result of using oil/water emulsions nor were any depositsnoted on turbine internals.   Long-term tests, now underway at Kearny, include 200 to 400 operatinghours on two separate machines firing oil/water emulsions followed bythorough hot-side inspections. A 1500-hr reliability test is also planned.Engineers expect to more thoroughly investigate heat-rate penalties, poweroutput boosts, and changes in CO emissions.   In Berlin, Germany, one 83.5-MW gas turbine at the Wilmersdorf station,originally equipped with water injection, was also retrofitted with awater/oil emulsion system. The plant, owned by Berlin's utility, Bewag, wasoperating in cogeneration/district-heating mode but after unification,authorities determined that peaking would be more appropriate.   According to engineers close to the project, advantages of usingemulsions instead of straight water injection are: (1) The gas turbine'scombustor is not affected, and (2) emulsions more uniformly distribute thewater in the most critical region of the flame. The gas turbine, suppliedby European Gas Turbine Co, Paris, France, has always fired distillateoil.   Of particular interest is that emulsifying agents are not added to thefuel. Only an in-line static oil/water mixer is installed downstream of theoil and deionized-water pumps. A residence time of less than 24 secondsbetween emulsifying and firing ensures the stability of the mixture.   NO subscript x emissions achieved are shown in Figure 1. As important,other operating parameters did not deteriorate, particularly noise,combustion properties, and CO emissions. Only at loads below the range ofthe gas turbine could CO emissions increase above the 100 mg/Nm superscript3 limit governing the site.   A long-term test was also successful and helped to evaluate mechanicalmodifications required of the fuel supply system and the overall controlscheme. Wilmersdorf now plans to convert all three of its machines to burnwater/fuel emulsions for NO subscript x control.Direct-contact condensers (DCC) could increase unit availability by up to3% compared to conventional shell-and-tube condensers, according to DBharathan, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colo, and PD'Errico, Stone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass. Other benefitsinclude a slightly lower heat rate, ease of maintenance, cleanerheat-transfer surface, shorter condenser height and thus lower plantprofile, better part-load performance, and better control of dissolved Osubscript 2.   In the proposed system (Figure 2), the DCC is a vacuum vessel withinternal packing that enhances contact between steam from the turbine andcooling water. Cooling water is essentially condensate that is returned tothe DCC through a pump-around loop. Note that the DCC concept used here issimilar to the one used in dry cooling systems throughout the world. A setof parallel-plate heat exchangers transfers heat from the condensate to thecooling-water loop. The plate heat exchangers (PHE) form the barrierbetween cooling water and condensate.   Because there are far fewer joints in a PHE than in a conventionalcondenser, the potential for leakage--the number-one problem withcondensers and a significant cause of unit forced outages--is greatlydiminished. Pressure of the condensate side of the PHE is higher than forthe cooling-water side, helping to prevent in-leakage of contaminants intothe condensate. In addition, heat-transfer rates are double, and foulingfactors are at least five times lower than those for surface condensers.When cleaning is necessary, individual PHE modules can be taken out ofservice with no blip in performance.   Tradeoffs in design include the need for 30% more heat-transfer areathan a surface condenser, need for a pump-around loop which consumesauxiliary power and increases system complexity, and adequate filtrationand treatment for biofouling of the cooling water stream to preventplugging. Cooling-water passages in PHEs are much narrower than in surfacecondensers.Probabilistic modeling is a multi-functional statistical tool madepractical by the advent of high-speed computing power. In the powerplantarena, it is being used to characterize uncertainties in the performanceand cost of advanced powerplant technologies (Figure 3) and to assess thefate of toxic substances in existing and new powerplant designs.   The unique feature of probabilistic modeling is that it expressesuncertainty in a process parameter or input assumption not as a singlevalue as with more common deterministic approaches, but as a probabilitydistribution indicating the likelihood of various outcomes. Interactionsbetween uncertainties are also better accounted for. It is particularlysuited to analyzing parameters whose values are very likely to beuncertain. This includes trace quantities of pollutants at or near thelimits of detection.   The technique allows you to estimate the frequency that a particularvalue of interest might be exceeded. So, given specific uncertaintiesinherent to the system under study, the model can conclude that there is a90% probability a given trace substance will not exceed regulated limits.   In general, the application of probabilistic modeling becomes morenecessary as more parameters become important, even critical to the successof the design. For example, if the designer is worried about cost, energyefficiency, reliability, as well as the discharge of a variety of regulatedpollutants, then probabilistic modeling provides a greater degree ofinsight into how design tradeoffs affect those performance parameters.   In the case of comparing two or more plant designs or technologies,probabilistic modeling allows each design to reflect the degree ofconfidence of the designer in his input assumptions. Simultaneousinput-parameter uncertainties are propagated through an engineering modelto yield an explicit indication of the full range of uncertainties inoutput values.   To fine-tune an R&D program, probabilistic modeling allows the mostuncertain components of given design to be identified and quantified. Thisallows better placement of priorities and, subsequently, allocation ofresearch funds.   One price for this insight is computing time. To illustrate: To comparetwo integrated-gasification/combined-cycle (IGCC) plant designs, adeterministic analysis might take a half-hour or less of computer time. Aprobabilistic analysis could take between six and 12 hours. In addition,the amount of input information required for probabilistic modeling is fargreater. For more information, contact Ed Rubin or Christopher Frey,Carnegie Mellon University, Center for Energy & Environmental Studies,Pittsburgh, Pa.Figure 1: NO subscript x reductions using fuel/water emulsions aresignificant for several gas-turbine outputsFigure 2: Direct-contact condenser with parallel-plate heat exchangers andpump-around loop reportedly could boost availability of large powerplantsFigure 3: Probabilistic modeling of an IGCC design resulted in this rangeof values for thermal efficiency, capital cost, and levelized costCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COMPANY FEATURES RANGE OF PRODUCTS AT ISA SHOWAt the recent Instrument Society of America's show and conference, BaileyControls Co featured a wide range of field instrumentation and its latestdigital distributed system.-- The INFI 90 strategic process management system integratesprocess-control activities with such business factors as market conditions,economic climate, and material costs. The digital distributed system offersenhanced functionality, improved engineering tools, and environmentallyhardened packaging.-- Magnetic inductive flowmeters provide accurate flow-rate measurement ofconductive liquids and slurries. They are especially suited for continuousprocess and batch control, as well as totalization.-- Mass flowmeter offers accurate, one-step measurement of both mass flowand density from one instrument, which features a transducer unaffected bydensity, viscosity, or other process parameters.-- Smart electronic pressure transmitters are designed for differential-,gage-, absolute-, and level-pressure inputs, and interface with othercompany I&C systems and products.-- Smart temperature transmitters accept inputs from thermocouple, RTD, ormillivolt sources. They are user-configurable to provide an output linearto temperature or conforming to nonlinear input signals.-- Analog transmitters determine flow rates, fluid levels, and absolute,gage, and differential pressures. They are suitable for operation innormal, harsh, and hazardous installations.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.MONITOR, CONTROL ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION FROM CENTRAL LOCATIONElectrical distribution communications system, called Access, is availablefrom Siemens Energy & Automation Inc, Electrical Apparatus Div. The systemstarts with smart field devices, each with protective or metering functionsof their own. These smart trip units, power meters, and protective relayshave built-in communications capabilities and can send/receive informationusing RS485 local communications networks. Supervisory devices act ascollection points for information coming from these intelligent fielddevices.   At the top of the system is the Access host personal computer, which canmonitor an electrical system with more than 1000 field devices. The PCsoftware is designed for simple operation with minimal training.-- Display and monitoring unit is a supervisory device that collects,records, and displays real-time and historical power data. It has a 9-in.graphic or local display unit with basic alphanumeric display features.-- User-programmable motor control and protection device comes in threemodels to provide reliable, flexible, and affordable protection forNEMA/EEMAC-size low-voltage motors from 0.3 to 540 A.-- Overcurrent protective relay provides overcurrent, short-circuit, andground-fault protection and selective tripping for electric-powerapplications, and communicates with Access and supervisory device.-- Static trip unit monitors, evaluates, and controls the powerdistribution system, circuit by circuit. Microprocessor-based, the tripoffers overcurrent protection, comprehensive metering, and extendedprotective relaying.-- Electronic metering package combines ammeter and switch, voltmeter andswitch, kWh-demand meter, kW meter, power-factor meter, and five othermetered functions into one comprehensive digital unit.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.UPGRADE INDUSTRIAL GAS TURBINES WITH ELECTRONIC TRANSMITTERSRecently, a major manufacturer of industrial gas turbines upgraded theinstrumentation package on its line of machines. Existing mechanical relaysand switches were replaced with modern electronic devices, such as thepressure transmitters shown in the photos. The older devices monitoreddiscrete setpoints like pre-start values, plus low, high, and shutdownlevels.   At the beginning of the upgrade program, the decision was made toinstall such analog monitoring devices as sensors, transducers, andtransmitters on the turbines and link them to a programmable logiccontroller (PLC). By switching from mechanical relays to electronictransmitters, the manufacturer gained the ability to closely monitor andcontrol its equipment, as well as the convenience of replacing two, three,and sometimes four switches with one analog device.   With the electronic transmitter, all alarms, shutdowns, and pre-startcycles are controlled by the PLC. New setpoints require just a fewkeystrokes to update the software--not a hardware switch to new relays. Thepressure transmitters provide analog signals for these parameters: fuelsystem, lube-oil system, hydraulic (servo) system, turbine-compressordischarge, boost-compressor suction and discharge, boost-compressor sealsystem.   The upgrade meets user needs to monitor various functions of the turbinefor performance, safety, sequencing, and troubleshooting. Themicroprocessor-based PLC works with the new analog input/output modules toperform such functions as:-- Sequencing turbine and auxiliaries.-- Controlling turbine during startup, loading, and shutdown.-- Protecting turbine from abnormal internal or external conditions.-- Monitoring and displaying analog and status outputs.-- Responding to operator commands.   Among the options the PLC offers are condition and trend monitoring,predictive trending, comparative strip charts, and turbine and compressorperformance maps.   With analog components, savings in inventory and spare parts arepossible. To accomplish this, transmitters are calibrated for a specificrange; PLC software is changed for specific setpoints required for theapplication. There's no need to stock a wide variety of pressure switcheswith different setpoints for different applications and conditions.--AmetekInc, PMT Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Tensioning system permits reduced radiation exposure, shortened downtime,Tensioning system permits reduced radiation exposure, shortened downtime,smaller crew sizes, and increased safety. As explained in brochure, thehydraulic system leads to savings in stud-tensioning operations of thereactor pressure vessel.--Biach Industries.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Condensate discharge system combines the best features of float andCondensate discharge system combines the best features of float andsolenoid drains in a self-regulating package. To activate the drain valve,a float triggers a solenoid switch. Condensate flows from the reservoirbottom, through a discharge pipe, to a top outlet. Thus, no air is lost,saving energy and cost.--Granzow Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Steam-generator services are outlined in booklet, which covers everythingSteam-generator services are outlined in booklet, which covers everythingfrom diagnostic technology to replacement units. Services discussed:robotic and remote manipulator systems; rotating-sensor tube inspection;tube sleeving, plugging, and shot peening; special inspection and repairtooling.--B&W Nuclear Service Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Valve repairs by company at Cape Fear plant operation were honored withValve repairs by company at Cape Fear plant operation were honored withaward for quality and cost-effectiveness. Company has rebuilt nearly 1000valves at site since 1988 with zero subsequent repairs--a 59% cost savingper valve over a new valve.--Newport News Industrial Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Scada system, for cooling-water treatment applications, provides increasedScada system, for cooling-water treatment applications, provides increasedcooling/boiler-system reliability, manpower saving, and improvedefficiency. The system controls, monitors, logs, alarms, and communicateschemical feeds and cooling-system operation parameters.--Ashland ChemicalCo, Drew Industrial Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Data-acquisition system--an advanced computer monitoring process--linksData-acquisition system--an advanced computer monitoring process--linkscompany's mobile water treatment equipment to its 24-hr/day centraldispatch center. Vital operating data can be displayed, monitored, andarchived. Preset alarm points are announced both visually andaudibly.--Ecolochem Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Ceramic adhesive bonds silica gaskets to furnace brick. TheCeramic adhesive bonds silica gaskets to furnace brick. Thesingle-component, alumina-based adhesive can function at temperatures to3200F. Besides low thermal conductivity, high dielectric strength, andtemperature resistance, the adhesive also offers excellent moisture,oxidation, and solvent resistance.--Aremco Products Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Utility-boiler upgrades are featured in brochure, including those for NOxUtility-boiler upgrades are featured in brochure, including those for NOxreduction, improved water circulation, pressure-part modifications,pulverizer- and fuel-system conversions, and other boilerimprovements.--Babcock & Wilcox Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Report-generation service combines heat-exchanger eddy-current inspectionReport-generation service combines heat-exchanger eddy-current inspectiondata from in-house testing teams or independent vendors, user-specifiedcriteria, and the company's own software (TubeStat Services) to createcomprehensive, graphical inspection reports.--Karta Technology Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Bulk-material valve with inflatable seal is designed for use in pressurizedBulk-material valve with inflatable seal is designed for use in pressurizedand/or abrasive applications such as ash, coal, and lime handling andconveying. Key benefits: environmentally sealed housing, pressure/vacuumand abrasive service, pressure-tight closure, wide temperaturerange.--Schutte-Meyer, a Purnell Affiliate.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Drum/tank samplers are a durable, safe, accurate, and easy-to-use productDrum/tank samplers are a durable, safe, accurate, and easy-to-use productline for sampling virtually any kind of liquid or sludge. Common sourcesare 55-gal drums, truck and rail-tank cars, large tanks, streams, lakes,rivers, and lagoons.--Norton Performance Plastics.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PC-based system reduces time required to balance rotors in large steamPC-based system reduces time required to balance rotors in large steamturbine/generators from days to hours. Using personal computers forbalancing, outage time will be kept to a minimum for nearly 500 ofcompany's units worldwide.--General Electric Co, GE Research & DevelopmentCtr.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Low-NO subscript x combustors for company's heavy-duty gas turbines areLow-NO subscript x combustors for company's heavy-duty gas turbines areimmediately available, with shipments by 1994 for certain units. These drylow-NOx systems meet current emissions standards; more advanced systemswill meet the 9-ppm standard.--General Electric Co, GE Power Generation.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Switchgear offers safety features, minimum downtime, system selectivity,Switchgear offers safety features, minimum downtime, system selectivity,ease of maintenance, and large functional capacity. Primary-component typesare the DS (not fusible) and DSL (fused) low-voltage power circuitbreakers.--Square D Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Communicator interface allows uninterruptible power systems (UPS) toCommunicator interface allows uninterruptible power systems (UPS) tointerface with local-area networks (LANs) or RS232 communications in plainEnglish. Offered are UPS front-panel view, diagnostic and alarm messages,and control capability from any LAN terminal.--Sola, a unit of GeneralSignal Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Circuit interrupter combines the best of switching- and vacuum-interruptionCircuit interrupter combines the best of switching- and vacuum-interruptiontechnologies in medium-voltage power distribution systems. A mechanismenables the interrupter to open the circuit and extinguish the arc withinthe vacuum interrupters before the isolation blades openautomatically.--Square D Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Expansion joints feature one-piece welded construction ofbody and gland,Expansion joints feature one-piece welded construction ofbody and gland,allowing packing to be easily added under full-line pressure. Jointsreportedly require only nominal maintenance, without the necessity of majorrepairs.--Yarway Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Pump features include plunger couplings, double-extended crankshaft,Pump features include plunger couplings, double-extended crankshaft,bolted-on valve covers, replaceable stuffing boxes, flanged fluidconnections on all cylinders, and high-technology bearings. Result issmoother discharge flow.--Cooper Industries, Gardner-Denver IndustrialMachinery Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Rotary control valve provides noise abatement in gas or vapor service plusRotary control valve provides noise abatement in gas or vapor service pluscavitation control in liquid service. Metal-seated ball valve hasattenuator plates; flow is forced through holes in plates, preventingexcessive velocity and minimizing corrosion.--Neles-Jamesbury Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Expansion joint absorbs lateral deflection and limits angular rotation toExpansion joint absorbs lateral deflection and limits angular rotation toone plane. Hinged-type, 24-in.-diameter joints are designed for emergencyshutdown delivery requirements.--Piping Technology & Products Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Check valve, in sizes 2 to 24 in., features low head loss with non-slamCheck valve, in sizes 2 to 24 in., features low head loss with non-slamclosing. It is available with rubber lining as well as backflowactuation.--Val-Matic Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Air compressors, 15 to 30 hp, operate continuously under full load atAir compressors, 15 to 30 hp, operate continuously under full load atpressures to 175 psig for two-stage and 60 psig for single-stage units.Lube systems are splash or optional pressure feed with spin-on oil filterfor rigorous-duty applications.--Cooper Industries, Gardner-DenverIndustrial Machinery Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Ball valves promise zero leakage in severe service applications, operatingBall valves promise zero leakage in severe service applications, operatingin temperatures from cryogenic to 2100F, in pressures from vacuum to 50,000psig, and in most abrasive and corrosive environments. Valves arequarter-turn, metal-seated designs.--ValvTron, a subsidiary of YarwayCorp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Valve services and products include upgraded test equipment for actuatorValve services and products include upgraded test equipment for actuatorcomponents and check-valve diagnostic system. Brochure details a variety ofvalve-related engineering software programs to assist utilities invalve-maintenance decision making and in complying with NRCrequirements.--B&W Nuclear Service Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Expansion joints provide 13-in. movement, 50 psig in the abrasiveExpansion joints provide 13-in. movement, 50 psig in the abrasiveenvironment of a powerplant. They have internal guide rings to acceptlateral forces and internal packing capable of withstanding 1100Ftemperatures.--Sweco Fab Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Flue-gas analyzer has zirconium electrochemical cell for use in gas streamsFlue-gas analyzer has zirconium electrochemical cell for use in gas streamsto 2800F without cooling or conditioning. The catalytic combustiblesdetector measures net excess oxygen and combustibles in high-particulateprocess gas. Applications: boilers, furnaces, rotary kilns,incinerators.--Ametek Inc, Thermox Instruments Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Emissions monitor is a single-pass EPA-compliance system that usesEmissions monitor is a single-pass EPA-compliance system that usesstate-of-the-art glass-fiberoptics technology. In situ components do notrequire fail/safe shutters or weatherhoods. Single-pass technique leads toreliable, repeatable, and linear readings.--Datatest Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Pressure sensors for measurements on internal-combustion engines convertPressure sensors for measurements on internal-combustion engines convertpressure into an electric signal. The conversion is performed via theelastic deformation of a diaphragm made of silicon subjected to pressure onone side. A Wheatstone bridge circuit, diffused into the surface of thediaphragm, is unbalanced proportionally by the applied pressure.--KistlerInstrument Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Distributed-control system (DCS) offers transducer compatibility, precisionDistributed-control system (DCS) offers transducer compatibility, precisionanalog measurement, and network-based or intelligent stand-alone operation.The DCS operates in hostile environments to provide pipeline monitoring andwastewater management.--Analogic Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Company products include microprocessor-based control systems,Company products include microprocessor-based control systems,distributed-control systems, flame detectors, high-energy spark igniters,oil and gas guns, parallel air-flow burners, oil and gas burners,desuperheaters, valve assemblies, windboxes.--Forney International Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Data-logging system is a self-contained, battery-powered package with up toData-logging system is a self-contained, battery-powered package with up to16 analog/digital inputs, plug-in interface modules, and such configurableoptions as an integral modem and a rechargeable, programmable powersupply.--Logic Beach Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Thermal imaging and temperature-measurement systems are described inThermal imaging and temperature-measurement systems are described inbrochure, including the many applications the systems can be used for inpredictive maintenance, nondestructive testing, R&D, electronics design.and night vision.--Inframetrics Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.O subscript 2 analyzer is suitable for monitoring and controlling anyO subscript 2 analyzer is suitable for monitoring and controlling anyvariable-gas stream or atmosphere that is clean and dry. It measuresO subscript 2 from 1 ppb to 100%; in high-temperature reducing atmospheres,it indicates the amount of O subscript 2 and moisture existing in chemicalequilibrium.--Panametrics Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Pressure transducers reportedly are offered at less cost than those madePressure transducers reportedly are offered at less cost than those madeconventionally. The thin-film instruments are produced via aplasma-enhanced chemical-vapor-deposition wafer technology, plus newtechniques in laser welding and vacuum brazing.--Imo Industries Inc,Barksdale Controls Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Characterizable positioners provide sensitive and accurate positioning ofCharacterizable positioners provide sensitive and accurate positioning ofpneumatic final-control elements. They are selected for either a linear ornonliner relation to pneumatic and current input signals.--Bailey ControlsCo.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Digital multimeters feature large LCD numerals (0.7 in.) for easy viewing,Digital multimeters feature large LCD numerals (0.7 in.) for easy viewing,10-A current fusing to protect user and meter, a warning beeper, safetytest leads, and increased battery life.--Beckman Industrial Corp,Instrumentation Products Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Level controller offers reliable operation for steam-generating plant,Level controller offers reliable operation for steam-generating plant,simple installation, resistivity electrodes as input transducer, fullthree-term controller functions, increased plant efficiency, and lowcost.--Schlumberger Industries, Industrial Transducer Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Transmitter enclosure features a large window for increased viewing areaTransmitter enclosure features a large window for increased viewing areaand a wide throat opening for easy instrument installation and maintenance.Enclosure meets Class I (Groups B, C, and D), Class II (Groups E, F, andG), and NEMA 3, 4, 7, and 9 specifications.--Curlee Manufacturing Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Software package projects long-term energy use and demand for 100- toSoftware package projects long-term energy use and demand for 100- to1000-MW electric utilities. Because of a user-friendly menu system, on-linehelp screens, and similar features, even inexperienced users can apply thiseconometric, microcomputer-based package.--Burns & McDonnell EngineeringCo.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.HART protocol-based measurement and control instruments are available fromHART protocol-based measurement and control instruments are available from18 HART members. As brochure describes, the protocol retains 4-20-mAprocess control signals while simultaneously providing digital process andtransmitter data over the same loop.--HART User Group.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Applications program allows fully functional annunciator--monitoring up toApplications program allows fully functional annunciator--monitoring up to5530 control points--to be displayed on computer screen. Program canreplicate up to seven Series 90 annunciator cabinets on any DOS-basedIBM-AT or compatible computer.--Ametek Inc, Panalarm Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Stator ground relay combines (1) 60-Hz signals from measurements ofStator ground relay combines (1) 60-Hz signals from measurements ofvoltages derived from the neutral grounding distribution transformer, and(2) high voltages of the generator. The 19-in. mechanical chassis comprisesseven plug-in cards for ease of maintenance and field replacement.--DerlanManufacturing Inc, Multilin Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Software programs help companies cope with the many federal, state, andSoftware programs help companies cope with the many federal, state, andlocal regulations dealing with environmental, health, and safety issues.The programs are compatible with both Macintosh and DOS-basedcomputers.--Gaia Systems.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.XL-Net, a flexible software package, provides plant-wide human integratedXL-Net, a flexible software package, provides plant-wide human integratedmanufacturing via networked personal computers or terminals. Theintegrated, distributed-control-system facility dynamically links islandsof information and combines data from multiple sources onto a commonplatform for easy user access.--Johnson Yokogawa Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DETECT HOT SPOTS IN AIR HEATERS BEFORE FIRE OCCURSBy:Steven CollinsThe buildup of combustibles on air-heater elements can lead to disaster.When enough heat and excess air are available, the deposits undergospontaneous oxidation--causing the temperature to rise higher. Once it goesabove 400F, ignition can occur, creating a "hot spot." Left alone, suchareas may grow hot enough for the thin metal elements themselves toignite--an extremely dangerous situation.   Ordinarily, thermocouples are placed at the gas-outlet side of airheaters to detect fires. However, this method only detects a fire after ithas started and may not be accurate when there is little or no flue-gasflow through the heater--such as when a unit is put into the hot standbycondition--because it relies on the convective transfer of heat tothermocouples.   An infrared heat-detection system, recently developed and tested inJapan, reportedly has several advantages over the conventional method ofair-heater fire detection, including: (1) Hot spots are detected before afire starts, (2) element temperature monitoring is accurate at all times,regardless of gas flow rate, (3) location and temperature of hot spots canbe depicted graphically on control-room CRT screens, and (4) the system canbe calibrated automatically in-place using a standard heat source.   The system is a joint development of Tokyo Electric Power Co (Tepco) andMitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd, Tokyo, Japan. It was tested at Tepco's265-MW Yokosuka Unit 1, which includes a combination coal/oil-fired boilerwith a rotating regenerative air heater (figure, above).   To enhance long-term reliability, the system is located in the air-inletsection of the air heater where temperatures are relatively low and theenvironment is free of dust and corrosive elements found in the flue-gasstream. The actual infrared sensor itself is located outsideof the heater.   Here's how the system works: A track-mounted mirror travels back andforth, scanning the plane of the rotating air heater. When a hot spotoccurs, the infrared rays it emits are reflected by the mirror at a 90-degangle into the sensing unit. A local control panel converts the infraredintensity to a scaled temperature signal and measures the position of themirror on its track and the air heater in its rotational path. These dataare then transmitted to the plant's main monitoring system, which sounds analarm. Operators can view the exact position and intensity of the hotspot--represented by color spectrum--on a CRT screen. This visual imagingsystem makes it easy to monitor growth of the hot spots and theeffectiveness of preventive or extinguishing measures--such as cutting airflow, flooding with CO subscript 2, etc.   During 14 months of testing at Yokosuka, the unit is reported to haveoperated without any notable problems. In the event that dust deposits inthe area of the mirror--one consequence of co-firing coal and oil--it iseasily removed by a small air-jet system.Figure: Combination coal/oil-fired boiler with a rotating regenerative airheaterCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CUT SCRUBBER O&M COSTS BY ACID-CLEANING FILTER SCREENSBy:Steven CollinsCharles Hoop, Columbus Southern Power Co, devised a simple and inexpensivemethod for cleaning grit and particles from FGD slurry separator screens atthe Conesville (Ohio) station. In less than four hours, the FGD system's4-ft-diameter stainless steel screens are returned to "like-new" conditionby soaking them in a trough containing a muriatic acid solution (photos,preceding page).   Before the soaking method was implemented, the plant's four screensrequired replacement every two weeks at a cost of $400/screen. According toHoop, the screens have thus far required no replacement. The 28 cleaningsperformed each year require 110 hours, or about $2200 worth of labor.Replacing the screens cost $11,200/yr plus labor. Thus, the plant savesabout $9000 annually by cleaning screens rather than replacing them.Photograph: A trough containing a muriatic acid solutionCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.USE MODEL PLANE TO RECORD STACK CONDITIONSBy:Steven CollinsWhile serving as a shift foreman at a utility generating station inIllinois, C G Vernon came up with a "topflight" solution to recording windand temperature data near the outlet of the plant's stacks. Researchersneeded the data to check if emissions were being adequately dispersed andto substantiate future stack designs.   Because the stacks are several hundred feet tall, researchers firstconsidered using a helicopter. However, this alternative was deemed toorisky and expensive. Eventually, the necessary equipment was carried upabove the stacks by large balloons. These were difficult to control. Onebroke free of its anchor line and came down in a nearby lake.   The research team next considered hiring a private plane, but soon foundout that none could fly low enough or slow enough. Just when the team wasabout to abandon the project, Vernon--whose son was a model planefanatic--suggested that a remote-controlled plane be used. The researchteam quickly found a model plane large enough to carry the payload ofmonitoring instruments. Soon after, the "mini research plane" wassuccessfully maneuvered up above the stacks, collected the data, andreturned safely to ground.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CALCULATE LOSSES CAUSED BY STEAM LEAKSBy:Steven CollinsDid you ever wonder how much energy --and money--is wasted because of steamleaks at your plant? The next time you come across one, use the followingexample to estimate losses:   Assume that a steam trap having a 1/4-in. orifice leaks 100-psig steam72 hr/week.   -- Look up energy loss per thousand hours of leakage in the tablebelow.   -- Annual energy loss (AEL)AEL = 72 x 52 x 240-million Btu divided by 1000 hr = 864-million Btu/yr  -- Annual dollar loss (ADL)ADL = 864 divided by (1.03-million Btu divided by 1000 ft superscript 3)x (0.65) x ($2 divided by 1000 ft superscript 3) = $2581Heating loss caused by steam leaks                       Loss, million-Btu/1000 hrSteam pressure,            Orifice size, in.psig                       1/8     1/4     3/820                        12.3    47.9     79.950                        30.8     120     200100                       61.6     240     400Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COOK ZEBRA MUSSELS BY RECIRCULATING COOLING WATERBy:Steven CollinsBy recirculating condenser cooling water, engineers at a CommonwealthEdison Co fossil-fired plant were able to double the temperature in thecooling circuit. Six hours of this treatment killed approximately 75% ofthe mussels that were blocking the cooling-water filter screens. Theutility estimates that two such treatments each year can prevent zebramussels from posing any problems to operations.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FLOW MODIFIER UPS EFFICIENCY OF GAS-FIRED BOILERSBy:Steven CollinsUsers of packaged boilers and other gas-fired process vessels have reportedsignificant efficiency increases after installing an in-line device thatchanges fuel gas flow from laminar to turbulent (figure, above). These"turbulators" increase gas temperature closer to the point of combustion bycausing fuel particles to impact each other--and the walls of the supplypipe-- with greater frequency and force. More important, turbulent flowresults in rapid and complete combustion by ensuring better mixing of gasand air when the fuel reaches the burner.   One company, Leader Energy Industries Inc, Chicago, Ill, manufacturesstainless steel turbulators, which reportedly have improved the fuelefficiency of industrial heating boilers by up to 10% (photo, below). Thedevice has a more dramatic impact when installed in low-pressure gas-supplysystems--below 20 psig--because high-pressure systems inherently impartturbulent flow. However, improvements have been documented at higherpressure levels as well.   When Duncan Boiler Service Inc, Kenner, La, installed a turbulator inthe 120-psig gas supply line of an 800-hp heating boiler, the device raisedfull-load efficiency by over 3%. Improved fuel/air mixing allowed smoothercombustion and reduced the required excess O2 by 27%. As a result,NO subscript x emissions dropped from 58 ppm to 35 ppm.Figure: In-line device that changes fuel gas flow from laminar toturbulentPhotograph: Leader Energy Industries Inc's stainless steel turbulatorsCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.HOW SHOULD WE PLAN FOR REPAIRS AFTER FIRE OR STORM?By:William O'KeefeA paper mill near our plant recently had a fire on its turbine floor, withconsiderable damage done. I was hired by the management to help with therepair and return to service of the equipment. The mill management, besidescalling in manufacturers of the major components to assess damage and makerepairs, did much of the work on small equipment and piping. Although thefire was totally unexpected, starting from electrical troubles, it seemedto me that the plant lost much time at the start of rehabilitation by nothaving any idea of how to proceed. There was no coordinated effort orguidelines on major decisions. Individual tasks were assigned with no morethan a command to get back on line as fast as possible.   The effort would have been much more efficient if at least the outlineof a plan of action had been in existence beforehand. This would apply tomany other large-scale interruptions, too, such as floods or storms.   What experience have Power readers had with preparation of contingencyor disaster plans for steam and electric-power facilities? Have the readersdeveloped any criteria for evaluating damage and repair-vs-scrapdecisions?--OSR, September PowerSOLUTIONSDocumentation is the first needIn a recent fire restoration in which I was involved, proper documentationwas critical to a quick completion. Lack of available, up-to-datedocumentation could have been a problem. Unlimited quantities of repairpersonnel, equipment, and supplies will do no good until the engineeringstaff figures out what has to be done.   In our case, we had about 80% of the necessary information within oneday. While the equipment covered by the 80% was being repaired, we had timeto conduct a walkdown and to figure out the other 20% that wasundocumented. All those who are in favor of undocumented modifications oradditions based on sketches tucked away in a file cabinet, take heed--theupfront time and money saved can be lost several times over.J Dage, Detroit, MichPre-disaster photos can be vitalOne help in restoring conditions is a file of photos taken generallythroughout the plant within, say, a year before the catastrophe. Thephotography doesn't have to be studio quality, either. A shot taken from avantage point and relating the locations of components to each other and toany piping, electrical ducts, etc, will prove helpful even if drawings areavailable. There will always be add-ons that don't show on any drawing.Some of the added features may have been very expensive in time and money,and reconstituting them from memory can be costly. Guards and safetyrailing are examples of this.   Two cautions on photographing the plant:   -- Keep the photos at a distance from the plant site, so that they willsurvive.   -- Make sure that repeat photography is done at least annually, on a setdate if possible.   With new high-speed film, even a mid-price camera can get adequate shotsin most plant areas without the trouble of special lighting. Record on theback of each photo the point from which it was taken, so that the nextyear's series can at least start from what were found effective vantagepoints in the past.R J Allison, Sacramento, CalifFirst, know the inventoryOf primary importance is an equipment and inventory list which includespurchase price and date, or current price. The list should cover allcapital costs and assets in the powerplant.   To evaluate damage, an assessment program by category or discipline ofwork--such as mechanical, electrical, instruments and controls, orcivil--should include the following:   -- Scope of damage.   -- Labor and material estimate for repair.   -- Labor and material estimate for replacement.   -- Age of equipment.   -- Decision on whether system improvement or upgrade is involved.   -- Availability of replacement machinery or components.   Remember to assign a unique sequential-number system for each damageassessment. Once the plant has finished the damage assessment, categorizeas complete loss, partial loss, or no disaster-related loss. This can be apercent of replacement cost.   Accurate and prompt damage assessment is critical. It will make easierthe determination of repair vs scrap status and let cleanup work begin.Damage assessment will prove valuable even for systems or equipmentadjudged to be a total loss.   A complete schedule for the work is next. It will give organization,added cost considerations, and a target for completion of work in timelymanner.   Repair and replacement work can begin with engineering, contractors,procurement, invoices, work orders, man-hour records, and alldisaster-repair-related cost-tracking referenced to the appropriatedamage-assessment document number. In many cases, an accounting cost codesystem may be desirable for an additional method ofcost-accumulation-summary reporting. As costs accrue, up to the finalresolution, the damage assessment evaluation serves for categorizing thework.R Webster, Charlotte, NCIt's an established science nowAbout 20 years ago, "hazard, fault, and failure analysis" turned into aformal scientific method of investigating potential problems in the spaceprogram, aircraft manufacture, chemical-processing industries, and severalengineering systems. Simply stated, the method applies analyticalprocedures to any system or part of it to find the potential for damage ofphysical facilities, the downtime costs, and the lost-production charges.This method has been developed in-house by many companies and variousgovernment agencies. It is usually taught by a practitioner trained by theemployer and having experience in the field.   Applying the above-described analysis to the paper mill (considering itas a failure) would have allowed management to have established proceduresfor cleanup, repairs, replacements, and general rehabilitation methods inadvance. Obviously this was not done, as OSR observes. The early effortsafter the mill fire seem to have resembled the oldnavy axiom: "When indanger or doubt, run in circles, scream, and shout." From my experience, itis possible not only to analyze potentials for catastrophe at variouslevels, but also to find ways to reduce the happenings.   Damage evaluations and repair-vs-scrap decision criteria are on-the-spotfunctions, to be made by the best plant- engineering personnel at thescene. This includes selection of experienced plant millwright crews.B B Brown, Greencastle, PaBeware of the asbestos threatOne aspect of the rebuilding effort that doesn't draw much attention butwhich is looming larger as time goes on is the problem of asbestosinsulation. Many older plants have buildings, components, and pipinginsulated with asbestos-containing materials. Although neglect or evenencapsulation may have led to a false sense of security, when a majordisaster hits, there is likely to be considerable loose asbestos on-site,already released or to be released during repairs.   Many environmental agencies are now more aware than ever of thepossibilities of health hazards from asbestos released during naturaldisasters of the kind that OSR mentions. the disaster itself is bound toattract attention of the regulatory agencies, and inspectors are verylikely to be on the scene even before the cleanup crews arrive.   Any disaster program to restore a plant to service has got to take thisinto account. Precautions will be necessary during removal of asbestos tothe point where crews can begin work on the major items of plant andequipment. Any plant preparing plans for recovery from disaster should becognizant of what the asbestos situation is now and could be in case of adisaster.G V Arcano, Milwaukee, WisDon't rush into restorationOSR is right in thinking that planning ahead of time is crucial for majorevents in a plant. From my experience, I can add that over-hasty return toservice can be the start of a long period of trouble.   In our case, a flood accompanied by a medium-size fire left us withwater-soaked components,fire damage, and a management that wanted instantreturn to generation. We didn't realize the hidden damage from sand, silt,and water when we rushed through perfunctory cleanups and got back on lineas soon as equipment could operate within temperature and vibrationtolerances.   After about four months, however, we began to pay the price, with damageto journals, dielectric failures, gasket leaks, and accelerated corrosion.I never found out exactly what our accelerated and highly praised recoveryeffort cost us, but I am sure that the shortcuts were a disaster of theirown.R A Masniak, Ft Lauderdale, FlaYour January problemWhat's the best way to plan run time of redundant equipment?Recently, I have been faced with the question of how to handle the run timeof redundant equipment at a generating station. When planning for maximumavailability at acceptable cost, I have wondered what the recommendedprocedure is for trading-off standby equipment. Opinions on the advantagesand disadvantages of maintaining equal total-run time vs either staggeredtotal-run time or a full-time lead and standby situation seem to vary.   What experience have Power readers had with improving availability bycareful planning of run time for redundant components--such as pumps, fans,and even turbines or auxiliary drives? Once a total-run-time policy isestablished, to what lengths should we go to track total run time toequipment preventive-maintenance (PM) times or to failure? Have readers hadtrouble with excessive running of standby equipment which may not be as newor equal in quality to firstline equipment? And what is the best way tokeep records on this?--MPCCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-2IA059-000325-B007-196http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey99.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234749 text/html 123753HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:45:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:35 GMTContent-length: 123565Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey99.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER IN ASIA via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SETBACK FOR JAPAN'S N-PROGRAMME AFTER MONJU ACCIDENT (1372 words) COMPANIES TURN UP HEAT FOR 3 GORGES FUNDING (2072 words) BLACKOUTS HAMMER INDIA'S ECONOMIC OUTPUT (1160 words) ADB NEPAL DEAL SETS OUT POWER PRIORITIES (1873 words) RUSSIAN GROUP LOI FOR TEHRI HYDROPOWER EQUIPMENT (362 words) SCHEMES FREED FROM DELHI RED TAPE DELAYS (174 words) CEPA POWER PURCHASE DEAL APPEARS `ALL SET' (337 words) PRESSURE ON FOR FURTHER DABHOL TARIFF TRADE OFF (236 words) KERALA FAST-TRACK SHORTLIST (202 words) IFC BACKS AES WITH $79M LOAN FOR MUZZAFARGARH (361 words) NEW DATES FOR SRI PRIVATISATION (184 words) WB, JAPANESE LOCK DOWN FINANCING FOR GHAZI BAROTHA (333 words) WU PROJECT GROUNDBREAKING (209 words) NEA, NPC BENEFIT FROM CASH ADVANCES (366 words) W'HOUSE SETTLEMENT STILL FACES SUPREME COURT CHALLENGE (204 words) PLN ALLOCATES $94M FOR SOUTH SULAWESI HYDRO PLANT (324 words) PGN SIGNS $1.3BN DEAL WITH BRIGHTON LTD (259 words) TENAGA HOPES FOR TARIFFS DECISION BY EARLY SPRING (378 words) TENDERS IMMINENT FOR BAKUN MEGA HYDROPOWER SCHEME (449 words) PROTESTS FORCE SHIFT OF WASTE POWER SITE (375 words) DSM TO GET $40M (236 words) OLD HYDRO SCHEME GETS NEW UNIT (595 words) SETBACK FOR MALAY POWER EXPORTS (433 words) LAMPANG LIGNITE SCHEME MAY BE BACK ON AGAIN (245 words) NEW ADB PLEDGE TO BACK CHINESE HYDRO AT TING RIVER (594 words) WEAK HK ECONOMY FORCES CLP TO TRIM OUTLAY (704 words) CHINA PIPING NATURAL GAS TO HONG KONG (164 words) MAJOR POWER SECTOR SHAKEUP (265 words) LOAN FOR LING AO (152 words) N-PROBLEMS AT JAPC, TOHOKU (87 words) SUMITOMO METAL PLANS TO MOVE INTO POWER SECTOR (176 words) DEMAND TO GROW 0.8% (294 words) JAPANESE TO BUILD THREE HYDROELECTRIC PLANTS (87 words) ENTERGY LOCKS UP CITIPOWER (115 words) WHOLESALE PRICING CLAIMED TO BE `ANTI-COMPETITIVE' (585 words) NEWS PACHYDRO SHARE PLACEMENT (76 words) SAUDIA ARABIAN BUDGET (107 words) SAUDI ELECTRIC COMPANY LOSS (69 words) PROJECT TO LINK THE GULF STATES' GRIDS (79 words) IRANIAN FUSION AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY RESEARCH (90 words) BP TO DEVELOP GAS RESERVES IN THE SAHARA (304 words) BANGLADESH GAS DISCOVERY (143 words) VIETNAM OIL PRODUCTS IMPORT QUOTA (180 words) PETRONAS STAKE IN REFINERY IN VIETNAM (102 words) PHILIPPINES OIL PRICE STABILISATION FUND (164 words) INDONESIAN CILACAP REFINERY (68 words) MALAYSIAN CONTROVERSY OVER OIL DISCOVERIES (274 words) CHINA SEEKING FOREIGN CAPITAL TO FUND OILFIELD (130 words) CHINA PLANNING TO BECOME MORE ACTIVE ABROAD (105 words) KOREA COULD PLAY ROLE IN OPENING RUSSIAN GAS RESERVES (89 words) SOUTH KOREAN ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS (70 words) CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SETBACK FOR JAPAN'S N-PROGRAMME AFTER MONJU ACCIDENTJapan's nuclear power programme, the most ambitious in the world, isfacing major repercussions following a major accident at the site ofthe country's 280 MW Monju fast-breeder experimental reactor.While the accident itself was severe - involving the leakage of sodium-based coolant - and could have led to a near catastrophic series ofevents, what is more worrisome was the slow reaction of the operatorsand of other officials associated with the FBR programme.Their subsequent efforts to `cover up' many details of the accident,which involved the reactor's secondary coolant system, has led theJapanese news media, the Fukui prefectural government and others toengage in bitter criticism of the way the national government handlesits comprehensive nuclear energy policy.For example, Yasuoki Urano, director-general of the Science andTechnology Agency (STA), said he was extremely angry about falsereports given by Monju's operator.The coverup involved withholding segments of video footage showing theextensive damage to pipe structures caused by leakage of the sodiumcoolant, which itself was the result of an apparent faulty pipe weld.Located in Tsuruga, Fukui prefecture, Monju is the heart of acontroversy over Japan's use of plutonium and the government's step-by-step development scheme focusing on eventual construction and use ofcommercial fast-breeder reactors.Indeed, Japan's largest newspaper, the Yomiuri Shimbun, said in aDecember 24 editorial: "Outrage and concern over the handling of theattempted cover up are brought to light. Unless `Donen' (the operator)changes, it cannot be entrusted with nuclear development in whichsafety is most crucial."The Yomiuri Shimbun is well-known as an advocate of further developmentof nuclear power projects, unlike some other Japanese newspapers, so aneditorial on its pages is to be seen as particularly damaging to theprogramme.Because Monju is fuelled by plutonium, the leakage of about threetonnes of sodium-compound coolant on December 8 could have been muchmore severe. The daily coverage in the media in Japan of the accident'sseverity (which was only made known in bits and pieces), the falsifyingof details, and the slow response of officials to admit problems, mayin turn result in a drastic re-examination of Japan's policies vis-a-vis the use of plutonium.The country had planned to start utilising some plutonium in the formof mixed-oxide fuel (MOX) in as many as 10 BWRs and PWRs by around 2000-2002. This is viewed as an effective way to use up some plutonium, soas to prevent Japan from having an excess amount in storage - whichwould make neighbouring countries nervous.But that plan, which is overseen by the Ministry of International Tradeand Industry (MITI), could be delayed considerably because of freshconcerns over safety.There are implications too for the long-term nuclear programme. TheInstitute of Energy Economics predicts that Japan should have 75-90 GWof nuclear power by 2020 and 90 GW-110 GW by 2030. This estimate,regarded as phenomenal in most nuclear circles, stems from a recentprojection study funded by the STA.At present, Japan has 39.6 GW of nuclear capacity in 50 operatingreactors with another four under construction or near commissioning.There are already problem of where to site new reactors.  Alsotroublesome is the history of Monju with construction delays, costoverruns, postponements in starting operations due to equipmentproblems, and assorted other headaches.Last March, a problem with a steam control device was found, and inJune a software-related problem cropped up. Monju had been generatingpower since late August, and it had been scheduled to begin full powertests at the end of the year.The Nuclear Safety Commission, an independent entity affiliated withthe Science and Technology Agency, is now investigating the accidentand the series of events following the detection of the sodium compoundleak.  On the day of the accident, it took eight minutes for the headoperator of the Monju to get in contact with the "division chief" toask permission to shut down the plant, which was operating at about 40%of output.The Leakage was detected at 7:47 p.m. on December 8 and the shutdowndid not start until 8 p.m. Late last month, after this detail came tolight, Hiroshi Oishi, head of the Power Reactor and Nuclear FuelDevelopment Corp (PNC), admitted that the delay in shutting down thereactor - due to the intricate chain of command hierarchy - was,indeed, a problem. Oishi also admitted that this delay was itself amongthe contributing causes to the lag in reporting the accident to thelocal municipality.Meanwhile, the Fukui prefectural government has issued a report latelast month that prohibits Monju from being restarted.without strictguarantees that accident safeguards are fully implemented by the PNC.These safeguards focus mainly on leak detection systems and emergencyprocedures. That report came out about the same time that the STArevised a report on the accident.The STA had to get the PNC to revise the report because PNC's initialversion contained falsified data. Included in the corrections was arevised time of the first inspection of the accident site (7 a.m.,December 9) rather than the earlier stated time (10 p.m. the nightbefore). PNC dismissed four officials associated with Monju, includingone of the directors in charge of operations. "Dismissed" means theywill still be employed by PNC, though at other sites.Fukui governor Yukio Kurita went so far as to say that the citizens ofFukui feel "betrayed because of PNC's deceptions." Fukui prefecture hasa total of 15 nuclear reactors, most of which are operated by Osaka-based Kansai Electric Power Co.MITI Vice-Minister Tomio Tsutsumi said that MITI was instructing allpower utilities to enhance their training of operators and inspectionprocesses as well as speed up reporting of accidents to relevantauthorities. His comments were made in direct response to the Monjuaccident.Monju is slated to serve as the technical foundation for a `pre-commercial' or `demonstration' FBR, which would be followed bycommercial FBRs, according to the government's long-term nuclear energydevelopment plan. However, critics contend that the post-Monju plantwill be exceedingly expensive and that electric power utilities are notinterested in building and operating commercial FBRs until sometimeafter 2030. The Monju accident will definitely have an impact on thisschedule.It could also create extensive hardships for planners seeking to find aconstruction site for the post-Monju reactor. MITI's Agency of NaturalResources and Energy (ANRE) and other government groups will do theirbest to secure such a site, which requires local approval. But in thewake of the Monju accident that will be a significant challenge.Additionally, the accident will affect the outlook on the nuclear fuelreprocessing facility now under construction at Rokkasho-mura, Aomoriprefecture. The planned measures to ensure the safety of that plant,which will handle spent fuel and plutonium, will likely have to beenhanced. And that plant will be subject to greater oversight fromlocal authorities fearing the possibility of the whitewashing similarto that occurring after Monju's sodium leakage. Aomori has sentofficials to Fukui to investigate first hand the accident and thesubsequent cover up.Because the Federation of Electric Power Companies (FERC) decided inJuly 1995 to cancel the government-led project to construct a plutonium-burning advanced thermal reactor (ATR) in Aomori prefecture, mainly dueto escalating cost projections, the FBR programme itself may be subjectto greater cost-related scrutiny and other kinds of analysis. Expandingpressure on utilities to reduce costs - so as to slash rate structures- is causing power utility executives to look more closely at all areaswhere cost-cutting rationalisation can be applied.One serious after-effect of the Monju accident is that the Fukuiprefectural government has stated that it will delay making a decisionto allow Japan Atomic Power Co. to build two more reactors in theTsuruga area. And, as for the time that will be needed to repairMonju's equipment, some estimates are in the range of two years, ifextensive redesign work is required.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996COMPANIES TURN UP HEAT FOR 3 GORGES FUNDINGWestern companies are starting to turn up the heat on their developmentagencies to ensure they do not miss out on the a piece of the action inthe world's biggest hydroelectric project at Three Gorges on China'sYangtze River.The focal point is in the US where it had been understood, unofficiallyat least, that US companies could not count on any support from theExport-Import Bank in their efforts to win power equipment deals at thehigh dam project deep in central China, 1,500 km from Shanghai. Thisstemmed largely from the Clinton Administration's long dispute withChina over human rights abuses and the more pertinent issue of themassive dislocation of people affected by the construction of the17,500 MW-plus complex and the creation of a huge reservoir downriverfrom Chongqing.It is predicted that well over 1m people will be dislocated by theproject, and it is not thought that Beijing will overly concern itselfwith how smooth this exodus will be. The estimated value of the projectis now becoming stratospheric and has been put at around $24bn. Theproject, in totality,  could be completed by 2009, but is likely to befinished sometime in the second decade. First power would come on lineearly in the next century.Recent developments suggest that the Eximbank is now yielding tocongressional and private sector lobby pressure to do what it issupposed to do - back US exports. It became known recently that aNational Security Council interagency committee had concluded that USgovernment finance should not be made available to such a controversialproject.However, the caution to Exim by the administration was carefullyworded. In a letter last September from Samuel Berger, deputy assistantto the president for national security, the NSC said it would be"unwise" for the government (of which Exim is an agency) should alignitself with the scheme because of environmental and human rightsconcerns and should note the legal problems that might arise from anydecision to provide assistance. But also the government should"refrain" from publicly condemning the project. "Such a condemnationwould unduly strain bilateral relations." In conclusion, the governmentshould take a low profile on the Three Gorges project for fear ofharming other US trade and investment interests in China.The reference to  legal problems appears connected with threats by manyenvironmental agencies contemplating court action against Exim shouldit change its mind.This will pose a major challenge for Martin Kamark, a Washingtonlawyer, named last week to succeed Kenneth Brody as chairman of theinstitution. Kamarck's wife, Elaine, is a senior policy advisor to vice-president Al Gore, which suggests he will be under pressure to tow theAdministration's line rather than that of private sector interests.Nevertheless, as he prepared for his new position - he is already vice-chairman - news reports last week from the US indicated that the WhiteHouse is putting some distance between itself from its earlier adviceto Exim to stay away from Three Gorges. American companies such asCaterpillar, Rotec and Voith Hydro have applied for $500m in loans fromExim. General Electric made clear two years ago that it wouldaggressively pursue opportunities to cash in on the project'srequirements for up to 16 foreign-manufactured turbine generators forthe dam's power houses.The concerns of US industry are real enough for it is mainly the US -and until a year or so ago Canada - that has allowed itself to moraliseabout the project. No such worries as yet bedevil the British, French,German or Japanese governments, whose companies are now positioningthemselves to chase for business, either through direct negotiation orin competitive tender. China is still thought to be the biginfrastructure order-book prize in Asia, despite its  inarticulateforeign investment policies, which are still undergoing revisions.Analysts do concede, however, that the attempted use of foreign aid byother countries to support Three Gorges - at least in its early stages- will arouse similar controversy because of the strength of theinternational environmental lobby. The British government was badlyburned by the use of concessional finance to back the Malaysian PergauDam scheme; and the Japanese foot-dragged on supporting the WorldBank's now-aborted backing for the Nepal Arun III project.US companies have noted Canada's `Damascene' conversion to the theproject. When in opposition, Jean Chretien's Liberal Party condemnedthe Tory government's support for Three Gorges, but when in power, itchanged its tune - most notably in November 1993 when Chretien, nowPrime Minister, visited China. Said one observer, "He saw the future,and it was wet."Chretien has since given the Canadian Export Development Corp.,Canada's version of the US Exim Bank, the green light to provide exportcredits to back Canadian involvement in Three Gorges. Some of the majorregional utilities, full of hydropower expertise but sensitive to theresettlement issue, are on record as eschewing support for the scheme,such as BC Hydro and Ontario Hydro. Indeed, BCH's ex-chief executive,Maurice Strong, is an environmentalist and is now an adviser to theWorld Bank's new president James Wolfensohn.Significantly,  last year Monenco Agra, an engineering consultant, wona $34.5m contract to provide a computer system to co-ordinate theThree Gorges resettlement. EDC support of $12.5m has since beenmobilised; indeed, the EDC had already provided $23.5m in finance andcover to help Dominion Bridge build a cement plant in China, whoseoutput will be used on the dam.The existence of a Canadian option is seen as a benefit to those UScompanies - of which there are many - with subsidiaries in Canada.Rotec has indicated it might look to the EDC if Exim backing is notavailable.Solid opposition to the scheme still lies with the environmentalgroups. Probe International in Canada has taken some relish atlampooning Chretien's volte face on the issue. In the US, Human RightsWatch/Asia has attacked the Beijing government for its suppression ofopen debate or, indeed, any criticism of the project.It reinforced this with publication of  report detailing a devastatingaccount of two Chinese dam collapses in August 1975, which took thelives of at least 85,000 and possibly as many as 230,000, but news ofwhich was hushed up by the government. US International Rivers Networkhas added its weight to the chorus of disapproval for the scheme.Further critiques in the past few years have come in the form of twopublications, Yangtze! Yangtze! by Dai Qing; and Damming the ThreeGorges, edited by Margaret Barber and Grainne Ryder and issued byToronto-based Probe.Among the multilateral aid agencies, the lobby groups appear to havehad success in garnering fairly cohesive  support for their anti-ThreeGorges stance. The World Bank last year took the circumspect view that,as it had not been asked by China, it could not support Three Gorges.Under its new president, James Wolfensohn, who is pushing the Bank todemand greater accountability and signs of commerciality among borrowernations, this policy towards Three Gorges is now: `if asked, the answeris no.' Wolfensohn, it should be noted, is a close friend of PresidentClinton.The Bank's view is shared by the Asian Development Bank. Both the WorldBank and the Asian Development Bank (See ADB feature this issue) feelthey are putting plenty of money into China for power projects - someof them hydro - without getting involved in anything so pregnant withcontroversy.But much schizophrenia still attends the scheme.In a recent article in Foreign Affairs, the authoritative US bimonthlypublication, writer Audrey Topping noted:"Estimates of the project's cost range between $17.3bn and $30bn. Tohelp defray this, the government has been seeking $8bn in foreigninvestment. The World Bank, after overseeing a four-year, $8.7mfeasibility study conducted (in the 1980s) by the CanadianInternational Development Agency, refused to help with funding."Merrill Lynch and other potential investors have also withdrawnbecause of the financial and political risks, as well as questions ofhuman rights violations."In Hong Kong, Merrill's Robert Graves, senior vice-president formarketing and communications, last week told Power in Asia: "MerrillLynch has never been mandated to work on behalf of or for the Chinesegovernment regarding the Three Gorges Dam project, nor has any otherforeign bank as far as I know. There have been a lot of rumours in thepast that we were involved, but we never have been approached."This does not tally with the fact that in 1993 Merrill Lynch,describing itself as a leading international financial intermediary forChina, published a sponsored statement in the western media providing abalanced analysis of Three Gorges, explaining the dam's irrigation,agricultural and power generation benefits while explaining the scopeof the relocation and rehabilitation problem. Said the article:"Financing for the project, officially estimated at $10bn, will comefrom worldwide sources. Merrill Lynch has been working with the Beijinggovernment to develop the financing plan, which could include bondofferings."Equity financing could account for as much as 50% of the financing inthe early construction stages, and there is also likely to be asignificant amount of strategic partnership investment frominternational sources. . . ."Whatever Merrill's involvement in Three Gorges is, or was, the factremain that the project is now  beginning to gear up.In recent weeks, Shi Dazhen, China's Power Industry Minister, announcedplans for the creation of a nationwide power grid, which could treblecurrent capacity. This grid was being planned around Three Gorges, andis aimed at integrating regional and provincial power grids.Speaking at the annual conference of the country's power industry, Shisaid that the capacity of installed generators, which is now nearly 210GW, should rise to 300 GW by 2000 and 550 GW-600 GW by 2010, abreathtaking scenario.Even more important was the need to boost output. By 2000, he said,output will have risen to 1.4 trillion kWh, up from 1 trillion kWh in1995. A total of 170,000 km of power lines capable of handling 220 kVof power and more will have been installed by then.Three Gorges will be a centrepiece of the expansion programme. A highvoltage power transmission system will carry power generated by ThreeGorges to other parts of the country. A new company will be set up tocarry out the task.Added to this will be a nationwide power network to link the grids inthe central and eastern parts of Sichuan province, followed by otherprovinces and autonomous regions. Further, a total of 19 majorhydropower schemes and six pumped storage plants will be constructed inthe upper and middle reaches of the Yangtze and three other rivers.This all-embracing plan also calls for power grids in 35 key cities tobe rehabilitated and for coal-fired and hydropower generators to berenovated, and increased use of less toxic fuels such as liquified coalor gas.In Beijing last month, China Securities, a business publication, calledon China to issue bonds in overseas markets to meet a shortfall infunds for the project. They should then use the hard currency raised tofill part of an expected Yn50bn shortfall. The article said that Chinacould provide only Yn200bn of the estimated Yn250bn ($30bn).According to observers in Hong Kong, there are increasing signs thatChina is paying attention to international opinion. "They have to ifthey want any really helpful foreign finance, be it commercial lendingor export credits," said one banker.  In addition, officials from theThree Gorges Development Group explained that China planned to set up alife insurance company to provide policies to those being resettled.The officials said that an application had been sent to the centralbank, with an approval expected by 1996. The so-called Three GorgesLife Insurance Co, will be headquartered in Beijing with officeslocated closer to the site.* Yangtze! Yangtze!, by Dai Qing, Earthscan Publications Ltd., 120Pentonville Road, London, 295 pages. #12.95; Damming the Three Gorges,edited by Margaret Barber and Grainne Ryder, Earthscan PublicationsLtd., Probe International, Toronto, #12.95.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BLACKOUTS HAMMER INDIA'S ECONOMIC OUTPUTIndia is reeling under one of the worst onslaughts of power shortagesin living in memory. The current crisis is reaching nationalproportions and has been mounting in intensity for about three months.According to power officials, the source of the problems stems from thecountry's failure to reach its power project installation targets,inadequate rainfall hampering hydropower generation, continued coalshortages for a variety of reasons and what has been described as`inter-grid indiscipline.'  The government in the southern state ofAndhra Pradesh has recently increased power cuts to high tensionindustrial customers to between 40% and 60% of their sanctioned loadsabove 70 kVa. Restrictions on peak hour consumption for industrialconsumers and five-hour supply cuts daily for household consumers arefacets of the acute power crisis in the state.According to officials, there is a ban on power consumption for bookingor water heating in houses and on the use of neon signs at shops and onbillboards. Street lighting is even being restricted to alternatepoles.The curtailment has come just at the end of an earlier powerrestriction regime, eased briefly with the belated arrival of monsoonrains which boosted reservoir levels.The problem in AP state, however, is being greeted with widespreadscepticism, particularly by business consumers who believe thegovernment is protecting  the agricultural community at their expense.The rationale is that the rural vote is too delicate to be tamperedwith by the Telgu Desam Party, particularly in an election year.Therefore urban customers are being made to bear the lion's share ofthe power cut regime.For example, the government is maintaining a certain minimum level ofwater in Srisailam reservoir for release to the newly constructed TelguGanga canal system to provide irrigation facilities for the farmers inthe Rayalaseema region. This has resulted in the closure of theSrisailam hydropower station and the loss of 770 MW of capacity.Indeed, it is to maintain the promised daily nine hours power supplyfor irrigation pumpsets that other consumers are having to take it onthe chin. AP Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu explained to thelegislative assembly that only 4,295 MW power was available in Decemberagainst peak demand of 5,219 MW.In neighbouring Karnataka state, a 50% cut for high tension consumersand the 30% cut in supply for all low tension commercial, industrialand non-industrial consumers since late October has led to a powersupply crisis never seen before, say officials.One stop-gap is a proposal for three barge-mounted generating unitswith a total of 400 MW of capacity, which could be delivered within sixmonths of the issue of letters of intent. If the deal goes through, itwill be some kind of record in a country renowned for its bureaucracyand slow approvals system - one of the reasons for the power crisis.Karnataka's problem is that it is 65% reliant on hydropower; thisyear's monsoon has been late, leaving Linganamakki, Supta and Mani damreservoirs half empty. In Kerala state, the fast depletion of hydroreservoirs is prompting a similar requirement for belt-tightening.AP and Karnataka states are also suffering from a long strike by amajority of workers in the Singareni Colliers Co. (SCCL) coal mines,which has been going on since mid-October.The virtual halt of coal supplies from the SCCL mines in AP has hit theRamagundam power station operated by the National Thermal Power Corp(2,000 MW) and Karnataka's only coal-fired unit at Raichur. Generationdropped to just 600 MW at Ramagundam as daily coal supplies went downto 20,000 tonnes against 35,000 tonnes normally required.  The NTPC isbeing persuaded to pay in advance for the coal in order to generatebetween Rs400m-Rs450m required to meet the wage arrears of the strikingworkers of the financially-troubled SCCL.Coal problems are also hitting APSEB. The state utility has called foroffers for 500,000t of imported coal, but has delayed an actual orderplacement. The imported coal will cost about Rs2,900 per tonne, veryexpensive compared with the Rs700-Rs800 per tonne for domestic coal.Financially the board is unable to pick up the estimated Rs1.50bn($42m) bill for the imported coal. The transmission constraints standin the way of wheeling surplus power from the eastern region.The coal authorities, as in the past, hardly admit any supply shortagesby its enterprises, despite the outcry but its customers. Two 250 MWunits at Dahanu power station, operated by the private sector BSESLtd., are operating much below capacity due to low supplies fromdomestic mines controlled by government enterprises.But Coal Minister Jagdish Tyler explained to the parliament last monththat the coal companies had supplied 115.8mt of coal to the powerstations in the April-November period, achieving 99.45% of the target.The reason, then, for the low stocks at the power stations could beexcess consumption of coal by them, constraints in unloading coal fromrailway wagons at the power houses and constraints in the movement ofcoal. not to mention the perennial problem of non-delivery because ofnon-payment of bills by power generators.As for transmission problems, three major grid disturbances in thewestern region in the past few months have led to blackouts and haveprompted much doubting about whether the region is any better off thanother regions of the country. More rude shocks are expected.For example,  R. Chandramuli, Tata Electric Companies V-P, has warnedthat the Bombay metropolis is facing a virtual grid collapse on a dailybasis. Bombay is accustomed to uninterrupted power supplies butsupplies were hit on December 9.N.A. Joshi, Maharashtra State Electricity Board member/technical,thinks the state will have power shortages and breakdowns until a new500 MW unit at Chandrapur goes on line in mid-1997. With peak demand at8,300 MW and availability at 7,700 MW, the state is at presentwitnessing about 600 MW shortage.At the same time, the perpetual overdraw by the Madhya Pradesh state by200 MW-500 MW from central power stations at Korba and Vindhyachal hasdeepened the shortages in Maharashtra.This is an example of grid indiscipline, and has led to a dip in theminimum level of frequency of power resulting in tripping of powergenerating stations all over the region.Factories in Gujarat in northwest India have recorded up to 80trippings a month since the end of summer. Even continuous processindustries in the state are reeling under a 25% cut in power supply."These cuts and supply shortfall will undermine our efforts to makeGujarat the premier state in the country for industrial investment,"rues Grish Dani, the president of the Gujarat chamber of commerce, inreference to some 20% investment injection attracted by the state since1991. The current shortfall has been estimated by industrialists at1,500 MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ADB NEPAL DEAL SETS OUT POWER PRIORITIESA $125m loan that the Asian Development Bank (ADB) was due to approvein 1997 for a hydro project in Kali Gandaki, Nepal, will now be broughtbefore ADB's board this year, Arun Adarkar, Director of ADB's recentlyinaugurated North American Office told Power in Asia in the course ofan interview.The decision to "accelerate" the Kali Gandaki project was taken becauseof Nepal's "new circumstances", explains Adarkar - notably, last year'scancellation of Nepal's biggest ever hydro scheme - the 210 MW Arun IIIrun-of-river scheme - when the World Bank withdrew its $175m supportfor the scheme.Adarkar, an Indian national, who was ADB secretary in Manila from 1985-1991, and a senior advisor in the Southeast Asia and Pacific Departmentof the International Monetary Fund before assuming his present post inWashington DC in May, denies that ADB's decision means ADB is taking upthe slack in power lending in Nepal, or indeed, anywhere else in Asia,because the World Bank is reducing its support for the sector, or, inthe case of Arun III, completely pulling out.The Kali Gandaki project is not "a replacement" for Arun III, and noris it in "the same geographical area", says Adarkar.Notwithstanding World Bank lending for power in South Asia isshrinking.  Between 1986 and 1990 such lending averaged $999m a year.But between 1991-1995 it had almost halved to $474m a year average.On the other hand, World Bank lending for power in East Asia and thePacific - a region that now includes six economies in transition:Cambodia, China, Laos, Mongolia, Mynamar and Vietnam - is increasing.World Bank loans for the power sector in this region averaged $662m ayear from 1986 to 1990 but they almost doubled to $1bn a year averagefrom 1991 to 1995.As for the ADB at December 31 1994 it had lent a total of $10.2bn forpower generation, distribution and transmission projects, and over $60mfor related technical assistance/advice.  ADB's borrowing countriescomprise the developing countries of South and East Asia and thePacific and some of the newly independent states of the former SovietUnion, such as Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic.Adarkar says ADB's projected lending for energy projects generally (oiland gas as well as for power) will average $4.8bn a year from January 11995 to December 31 1997, which is a big increase compared with ADB'slending in the sector during the previous three years.  Roughly two-thirds of this projected lending will be for the power sector.The ADB Director noted that the biggest borrower by far now and in theforeseeable future is China, a relatively new ADB client.  ADB loans toChina for power over the 1995-1997 period will total $1.8bn, saysAdarkar.  In second place, comes Indonesia ($787m total projected powersector lending), followed by the Phillipines ($544m).The ADB is also just beginning to do business or is renewing businesswith many other countries in the region.  For instance loans for powerprojects amounting to $100m, $35m and $25m are due to be disbursed toMongolia, Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic respectively during the1995-1997 period, while loans to Vietnam to rehabilitate its powersector are projected to total $140m during the period, ADB only renewedlending to Vietnam in 1993.Among ADB's traditional borrowers, Pakistan will continue to be animportant client, says Adarkar, with projected loans for the powersector between 1995 and 1997 of $300m.However, India which used to be a big power sector borrower in thepast, now borrows more from ADB for gas.  Total gas sector lending byADB to India was $560m in 1993, for instance.  Adarkar reckons, even ifADB, the World Bank and other development institutions pooled all theirpower sector loans for southern and eastern Asia and the Pacific, thesewould still not be nearly enough to satisfy the region's massiveestimated $45bn a year sector requirements during the 1990s.The massive investment needs reflect both specific and general factors. Specific failings are that all too often too close a relationshipexists between the functions of power utilities and government in theregion, with the result that the financial management and structuringof utilities is often not transparent; accounting is inefficient; anddue to unrealistic pricing, and tariffs not matching the real costs ofsupply, the utilities' debt servicing is now so onerous that theutilities cannot go on expanding to meet forecast demand in the 1990sin the way they did in the 1980s.Nor can the State bail the utilities out at a time when budget cutting,controlling inflation and other public investments, for instance inhealth and education, are priorities.  As a result, electricityshortages, power outages and brownouts are common across the region.Indeed, according to ADB, per capita electricity consumption in Asiandeveloping countries in now just 500 kWh compared with 6,600 kWh inOECD countries, and per capita installed capacity is 0.1 KW comparedwith 1.9 KW in the OECD.On top of this, inefficiencies in the generation, delivery and use ofelectricity causes serious losses.  Total system losses among ADBborrowing countries range from 25% to 35% compared with what ADBconsiders acceptable loss levels of 15% to 18%.Furthermore, much of theexpansion carried out in the power sector in the 1980s in the regionwas done without considering the environmental impact.The general reasons for the huge capital investment requirements atleast in East Asia are due to under-investment in the past, acuteproblem in Vietnam, Laos, Mongolia, Cambodia and the Philippines; rapidurbanisation (even if the current urban growth rate of 4% a year in theregion slows down more than 1bn people will be living in towns in thenext generation); rising global competition; and dramatically higheconomic growth.East Asia has been the fastest growing region in the world for 25years.  During the next decade the region is projected to grow at 7% -8% a year.  One consequence of this huge growth is that the demand forpower has also greatly increased, raising investment requirements.The need to promote private sector investment is vital.  The gapbetween the demand for large-scale financing in the 1990s in thesector, and what governments and development banks can provide, mayonly be bridged by private investment.So a top priority of ADB's work says Adarkar is helping countriescreate the conditions that make private investors participation in thesector appealing.The countries ADB lends to are far from homogeneous.  They includenewly industrialised, industrialising, developing and land-locked orisland economies.  Not surprisingly, different nations apply differentsets of reforms in the sector , and are more successful in some areasthan others.Consider reforms that are indispensable for attracting privateinvestment in the sector - establishing an appropriate legal andregulatory framework; putting an end to monopolistic practices byallowing competition in the generation, transmission and/ordistribution ends of the business; and laying the basis for soundmanagement in public utilities by restructuring them into autonomouscorporate entities.Such reforms have been successfully implemented in Malaysia, Indonesia,Korea, and Thailand in particular, says Adarkar.  In Thailand theMetropolitan Electricity Authority of Bangkok, and the ElectricityGenerating Authority of Thailand (EGAT) are "models" of government-owned utilities that are "efficiently managed, enjoy considerableautonomy, and have a good credit rating", he says.In many other countries in the region, pending institutional reformsand/or the privatisation of state-owned power companies, governmentshave invited the private sector to invest in independent power projectsoften under build-own-transfer (BOT) arrangements.According to these, the private sponsor finances the building andoperating of power plants while the state-owned public utilityundertakes to buy the electricity under take or pay contracts.The best example of this approach says the ADB Director, is thePhilippines.  Most electricity distribution was already privately-ownedin the Philippines when the country introduced laws allowing theprivate sector to participate in power generation as well as under BOOand BOT options.As a result, Japanese, Hong Kong, American and European investors arecurrently developing more than 6,000 MW of new generation capacity,which has relieved Manila of t he daily eight hour brownouts it used toendure.  Multilateral institutions estimate by 1998 as much as 80% ofnational generating capacity could be in private hands in thePhilippines compared to none in 1991.  Meanwhile establishing soundmanagement in public utilities - essential if the utilities are toattract private investment - may start with small reforms like sellinga minority of the utilities' stock to the public, (so that they becomemore independent from the government), or farming out tasks likemaintenance, and the billing of customers, to the private sector.Eventually, public utilities need to be allowed to issue bonds andshares on capital markets to raise long-term finance."But most important of all", emphasises the ADB Director," the publicutilities should be allowed to introduce appropriate pricing policiesso that the prices or tariffs they charge reflect the real costs ofsupply".  Inappropriate pricing policies for electricity supplies is "amajor problem" among ADB borrowers, Adarkar adds.  "In India, Pakistanand China, pricing distortions are the  biggest.  Thailand is anexception".As for subsidies to the power sector, ADB is pushing borrowers to phasethem out, and to minimise any cross-subsidisation that may exist, ofrural/agricultural consumers by urban/industrial consumers.A second priority is to make the system work more efficiently byreducing supply side losses, and encouraging governments to introducedemand-side management programmes.  The latter is expedient, saysAdarkar.  Studies in the US and Europe conclusively show that it costsfar less to reduce demand by a KW of electricity than it does to add aKW of generation.The third power sector priority is making sure the system does notdamage the environment.  For example, ADB has not ever been involved inthe financing of nuclear power plants.  However when it comes to havinga preference for run-of-river over dam-cum reservoir projects, or forhydro projects over retrofitting of thermal plants to improve theefficiency of power delivery and reduce pollution, Adarkar says," forthe Bank these options are not contrasting"."We may do both", he adds.  "It might be necessary in order to expandcapacity to invest in a hydro project.  But at the same time and in thesame country we might help finance retrofitting of a thermal scheme".All projects financed by ADB are assessed for their environmentalimpact and may be redesigned or even discarded if the environmentalimpact is found to be too adverse, or cannot be mitigated.  It alsoactively encourages borrowers to use clean coal technologies (wheneconomically viable).Coal is the primary source of energy in countries that are ADB'sbiggest borrowers (eg: China).  And the Bank also provides technicalassistance to countries to help them evaluate the economicpossibilities of developing solar, mini hydro and wind energy optionsto meet the demand for electricity in remote/rural areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996RUSSIAN GROUP LOI FOR TEHRI HYDROPOWER EQUIPMENTA letter of intent (LOI) has been issued to the Ukrainian-RussianEnergomach consortium for the supply of electro-mechanical equipmentfor the phase one segment of the 1,000 MW hydropower project in UttarPradesh.The deal has an estimated value of Rs3bn ($85.7m), but has been inlimbo for a long time as the Tehri Hydro Development Corp (THDC)insisted on a performance guarantee from an international bank whichthe consortium could not arrange. The corporation now has agreed toaccept the guarantee from the Russian government, and the guaranteeterms are now being drafted.The consortium includes Russian companies Energomach, Leningrad MetalWorks and Hydro Project Institute, as well as the Ukrainian groups ofTurbatom and Usal Electrotyzamash. The Tehri dam project was to befunded earlier by the former Soviet Union.The 4 x 250 MW first phase Tehri project is now scheduled forcompletion in 2000 if the THDC does not get entangled in any morerehabilitation and resettlement (R&R) problems, which have causeddelays.Time overruns have increased the per-megawatt cost to Rs33m from a mereRs330,000 as originally planned in the 1970s. The THDC had announced inlate November a new R&R package for those being uprooted from old Tehritown by the construction of the dam.The big increase in compensation for loss of agriculture lands,financial help in house construction at resettlement sites and cashincentives for an early shift from the building site by locals are someof the main features of the project package - and also a reason why thecost has escalated so precipitately from the 1970s.Environmental lobbyists opposing the project have been pressing peopleto hang on to their lands. The THDC authorities hope all residents ofthe town will have shifted to resettlement sites before June, when thewaters brought in by the monsoon rains are impounded by the dam.A 4 x 250 MW pumped storage plant at Tehri and a 4 x 100 MW hydropowerplant, with a 103 metre high concrete dam at Koteshwar, 22 kmdownstream of Tehri, have been planned for the second stage of theproject.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SCHEMES FREED FROM DELHI RED TAPE DELAYSPower projects with a value of up to Rs4bn ($114m) have been set freefrom the time-consuming scrutiny of the Central Electricity Authorityin a move to speed up approvals and hasten construction of smallerpower schemes.A government notification has specified that only projects allottedthrough competitive bidding below this threshold level will be sparedthe rigours of CEA techno-economic scrutiny. All other projects willcontinue to be governed by the existing guidelines, which provide anexemption from the CEA clearance only if the capital expenditure isless than Rs1bn ($28.5m).The four-fold increase in the exemption limit is targeted at taking theedge off the official scrutiny process, which is a source of ire tonearly all project sponsors. Few projects have been cleared by the CEAin the past five years.The Power Minister feels that competitive bidding cane take care of thecost and other factors which the CEA usually examines; therefore theprojects selected through open tender system need not be submitted forthe CEA scrutiny.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CEPA POWER PURCHASE DEAL APPEARS `ALL SET'A project proposal in which CEPA of Hong Kong, part of Gordon Wu'sHopewell Holdings empire, would secure agreement to build coal-firedpower stations in India, has moved forward with what are described as`preliminary agreements' for a power purchase agreement.CEPA is seeking to set up 10,560 MW of thermal capacity in the country,probably using a series of 660 MW off-the-shelf base load power units.The deal, when finalised, would be a record-breaker for India (and forWu), given that it would be the largest private sector scheme of itskind for Asia's second most populous country after China. Negotiationsfor the project began in 1993.Under the agreement, which involves both the central government andvarious state authorities, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Punjab and Haryanastates are committed to lift 1,300 MW, 1,200 MW, 800 MW and 700 MWrespectively from the 6 x 660 MW first phase of the 16-unit scheme. Theunits would be installed at Hirma in Orissa State.The first unit will be commissioned within 36 months of the financialclosure, and one unit is to be added at each subsequent three-monthinterval. Power from the first two units will be wheeled to Gujarat.A significant aspect of the preliminary deals is that the stategovernments will establish "an appropriate payment guarantee structure"for power purchases from the Hirma project. CEPA also wants to tap intoWorld Bank guarantees, but this will be no easy task given the Bank'sincreasing requirements for a more transparently commercial approach topower generation by the heavily subsidised and money-losing state powerboards.World Bank financing, or support by other national aid agencies ormultilaterals, will be important for CEPA which, like other privatepower sponsors, recognises the need to create a multinational`cocktail' of financing arrangements to make infrastructure projects inhigh risk developing countries work.Another signatory to the preliminary agreements is Power Grid Corp ofIndia, which will develop the transmission system necessary to wheelthe power.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PRESSURE ON FOR FURTHER DABHOL TARIFF TRADE OFFLast-minute jockeying between Enron and its partners in the Dabholproject consortium and the Maharashtra government was taking place asPower in Asia went to press, suggesting that Enron Development Corp. ofthe US may yield further concessions for lower tariffs for India'sfirst private sector LNG power project.The talks have been under way for months between the two warringparties to revive the two-phase, $2.5bn power project at Dabhol, whichwas ordered by the new state government to be suspended last summerafter construction was under way and financial close had been arrangedwith the state's previous government.Enron in Houston was tight-lipped Friday, saying only that "we arewaiting for Saturday" -  by which time a special cabinet meeting of theMaharashtra state government will have taken place to consider thelatest Enron/government position.If there is much more delay, arbitration proceedings against the statebrought by Enron and its partners Bechtel and GE Capital, will be gotunder way in London. They are scheduled for January 15.One aspect of the latest speculative offer is a marginal reduction byEnron in the tariff, at which the 2,015 MW project will sellelectricity to the state power board, to Rs1.89 levelised tariff agreedearlier in return for which the power board will lift power at morethan the 90% plant load factor mentioned in the original power purchaseagreement.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996KERALA FAST-TRACK SHORTLISTNine project developers have been selected for small, fast-trackprojects as part of the emergency plan of Kerala state to overcome a400 MW power shortage which is hurting the economy. The projects wouldrange in size between 15 MW and 30 MW.Proposals for the projects, to go up in the next year, were called bythe state-owned Kerala State Electricity Board (KSEB) and the KeralaState Industrial Development Corp. (KSIDC).The developers with project locations in brackets selected by the KSIDCinclude the following:* Lok Housing with EDL of Australia (Bekaal, Malappuram and Chavara).* IPCO-AGVL (Balusseir, Walayar and Kanjikode).* BSES (Kakkanad and Technopark).* Kings International Squa Marine Exports/Steag (Koothuparamba).* Dalmia Bros. (Kanidkode).These power stations are to come near industrial clusters sufferingfrom chronic power shortages. The developers have quoted tariff levelsof between Rs2.09 and 2.13/kWh.The power sales tariff quoted by proposed sponsors picked up by theKSEB varies from Rs2.10 to Rs2.63. Its choice of developers includes:* Euro Capital (Vizhinjam, Kuttikatur, Mudakkayam, Nilambur andPerinthalmanna).* ABG (Kasargod and Kanhangad).* Balaji Industries (Kodungaloor).* Contake Abadi (Veli).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996IFC BACKS AES WITH $79M LOAN FOR MUZZAFARGARHThe International Finance Corp (IFC) has signed an investment agreementwith AES Pak Generation (Private) Co. (AESPG) to provide a $79.5mfinance and equity package to help finance the $350m power plantplanned for Muzzafargarh in southern Punjab.The IFC said the amount will be split into $39m equity and theremaining will be raised through a syndicated loan.The AESPG is the second IFC-financed tie-up with AES in Pakistan. Theproject calls for construction of a 360 MW oil-fired power complex,which will be equipped with a flue gas desulphurisation facility, thefirst such plant of this type in the country.Additional financing will come from a variety of sources, withcommercial funding coming from ING, Dresdner Bank, Natwest  and KoreaMerchant Banking Corp. In addition, the Japanese Export-Import Bankwill provide a loan of $148m.Singapore-based AES Transport, a subsidiary of AES Corp of the US, willbe turnkey contractor for the project. AES will have an equity stake of$85m, according to Shahzad Qasim, director of AESPG.He said that AES expects to start generating 720 MW from both itsPakistan operations by December 1997 - the other unit is underconstruction at Lal Pir in Punjab and it reached financial closeearlier this year.WAPDA, the state power utility, will lift the electricity under a 30-year agreement, while another government, Pakistan State Oil (PSO),will supply fuel oil under a 30-year agreement.Vijay Chaudhry, IFC power division manager, said the agreement bringsto $280m the corporation's investments in the private power sector.* The privatisation commission has appointed the IFC as financialadviser to the privatisation of the Faisalabad Electric AreaElectricity Board. The IFC will help lay out a framework for theseparation of the FAEB from WAPDA so that it can operate as a privatelyowned and regulated power distribution company.The regulatory framework will establish rules for the rate-settingmechanism, FAEB's interaction with WAPDA, the National Electric PowerRegulatory Authority (NEPRA) and private power generators. The successof unbundling FAEB from WAPDA should provide a guideline for theprivatisation of seven other distribution boards.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NEW DATES FOR SRI PRIVATISATIONThe Sri Lanka government has set new dates for starting to privatisethe power sector by calling for a strategic partner for LankaElectricity Co, Officials said."We have extended the date for submitting expressions of interest toJanuary 16, 1996 from December 1, 1995," an official of the PublicEnterprise Reform Commission, which oversees privatisations, said.  Thenew agenda is the result of requests made by power operators, askingfor more time, the official said.The commission first advertised locally and overseas in late October,asking for power operators interested in taking a 51% in LECO, toexpress interest by December 1."We got over 10 expressions of interest and a host of requests onDecember 1, asking for more time," the official said.  According to thenew timeframe, the short-list of operators pre-qualified to bid will bemade available not later than January 23, the official added.LECO, the second largest power distributor in Sri Lanka, handles nearly20% of electricity generated in the country.  The balance isdistributed by Ceylon Electricity Board, the state-owned monopoly powergenerator.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WB, JAPANESE LOCK DOWN FINANCING FOR GHAZI BAROTHAThe World Bank and the Japanese government have announced theirrespective contributions towards the Ghazi Barotha dam. The Bankannounced just before Christmas that it would provide a $350m loantowards the cost of the $2.25bn scheme. The Bank's financing willaccount for 15.6% of the project's requirements.The Bank's commitment to the scheme shows that it is still backinglarge hydropower projects - this was in doubt because of its withdrawalfrom the Arun III hydropower scheme in Nepal earlier this year (See ADBfeature).The  scheme will involve works near the village of Ghazi, a 52 km longpower channel, a power complex near Barotha village to generate about6,600 GWh of energy annually, transmission facilities and environmentalmanagement and resettlement plans. The forecast of Pakistan'sunconstrained commercial energy demand calls for an annual increase ofabout 6.7% up to 2008.According to Zoubeida Ladhibi-Belk, power engineer at the Bank's SouthAsia Department, the project will reduce the high cost of electricityand will boost access to power in the country's rural areas.The Bank has been careful to ensure that all environmental pitfallsassociated with such projects have been taken into account beforecommitting itself to backing the scheme.According to the Bank, a total of 22,360 people will be affected by theproject, mostly only to a limited extent. Of these, some 900 living in110 housing units will need to be resettled. An integrated regionaldevelopment plan has been developed to provide health and educationprogrammes.Meanwhile, Japan's OECF said it will provide $350m towards the scheme.It will provide the funds in two phases. The first will consist of$200m and will be offered during the current financial year, while thesecond tranche of $150m will be released after the utilisation of fundsfor the first phase. The decision to provide funding in two phasesfollowed detailed OECF analysis. A Japanese delegation declared itself"satisfied: that the project was economically viable.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WU PROJECT GROUNDBREAKINGPrime Minister Bhutto will perform the ground-breaking ceremony at thesite of the 5,280 MW coal-fired power plant earmarked for Keti Banderin Sind province. The project is being undertaken by ConsolidatedElectric Power Asia, part of Gordon Wu's Hopewell Holdings of HongKong.The move is a strategic breakthrough, not only because of itsceremonial value but because it further confirms the momentum that hasgathered behind what promises to be Pakistan's largest thermal powerproject, proposed by the entrepreneurial Wu in 1993.The invitation to the groundbreaking was made by Agha Tariq Khan, theSind Mineral Development Minister.The project's cost, including all the associated infrastructure,including a coal terminal to handle imported coal and roads to handledomestic coal at the project's later phases, is put at $8bn. Initiallythis will be much less as the project will be built in a series ofsingle 600 MW units.The plants would ultimately require 30mt-35mt of coal annually.Officials close to the government said CEPA had already provided $5m tothe Sind government to carry out a feasibility study of Ket Bander,where eight units will eventually be installed, providing financing canbe raised for a private power scheme of such a scale.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NEA, NPC BENEFIT FROM CASH ADVANCESThe National Electrification Administration and the National PowerCorp. are among the biggest recipients of cash advances from thegovernment, which an inter-agency committee wants to stop to lessenmoney claims on the Treasury.Of the Ps44.4bn ($1.8bn) of such advances as of last October, Ps5.6bnwent to the NEA and Ps4.50bn to NPC.One way in which NPC's dependency on government handouts will bereduced will be signposted this year when NPC starts offeringhydropower projects to the private sector, to be built on a BOT basis.The offers will apply to projects planned for completion between 2000and 2005. This is something of an experiment as the government's andNPC's privatisation programme has revolved around thermal powerprojects, not the more capital-intensive hydropower schemes.Excluded in the bidding are the construction of two hydros with acombined capacity of 300 MW in Kalayaan in Laguna, south of Manila, andthe rehabilitation of the 350 MW hydro scheme in Caliraya-Botocan-Kalayaan, also in Laguna.Contracts in both are already in the final stages of negotiations withArgentina's Industrias Metalurgicas Pescamera Sociedad Anonima. NPC istrying to persuade the Board of Investments to grant tax exemptions andother fiscal perquisites to hydro schemes.To lure private investments, NPC itself is thinking of shouldering thecosts of putting up access roads and transmission lines as well as inobtaining rights of way to and from each project.Among those to be the subject of bidding are the 29 MW Timbaban schemein Visayas in the Central Philippines; and the 32 MW Villasiga unit inAntique, a 150 MW complex in Bulanog-Batang in Bukidnon in Mindanao;the 300 MW Pulangi project in Bukidnon and the 224 MW Agus III in Lanaodel Sur.* The Board of Investments has approved tax breaks for two geothermalpower projects to be built by PNOC-Energy Development Corp. One is aPS6.04bn geothermal steam field and a 120 MW power plant in Mount Laboin Camarines, south of Manila. The other project is a PS2.5bngeothermal steam field and power plant in Negros in the centralPhilippines. It has a capacity of 40 MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996W'HOUSE SETTLEMENT STILL FACES SUPREME COURT CHALLENGEThe infamous saga of the Westinghouse-built Bataan nuclear powerstation dispute may be 99% over but there remains a niggling 1% that isstill to be resolved before the case can truly be said to be settled.The legality of the recent out-of-court settlement of the disputebetween Manila and the US company (over bribe allegations stemming fromthe 1976 contract award by the Marcos government to Westinghouse) isstill under challenge in the Supreme Court.Some senators insist the settlement has to be ratified by them, but theNational Power Corp. has formally lifted the ban on power equipmentmanufactured or licenced by Westinghouse.The lifting of the ban was jointly agreed by the two sides. It pavesthe way for a second bidding at a still-unspecified date for a BOTcontract covering a gas-fired project in Ilijan in Batangas.The first bidding for what was then a 1,200 MW gas-fired power contractwent to Hong Kong's CEPA in venture with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries(MHI).The bid award was cancelled because of allegations that MHI was usingWestinghouse technology in its turbine equipment. Another bidder, AESTranspower Corp., was also cited as a user of the offending technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PLN ALLOCATES $94M FOR SOUTH SULAWESI HYDRO PLANTState-owned electricity company PT PLN plans to spend $94m on theconstruction of a 74.8 MW hydro-electric power plant near Palu, CentralSulawesi.Construction of the plant is due to commence in 1999 and to becompleted in 2003, the official Indonesian news agency Antara reportedin late December.  To be known as Palu-3, the plant will use water fromLake Lindu, located 40km south of Palu at an altitude of 960m above sealevel.  The lake has a surface area of 35.4 square kilometres, with anormal debit of 16.5 cubic metres.Palu-3 will be Central Sulawesi's largest hydro-power plant to date.Evidently anxious to avoid the civil unrest that has accompaniedprevious dam projects, PLN abandoned an earlier plan for Palu-3, whichwould have seen the lake's water level rise by 2m, submerging 274.5haof cultivated land and 164 houses.The head of PLN's Palu office was quoted as saying that the projectwould not take any land from the local population nor damage theenvironment in any way, notwithstanding is location with the Lore-Kalamanta National Park.A 983m pipeline with a diameter of 2.6m will channel the lake's watersto 373m drop at which the turbines will be located.The primary recipient of the electricity generated will be a cementplant in the town of Donggala, which lies in the hills to the west ofPalu.  The cement plant will require at least 90 MW.  The difference isto be made up by electricity from a diesel-powered plant in Silae, WestPalu.The Silae plant currently has a capacity of 32.7 MW, which is scheduledto be raised by 100 MW in the course of this year.PLN's cost estimate for the project does not include a 46.5 km 150 kVatransmission line linking the power station with Palu.Central Sulawesi's electricity demand is projected to reach 148.2 MW by2003.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PGN SIGNS $1.3BN DEAL WITH BRIGHTON LTDState-owned gas company PT Gas Negara has signed a $1.3bn contract withBrighton Ltd for the supply of gas to the latter's planned 600 MWcombined cycle power plant on Batam Island in Riau province.Under the contract, Gas Negara will supply 60,000 standard cubic feetper day to the Brighton plant for a period of 20 years.  The gas is tobe delivered through the Asmera-Duri-Batam pipeline, currently beingtendered.The pipeline project is to be funded jointly by the Asian DevelopmentBank, the Japan Export-Import Bank, the European Development Bank andGas Negara.Construction of the Brighton plant is due to commence in 1998.  It isscheduled to begin commercial operations in 1999, with an initialcapacity of 150 MW.  To that stage, the project is said to involve aninvestment of $100m.  The plant's capacity is to be expanded later to600 MW, at an estimated additional investment of $500m.Brighton, which is 55% owned by President Suharto's second son BambangTrihatmojo, is registered in Western Samoa.  The Batam power station isbeing constructed together with Indonesian company PT Kresna Tara,which is also 55% owned by Mr Trihatmojo.Other partners in the project are Johanes Kotjo, Bambang Riyadi Soegamaand Wisma Suhardono.Located 20 km south of Singapore, Batam Island is growing rapidly as anexport-oriented industrial zone.  As of June 1995 investment on Batamhad reached $5.3bn.  Exports from the island between January and June1995 were worth $1.055bn, as compared with $1.339bn for the whole of1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996TENAGA HOPES FOR TARIFFS DECISION BY EARLY SPRINGTenaga Nasional, the state-owned power utility, said it is optimisticthat the government will decide on its proposed restructuring of powertariffs by the first quarter.Ani bin Arope, the executive chairman, said the utility had submitted a"rebalancing proposal" on tariff rates but declined to give details.The move, first announced months ago, follows a government decisionearlier to turn thumbs down to a request for tariff hikes. The moveraised questions about Tenaga's freedom to implement tariff formulaswhich affect its earnings and profits.Ani said the new proposal takes into consideration the ration of powerconsumer groups. "Domestic users now accounts for 40% of our customersand the manufacturing sector 60%. It was the other way roundpreviously, he said.The government had earlier suggested to Tenaga that it raise theminimum rate charged for residential users under its tariffrestructuring proposal. Tariff hikes are important as Tenaga has signedcontracts to buy power from Malaysia's five private power producers;without higher rates the state group will have to absorb the costsinstead of being able to pass them on the consumers.Ani said Tenaga spent up to M$1bn for buying power last year and theamount would rise to an estimated M$1bn in 1996. Tenaga reported apretax profit of M$1.64bn for the year-ended August 31, down 17% fromM$1.98bn the year before. This year's result, while nothing to writehome about, should be "no worse" than that recorded in 1995.In the last financial year, Ani said Tenaga spent some M$3.4bn oninfrastructure. "We will spend M$4bn a year up to 2000 oninfrastructure." He said the country's power demand was growing at 12%-15% a year.Ani said Tenaga had signed an agreement to take a 20% stake in a $200mpower project in Pakistan. It was also in final negotiations for itsproposed 25% equity stake in a power project in Karnataka, India.Tenaga also was considering an offer to take up a 15% stake in theM$15bn Bakun hydropower project in Sarawak, a scheme, because of itsdeforestation implications, which promises to be one of the mostcontroversial power schemes in Asia, and which has raised a chorus ofinternational disapproval and opprobrium.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996TENDERS IMMINENT FOR BAKUN MEGA HYDROPOWER SCHEMEThe Bakun Hydroelectric Corp. (BHC), the brainchild of Ting Pek Khiing,the Sarawak timber baron, says it will issue its first tenders for theM$15bn ($5.9bn) Bakun hydropower dam this month. The project will havea capacity of more than 2,000 MW, including a 650 km subseatransmission line from Sarawak to the Malaysia peninsula.The company says it has already awarded a M$247m ($97m) contract toDong Ah Construction of South Korea to divert a river at the dam sitekeep in the Borneo rainforests. Lahmeyer of Germany has been awardedthe engineering consultancy contract. Sixteen companies are claimed tobe positioning themselves to bid for the main engineering andconstruction contracts.The company says that construction will start in May, pending approvalof an Environmental Impact Assessment from a pro-dam Sarawak stategovernment, which will be a stakeholder in the project. The key playeris Ting's Ekran Bhd, which owns a controlling stake in BHC. It saidthat a rights (new shares for old) and bond issue were still underpreparation and were not yet ready for shareholder approval.The project has been roundly criticised by virtually everyenvironmental group looking into it because of the damaging effects ofthe massive deforestation, the impracticality of the scheme being sofar from major population centres and the dislocation of localtribespeople. It is estimated that the dislocation could affect 10,000people.Nevertheless, the scheme is going ahead, not least because of thesupport of the government, which, through Tenaga Nasional, the state-owned utility, will be a part shareholder, as will the national pensionfund. Ting and Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad are also close friends.Ekran spokesman Sunny Khoo said recently that the company hoped toraise M$400m from the sale of 8m cu. m of logs. Last August, thecompany sold the rights to 3m cu. m of timber to a company calledUltimate Strategies Bhd for M$405m. Khoo said at the time that if thecompany could not get the price it wanted for the timber "then we willlog it ourselves." The sam site, and the timber on it, covers 80,000hectares.But according to a Kuala Lumpur-based foreign broker, "It is difficultto see exactly who will want to put their money into Bakun. Localinvestors who enjoy a gamble might be interested but then they wanttheir money back fast. The payback from Bakun could stretch well intothe next century."Nevertheless, the government deems the project essential because ofanticipated electricity shortfalls in the next century. The governmentrecently stated it would not review or reschedule mega projects itconsidered critical for continued economic development.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PROTESTS FORCE SHIFT OF WASTE POWER SITEThe cabinet has decided to relocate the controversial waste-to-energypower plant in the northern province of Chiang Mal in a move to end theyear-long protest by locals.The decision was made on December 26 as protest against the garbage-lignite fired power house seemed to peak as some 300 villagers fromHang Dong district, where the 20 MW facility was to be built, staged arally at Government House in Bangkok.The decision is a defeat for the Government, and the ProvincialElectricity Authority (PEA), who failed to convince the local people,after a public relations stint, that the project was environmentallyfriendly.Speaking after the Cabinet meeting, Technology and Environment MinisterYingphan Manasikarn insisted the cabinet's resolution does not mean thescrapping of the project, sponsored by PEA.He said the cabinet has taken a view that the project should remainbecause it would help solve Chiang Mai city's mounting garbage problemswhile contributing to the provision of electric power.  It would berelocated to other districts in the province provided that localsagree, Yingphan said.Deputy Interior Minister Kiatchai Chalchawarat, who oversees PEA saidcertain areas in San Sai and San Pa Tong districts of Chiang Mai may bealternative sites for the facility.At one point four months ago, Kiatchai, who was sent to brief some5,000 residents about the project at Hang Dong, narrowly escaped anattack by a mob of villagers angered by the government's refusal toscrap the scheme.Villagers feared that their backyard would be turned into a dumpingsite of garbage and the combustion of rubbish and the lignite wouldcreate adverse environmental impact to their neighbourhood.For the time being, it is not known the extent of effect the Cabinet'sresolution has on the $57.2m contract PEA awarded last March toKvaerner EnviroPower AB of Sweden to build the plant (PiA 173, Apr 3).Yingphan only said that PEA would need to negotiate with Swedishoffshoot of Norwegian Kvaerner industrial group about the new operatingenvironment.The scheme was earlier set to come on line on December 5, 1996.  Butopposition has delayed construction for nearly a year, making itimpossible to achieve that date.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DSM TO GET $40MThailand will earmark 1bn baht ($40m) budget for its demand sidemanagement (DSM) project in 1996 as part of the continuation of itsenergy conservation programme.  According to Sithiporn Ratanopas, EGATDSM director, 300m baht will go towards advertisement to promote publicawareness on energy conservation.  The advertising effort will focus onpromoting energy-efficient electrical appliance like refrigerators, air-conditioners, ballasts and compact fluorescent bulbs.  The remaining700m baht fund will for efficiency testing of air conditioners andrefrigerators, and developing a thermal storage and efficient motorprogrammes.EGAT is attempting to replace 20m typical ballasts in hotels and largebuildings nationwide with those which can save up to 40% of electricityconsumption.  EGAT will also use an energy saving label campaign with7,00-27,000-BTU air conditioners in 1996.  The degree of energy-savingcapacity indication will vary from one to five.  In 1996, EGAT willbegin to import 20 watt compact fluorescent tubes, which will replaceconventional 100 watt bulb.   They will be sold 20% below import price. The volume of import will be 1.6m units, worth 306m baht.The power authority has spend 87m baht to promote "slim" fluorescentand energy-saving label campaigns in 1995.  The success of the twocampaign is a booster for EGAT to go further with its energyconservation campaign in 1996.  Sithiporn said the DSM project wouldhelp reduce Thailand's power consumption by 10%, or 100bn units peryear.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996OLD HYDRO SCHEME GETS NEW UNITEGAT marked the completion of a 2.71 baht *$108.4m) scheme that furthermaximises the hydro benefits derived from Thailand's firsthydroelectric dam.The opening of the Lower Mae Ping project, an extension of the 31-year-old Bhumibol dam in the northwestern province of Tak, was officiated byHRH Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn on December 28.An additional turbine generating unit, the eighth of Bhumibol and of apumped storage type, will beef up Bhumibol's combined installedgenerating capacity by 32% to 720.8 MW, starting this month to augmentpeak power supplies.The Lower Mae Ping dam was built across the Mae Ping river some 5 kmdownstream of the Bhumibol dam in the province's Sam Ngao district.  Itis 200 metres wide and eight metres high.  Construction began in June1991, but the cost inflated from 2.35bn baht to 2.71bn baht.The secondary dam helps to hold back the stream flowed through Bhumiboland the pumps divert part of the water back to the main dam by a pumpwhich will be operated during the off-peak period.EGAT director Somboon Manenava said the Lower Mae Ping dam could helpsto conserve about 450m cubic metres of water annually which would otherbe drained out from the system.  The project is capable of pumping back3.5m cubic metres of water each day back to the main Bhumibol dam forirrigation and power generation.Lower Mae Ping turbine generator was supplied by a consortium ofKvaerner Energy AS and ABB Power Generation Ltd.  The civil works wereundertaken by Vianini Lavori SpA.Meanwhile, as additional sites for developing new hydro have either runout or have been restricted by environmentalists' opposition, the Thaipower authority is turing to pumped storage to maximise benefits fromexisting dams.EGAT is now assessing he economic proposition of installing pumpedstorage systems at the Khirithan dam in Chanthaburi, the Chulabhorn damin the northeastern province of Chaiyaphum and Ta Tung Na dam in thewestern province Kanchanaburi.EGAT g-m Preecha Chungwatana said these possible pumped storage sitesare in various stages of study.  That of the Khirithan seems to be inthe most advanced phase with reports are mostly completed and a publicrelation campaign is being exercised to win approval from villagers.It is too early to say how EGAT would proceed with possible pumpedstorage projects nor to detail how much more electrical power they canrender, according to the EGAT chief.  The current installed generatingcapacity of Khirithan is 12.70 MW, 40 MW at Chulabhorn 40 MW and 38 MWat Ta Tung Na.EGAT has already completed two pumped storage projects, one at the SriNakarin dam in Kanchanaburi with installed capacity of 720 MW and morerecently at Bhumibol.A third pumped storage scheme now under construction is the LamTakhong, rated 1,000 MW, in Nakhon Ratchasima, some 200 km northeast ofBangkok.  The initial phase of the scheme with is slated to come online in stages beginning in the year 2000 (PiA 191, Dec 11).According to Preecha said the pumped storage hydroelectric projects areviewed generally as the best method to fully utilise the country'slimited hydro resources both for the purpose of power generation andirrigation.  EGAT has no firm plan to start any new dam projects.  Asat the end of November EGAT was operating 53 hydro generation unitswith a combined installed capacity of 2,690 MW, representing about 18%of EGAT's total installed capacity of 14,595 MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SETBACK FOR MALAY POWER EXPORTSMalaysia's bid to export electricity to Thailand has initially met withrejection from its potential Thai buyer, and the prospects forestablishing an agreement now seem remote.Preecha Chungwatana, EGAT's g-m said the basic power tariff and supplyterms offered by Tenaga Technology Perlis (TTG), part of Malaysia'sTenaga Nasional Bhd, are unacceptable.TTG proposed a base tariff of 6 cents/kWh at the delivery point on theThailand-Malaysia border as well as requiring EGAT to take delivery ofthe entire proposed load of 300 MW on a "fully despatchable" basis, ona firm and full continuous basis for the entire life of the long-termsupply contract.The EGAT chief said the proposed price is simply too high as it exceedsthe rate on which EGAT pays for electricity purchased from othersources such as Laos or for power generated from EGAT's own powerplants in Thailand.  The current base price of power EGAT buys fromLaos is around 4 cents/kWh.Furthermore, EGAT is only prepared to take the full proposed loadduring Thailand's peak afternoon/early evening power demand with aprovision to guarantee a minimum offtake of 50% - 60% of the totalproposed capacity at any time of the day.EGAT's reaction to the terms proposed by TTG could spell doom of thelarge natural gas-fired combined-cycle plant being planned by Tenaga innorthern Malaysian peninsula state of Perils near the Thai border.EGAT has already made its stance known to TTG and asked the Malaysianoutfit to sweeten its proposal and come up with a new offer later.  Butthe EGAT chief expressed doubts if TTG could reduce the offered powertariff further because the cost of power generation in Malaysia ishigh.According to Preecha, Malaysia initially wanted to sell its indigenousnatural gas to Thailand, but later opted to sell electricity generatedfrom its natural gas as this energy form provides greaterprofitability.  (PiA 178, June 12).The EGAT chief noted that Thailand, especially its southern region, maynot need to rely on the proposed power sales from Malaysia in the shortterm because of EGAT's surplus generating capacity in the region.  EGATpresently has a combined installed generating capacity of about 1,200MW in the region while demand is about 1,000 MW, therefore, he added.Meanwhile, Laos has continued to make new offers to sell electricityfrom several of its hydro electric power stations to EGAT.  Lately,Laos and groups of international companies have presented details ofNam Thuen I and Nam Ngum projects to EGAT officials, said Preecha.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996LAMPANG LIGNITE SCHEME MAY BE BACK ON AGAINEGAT is eyeing opportunities to revive a plan to build a huge powerhouse using indigenous lignite reserves in the northern province ofLampang.EGAT Chief Preecha Chungwatana pointed to the possibilities of revivingthe 2,400 MW project, now on the "indefinite" waiting list after beingshelved in 1924.  The process of reviving this multi-billion-dollarscheme could start as soon as EGAT succeeded in convincing authoritiesand the public that the lignite-fired power plant was indeedenvironmentally acceptable.EGAT's existing lignite-fuelled Mae Moh power station in this province,700 km north of Bangkok, has been in the centre of public criticism andprotests for causing pollution to its neighbourhood due to its emissionof sulphur dioxide and dust for several years.Over the past two years, EGAT has started to equip sulphur dioxidecontrol systems to six of the newer generating units at the plant.For the time being, there seems to be a good chance of proving that thelignite-fired power station can be environmentally friendly, given thatthe desulphurising systems installed in some generating units at MaeMoh have worked well in effectively curbing sulphur dioxide emission.The revival of the Lampang project is basically aimed at serving twopurposes.  First, to utilise the remaining lignite reserves at Mae Moh,estimated at some 600mt in the "mineable" reserve category.  Secondly,the additional generating capacity would enable EGAT to respond to thecountry's fast-growing electricity demand in the future.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NEW ADB PLEDGE TO BACK CHINESE HYDRO AT TING RIVERA total of 600 MW of peak power generating capacity, capable ofgenerating an average of 1,520 GWh of electricity a year, will be addedonto a major hydro scheme planned for the Ting River, in the MianhuatanValley in Fujiian Province, China, with the help of a $170m loan fromthe Asian Development Bank (ADB).The project, costing a total $721m, all of which - apart from the ADBloan - will be financed by Chinese loans and funds, is going to involvethe construction of: a 111-metre high, 302-metre long, roller-compacted-concrete gravity dam and gated spillway; an underground power stationwith four 150 MW turbine generator units and related tunnels; a shiphoist to enable barges of up to 500t capacity to pass safely over thecurrents at the dam site; and two single-circuit, and one double-circuit 220 kV transmission lines, with a total length of 360 km andsubstation facilities, connecting the new power station to the Fujiiangrid.According to Arun Adarkar, the ADB's US chief direct beneficiaries ofthe project will be industrial, residential and agricultural consumerswho now endure power shortages during peak hours, as a consequence ofthe province's rapid economic growth.  The latter averaged 13.8% a yearfrom 1985-1994.During the same period electricity generation in the province increasedalmost fourfold.  However this expansion failed to keep pace withdemand, and the Fujiian Province's Electric Power Bureau estimatedsupply shortages in 1994 of over 1,100 GWh, or 7.2% of annual sales.ADB reckons this may be an under-estimate.Meanwhile, indirect beneficiaries will be residents, and industrial andagricultural enterprises situated downstream on the Ting River.  Thesestand to gain because a reservoir is going to be created at the hydrosite, 64 square metres in size with a flow regulating storage capacityof 1,122m cubic metres.  However at the dam site itself an estimated36,000 people out of 41,000 living in the area will be displaced byflooding, and will have to be re-located.The project will help develop hydropower, a renewable resource, andreduce Fujiian's reliance on coal, which causes pollution and is mainlyimported.  At the end of 1994 the installed capacity of the FujiianPower Grid was 5,261 MW; 3,261 MW of this was provided by hydro plants(62%), and 2,000 MW by thermal plants (38%).  Only about 30% ofFujiian's hydro potential has been developed so far.As well as the $170m loan, ADB is providing $300,000 in technicalassistance to implement institutional reforms.  The underlying aim ofthese is to separate the management of the Fujiian Province's ElectricPower Bureau from the management of the Fujiian Province's government.In addition the technical assistance will be used to overhaul thestructure and levels of the Province's electricity tariffs.  ADBsources say this is an area where a lot of work has to be done asChina's electricity pricing system in general is still extremelydistorted and often relies on subsidies.The Mianhuatan Valley project will be the biggest of five-cascade hydroschemes on the Ting River.  The other four are: a 140 MW Qingxi plantin Guangdong Province, which has been commissioned; a 40 MW Jinshanproject which is under construction; and a 51 MW Huilong project and a30 MW Shang Hang project which will be constructed after 2000.The project confirms ADB's commitment to China.  Though a relativelynew borrower of the Bank, China is now the Bank's "biggest borrower"for power projects, ahead of all of ADB's other clients.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WEAK HK ECONOMY FORCES CLP TO TRIM OUTLAYChina Light and Power has revised down its capital expenditure forecastfor 1992-1999 from HK$54bn to HK$52bn.It is the second time within two years that CLP has had to revise downits capital expenditure.  In 1994 the company trimmed capitalexpenditure from HK$60bn to HK$54bn.The reason for the current revision is the same as that given two yearsago, a drop in consumer demand for electricity, according to thecompany.  The announcement was made recently at CLP's annual generalmeeting in Hong Kong.The fall in demand has meant that CLP has had to delay thecommissioning of the last four units of the Black Point Power stationuntil 2002.The first four units of the 2,500 MW power station will start beingphased in this year.CLP chairman Sir Sidney Gordon told the AGM that because of the drop indemand the company had decide not to take part in the Daya Bay twonuclear power plant at Ling Ao in Guangdong province.  Sir Sidney CLPhas had to react to the economic changes now taking place in Hong Kong.He said that over the past 12 months Hong Kong had experienced anunemployment rate of 3.6%, the highest in nine years; a slowing growthof gross domestic product to 4.8% and flat retail sales."From our information some 30 factories either relocated to China orshut down during the first six months of 1995, due to high operatingcosts in Hong Kong, especially wages and rental costs," Sir Sidneysaid, "and the trend is likely to continue.""All these point to the urgent need for Hong Kong to lower its coststructure in order to make it an affordable place in which to conductmanufacturing and commercial business," he said."Our core business in Hong Kong, a barometer of the local economy, isshowing signs of change.  Sales to the manufacturing sector, forinstance, which used to form the backbone of our business andcontributing more than a third of our total sales, has dropped to halfthat figure and is likely to go down even further over the next fewyears."He said that annual growth in overall sales is expected to hoverbetween 3% and 5.5% in line with GDP forecasts.Sir Sidney said CLP acknowledged there was a problem, and the company'ssenior management had spent the last 18 months carrying out acomprehensive review of the company's position.  The result has been a`macro-strategic plan' and a detailed' change plan.'"The plans will focus on improving the utilisation of assets andresources, streamlining procedures and setting and achieving aperformance target benchmarked to world's best practices," he said."At the same time we are leveraging our core skills in the engineeringand finance streams to develop new businesses in China and other partsof Asia."In essence the strategic plans calls for the company's management totake active steps to ensure the continued success of the core businessin Hong Kong and to explore investment opportunities elsewhere."Sir Sidney said that due to the slowing down in local demand thecompany had decided to reduce the size or defer the commissioning datesof various power generating and transmission projects which shouldresult in large savings.The delaying in commissioning of the last four units of the gas-firedBlack Point is part of the cost-saving exercise.Sir Sidney said CLP intended to stretch the transmission anddistribution system by making it "work harder".  In doing so, headmitted that there would be an "element of risk which, whilstmanageable for a short period, should not be either overlooked orforgotten.""In addition, management has imposed stringent control on manpower andother operational expenses which we believe will bring aboutsignificant savings by the end of the decade," he said.On tariff increases, Sir Sidney said that "over the next few yearstariff increases will be below the prevailing inflation rate.  This isno small commitment in view of the fact that in the past 10 years ourbasic tariff has lagged behind inflation by nearly 80%," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CHINA PIPING NATURAL GAS TO HONG KONGChina has begun piping natural gas to Hong Kong under a 20-year termcontract to feed the territory's power industry starting January 1,officials from state-owned China National Offshore Oil Company (CNOOC)said.  The gas is sourced from the Yacheng 13-1 field, located in theSouth China Sea.  The field has an annual production of about 3.4bncubic metres of gas.  A total of 2.9m will be piped to Hong Kong via a790 km pipeline, completed in June last year.  The remaining 0.5bn ofgas will be supplied to China's Hainan power station and chemicalplants via another 91 km pipeline.  Yacheng 13-1 development project is51% owned by CNOOC, 14.3% by Kuwait Foreign Petroleum Exploration Corpand 34.7% by Arco China.  The term supply into Hong Kong was signedwith Castle Peak Power Corp, a 50-50 joint venture between China Lightand Power and Exxon.  The piped gas will be used to feed the CLPs BlackPoint Power station in Hong Kong.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MAJOR POWER SECTOR SHAKEUPThe Chinese government is to establish a National Power Corp tosupervise the supply of electricity throughout the country.According to a report in the China Daily recently, the Ministry ofPower Industry is to be dissolved within the next few months and itsfunctions transferred to the corporation.Power Industry Minister, Shi Dazhen made the announcement at a recentconference in Beijing on China's power industry.Although details are not clear, it is understood that the governmentwants to separate the functions of enterprise from that of government.According to the China Daily report the supervision of the industrywill be handled by the State Planning Commission and the State Economicand Trade Commission while the China Electricity Council will act in anadvisory capacity between government, industry and enterprises.  TheNational Power Corp will be the first step in the restructuringprocess.According to the report the National Power Corp will be the umbrella,or parent, with regional companies as its subsidiaries.  Regionalcompanies will be responsible for provincial power companies who inturn will be responsible for local power plants.Science research and design institutes and colleges will become partsof the National Power Corp and relations between them will beestablished on the basis of property ownership.Shi said China had installed power generators with a capacity of 75,000MW over the past five years, including hydropower machines with 13,000MW capacity.  Production of electricity has increased on an averagegrowth of 9.8% in the last five years, compared with 8.8% during 1986-1990.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996LOAN FOR LING AOBritain's ECGD has announced support for a contract won by GEC Alsthomin connection with the Ling Ao Nuclear Power Station being built inGuangdong Province.ECGD is providing a repayment guarantee for a #351.5m loan by asyndicate of banks led by West Merchant Bank as arranger, agent bankand principal lender.  The loan is being extended to the StateDevelopment Bank of China to help finance the project.GEC Alsthom has been awarded the contract by Ling Ao Nuclear Power Co.The contractor, which has its UK headquarters in Manchester will beresponsible for the design and supply of 2 x 1,000 MW steam turbinegenerator units and balance of plant for the conventional island of thestation.GEC Alsthom also supplied similar equipment for China's first nuclearpower station at Daya Bay, which was also supported by ECGD.  Fullcommissioning is planned for the year 2003.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996N-PROBLEMS AT JAPC, TOHOKUJapan Atomic Power Co (JAPC) and Tohoku Electric Power Co haveencountered problems that required the shutting down of reactors latelast month.  JAPC's Tokai reactor was shut down following a seawaterleakage; Tohoku Electric's Onagawa-2 BWR in Miyagi was shut down due toa water leak.The 825 MW Onagawa reactor is new and started commercial operationslast summer. Although the problems were minor, the closures were caught(See Feature) in the wake of publicity connected with the shutdown ofthe Monju prototype FBR .Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SUMITOMO METAL PLANS TO MOVE INTO POWER SECTORSumitomo Metal Industries, based in Osaka, intends to enter theelectric power wholesaling business by selling excess power that itgenerates at its steel mills in Ibaraki, Osaka and Kansai prefectures.The Kachima facility, Ibaraki, would sell power to Tepco, while theother two facilities would sell to Kansai Electric if the companysubmits successful bids to supply power.Other steelmakers that are interested in the business are KawasakiSteel, Nippon Steel and Kobe Steel. Energy-related companiesconsidering moves to enter the power wholesale sector include TomenCorp., Japan Energy Corp. and Nippon Oil Co.Moreover, Mitsubishi Materials Corp. is the first Japanese nonferrousmetal company to announce a plan to venture into the business. It hopesto construct a coal-burning plant as large as 100 MW to sell power toNagoya-based Chubu Electric. Another option for Mitsubishi Materials isto construct a coal burning facility that would supply Kyushu Electric,which is headquartered in Fukuoka. In either case, the facility wouldbe constructed at an existing nonferrous metal or cement factory site.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DEMAND TO GROW 0.8%Japan's electricity demand for this fiscal year ending March 31 isexpected to grow by a mere 0.8% from the previous year to 723.79bnkilowatt hours, an industry research institute said.  Demand from largeindustrial users is low in 1995/96, as a sluggishness domestic economyhas forced them to cut production because of growing inventories, theResearch Institute of Electric Power Industry said in a report.Electricity demand in fiscal 1996/97 is forecast to rise by 1.9% to737.41bn kWh.  An anticipated slight economic recovery in 1996/97 isexpected to drive up demand from large industrial users, the reportsaid.If Japan goes through an exceptionally hot summer in 1996/97, as in1994/95, electricity demand will surge by 4.4% from the previous year,it said.  In electricity demand soared 7.4% from a year earlier.Power generation in November rose 3.9% year-on-year to 65bn kWh, theFederation of Electric Power Companies reported.The federation said the increase in November electricity generation wasdue to lower temperatures compared with a year earlier, which pushed upheating demand.Of the total electricity generation in November, nuclear powergeneration by Japan's nine major electric power companies gained 13.8%from the same period last year to 21.6bn kWh.Hydropower generation surged 20.5% year-on-year to 3.5bn kWh.  The jumpreflects extremely low hydropower generation last November because ofwater shortages.Thermal power generation fell 4.7% due to the increase in nuclear powergeneration, to 32.3bn kWh.Japan's power utilities burnt 1.30m kilolitres (kl) of heavy fuel oilfor electricity during November, 1.47m kl of crude oil, 2.33m kl ofliquefied natural gas and 47,669 kl of naphtha, the federation said.The companies consumed a total of 1.85mt of coal in November.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996JAPANESE TO BUILD THREE HYDROELECTRIC PLANTSA Japanese government council has approved plans to start buildingthree hydroelectric plants and one thermal power plant during the yearending next March.  The projects approved by the Electric PowerDevelopment Coordination Council include a hydroelectric power plant inGifu Prefecture to be built by Chubu Electric Power Co. and a thermalplant by Hokuriku Electric Power Co. in Tsuruga, Fukui Prefecture,Kyodo quoted council officials as saying.  The officials were quoted assaying the new projects have a total annual output capacity of 2,000MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ENTERGY LOCKS UP CITIPOWEREntergy Corp. of the US has completed its takeover for Citipower, thelast of five power distributors sold off by the Victoria government.The deal had been expected. Entergy had been named as the preferredbuyer and will pay a total of A$1.75bn, which includes a capitalpayment of A$1.58bn and franchise fees with a present value of A$173m.Despite the apparent `sell out' to foreign interests - all fivedistributors were sold to US companies - the deal is regarded as asuccess for Victoria state. It has raised A$9bn, more than domesticanalysts had predicted. A total of $1.3bn of the Citipower sale will gotowards paying off the state's debts.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WHOLESALE PRICING CLAIMED TO BE `ANTI-COMPETITIVE'Major power users who make up 30% of New Zealand demand believe interimwholesale pricing arrangements are "highly anti-competitive." They saythere are better ways to provide a learning environment until fullwholesale competition comes in later in 1996.Competition watchdog, the Commerce Commission, on the other hand hasformed a preliminary view that the benefits to the public from theinterim rules will outweigh any lessening of competition. However, itwill not issue a final opinion until after public hearings on January18-19.The rules govern the relationship between Electricity Corp. of NewZealand (ECNZ), and Contact Energy, the new state-owned power firmbeing created by splitting ECNZ. The market will be run by EMCO, theElectricity Market Company, at present a joint venture of ECNZ,TransPower (which operates the grid) and the Electricity SupplyAssociation of New Zealand. Contact is expected to buy part of ECNZ'sEMCO stake.In a submission put to the Commission before it issued its preliminaryview, the Major Electricity Users Group (MEUG) says it is particularlyconcerned that the anti-competitive aspects of the interim arrangementswill carry over into the final rules for the wholesale electricitymarket. This group argues that the interim supply agreement and theasset sale and purchase agreement between ECNZ and Contact preserveECNZ's existing level of dominance in the market.MEUG disagrees that six months of trial is necessary. As there is nocertainty that these rates will flow through to become the final rules,it suggests the market could invest time and skills in managing theinterim, only to find that experience had become redundant. It suggestspaper trials should be looked at as an alternative.A different view has been put by the country's largest company,Fletcher Challenge, which is both a user and a utilities investor. Itsees the proposed rules As a "practical method of moving forward" on aninterim basis. Like others, however, it insists they should only beinterim. It wants a "drop dead" clause before the date at which theelectricity from an independent power plant is due to be dispatchedbecause the rules provide no incentive for third party generation.The Commerce Commission is considering the bridging pricing rules toapply to two interim phases. The first runs to April 6 from the date ofsettlement (probably February 1) at the sale of generating plant by theECNZ to Contact Energy. The major change during this period will be thedevelopment of competition between Contact and ECNZ to run whichever isthe marginal power station.In the second phase to end-September, the notified change in ECNZ'senergy supply contracts will be set on a day-ahead rather than a week-ahead basis, the charge will be calculated using actual rather thanforecast demand and the actual price paid by power purchasers will becalculated from the marginal cost of the last station used to meetactual demand.Arrangements for full competition after that have not yet beenfinalised. Key features are expected to be that rather than ECNZforming contracts with its customers, generators and purchasers willcontract with a pool; purchasers will be for electricity; that day-ahead price will reflect the market clearing price based on bids to buyand offers to sell; that the cap on the price of electricity in forceup to end-September will disappear; and that generators and purchaserswill be able to contract outside the pool and to trade their position.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PACHYDRO SHARE PLACEMENTPacific Hydro Ltd., the power generator, will place A$10m worth ofshares and convertible notes with the Development Australia Fund. Thiswill replace an A$10m placement that had been scheduled to go toInfratil Australia Ltd, but which did not proceed because the partiescould not agree terms sought by Infratil. Pacific Hydro said it willplace A$7m in shares issued at 70 cents each and A$3m of convertiblenotes, also issued at 70 cents each.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SAUDIA ARABIAN BUDGETSaudia Arabia, the world's largest oil producer and exporter, hasannounced its 1996 budget, which leaves expenditure unchanged from lastyear at 150bn riyals ($40bn) but a slightly higher deficit of 18.5bnriyals. The 1995 deficit has been estimated at 15bn riyals, but finalfigures have not been announced. For the electricity sector, thisyear's revenues and expenditures was put at 610.5m riyals. The sectoris involved in several multi-billion dollar power generation projectsinvolving high power equipment imports. Saudi produces 8m b/d, of which7m b/d are exported. It is understood that Saudi planners willcalculate oil revenue for this year $14/bbl, unchanged from last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SAUDI ELECTRIC COMPANY LOSSThe Saudi Consolidated Electric Company-Central says its net loss inthe six months ending November rose 12% compared with a year earlier.Figures released by the company show a 301.3m riyal loss ($80.3m) inthe first half of the current islamic year, up from 268.3m riyals forthe same period last year. Total income rose to 1.16 bn riyals from1.14bn and costs grew to 1.46bn riyals from 1.41bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PROJECT TO LINK THE GULF STATES' GRIDSThe UAE next month will issue a tender for a 475m dirham ($128m)project to link the Gulf states' electricity grids, reports al-Khaleejdaily newspaper. It said the Electricity Ministry was studying a finalreport on the project, which will raise grid capacity from 33 kV to 132kV in an effort to meet the country's power needs over the next 20years. Foreign and local companies have won contracts for major UAEelectricity contracts throughout the seven emirates.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996IRANIAN FUSION AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY RESEARCHThe Iranian government says it is pressing ahead with fusion and otheralternative energy research, despite US pressures against the country.President Rafsanjani said that work was going ahead despite efforts bythe US and others "that do not want . . . Iran to reach its worthyplace in the use of new energies. . . . " Work was continuing on theBushehr nuclear power plant, to be rebuilt by Russia under a $800mdeal. The US has imposed a trade and investment ban against Iran sinceJune.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BP TO DEVELOP GAS RESERVES IN THE SAHARABP has struck a $3.5bn gas deal with Sonatrach and the Algeriangovernment to develop reserves deep in the Sahara. The deal will boostBP's worldwide gas production by 30%. The site of the development isnear In Salah, deep in central Algeria and far distant from the civilwar. The joint venture will give BP access to the European gas market.The venture will sell some 10bn cu. m of gas per year into southernEurope via the Transmed pipeline into Italy and the under-constructionpipeline between Morocco and Spain. Sonatrach already exports 30bn cu.m of gas, mainly via Italy.John Browne, BP Exploration Director, said the deal was the first ofits type signed with Sonatrach, the sole gas producer in Algeria, forthe last 30 years. Under the deal BP will take 30% of the net afterexpenses of the gas to be sold. Under a typical production-sharingcontract, the foreign oil company is likely to earn 15% of the net.BP's favourable terms stems from Algeria's prolonged civil strife Andthe high political risk.Other companies are gathering round too. Exxon is starting talks on asimilar gas development deal. Ammar Makhloufi, the Energy Minister,said the government would like to see two or three major projectsemerge in the In Salah area. Algeria is said to be anxious for US andBritish involvement in the sector, now dominated by French and Italiancompanies.  Other companies, such as Total and Repsol of France weresaid to be in `negociation avancee' to develop a field, known as TFT(Tin Fouye Tabankort), close to the Libyan border and several hundredkilometres from the BP field., according to Al-Hayat newspaper. Thisfield is said to contain commercial quantities of natural gas (144bncu. m); LPG (15.6m tonnes) and condensates (16.6mt).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BANGLADESH GAS DISCOVERYPetroBangla's subsidiary Bapex has made a `very significant' gasdiscovery in the southern islands on the tip of the Bay of Bengal, thefirst gas fiend in the area. The site is at Bhola, and the field willincrease the country's known reserves by 10%. Reserves at present are10,000bn standard cubic feet, says Khandaker Mosharraf Hossain, theEnergy Minister. The field will be Bangladesh's 18th commercial fieldAs part of its liberalisation, the government in 1993 offered severalof the country's 23 blocks for production-sharing. Domestic demand isexpected to rise eight-fold by 2020 to 5.5m cu. f/d. Among explorationgroups are Occidental, Cairns Energy and Holland Sea Search and RexwoodOkland of the US.  Some 43% of the country's gas is used for the powersector, 88% of which are gas-fired; 34% is used as feedstock to thefertiliser industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996VIETNAM OIL PRODUCTS IMPORT QUOTAVietnam's Ministry of Trade has set the oil products import quota for1996 at 4.7mt, up from 4.5mt in 1995. The quota for crude andcondensates with a low paraffin content was set at 200,000t. Theministry has allocated imports for diesel at 2.3mt, up from 1.04mt lastyear; gasoline at 960,000t, up from 680,000t, fuel oil at 890,000t,kerosene at 300,000t and aviation fuel at 250,000t. Vietnam's mainimporter is Petrolimex, which was given a 3.1mt quota for oil products,up from 2.8mt in 1995. Petrolimex's diesel quota was set at 1.47mt,gasoline at 700,000t, fuel oil at 680,000t, kerosene at 150,000t andjet fuel at 100,000t.Last December, Petrolimex signed an annual term contract with KuwaitPetroleum Corp to lift 500,000t of 1% sulphur diesel and 80,000t of jetfuel starting this month. Petrolimex's remaining requirements will bemet through quarterly tender invitations and spot purchases. Thebalance of imports will be handled by other companies, such as Petex,Vietnam Airline Petroleum Co., and a new oil marketing firm,PetroVietnam Oil Processing, Distribution and Marketing Co. (PVPDC).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PETRONAS STAKE IN REFINERY IN VIETNAMPetronas of Malaysia will take a 30% stake in a $1.2bn oil refineryunder construction in central coastal Vietnam, says company prexyHassan Marican. The acquisition will be made in partnership with Conocoof the US and South Korea's LG Group. The refinery will have a capacityof 130,000 b/d and is located at Dung Quat Bay, 130 km south of Danang.The three would replace Total, which withdrew from the project lastyear. It had sought to build the refinery at Vung Tau in the south,where most exploration is being done. Hassan declined to disclosefinancial details of the deal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PHILIPPINES OIL PRICE STABILISATION FUNDPNOC plans to inject Ps8.6bn in the depleted oil price stabilisationfund, says Energy Secretary Francisco Viray. He said Ps5bn will bereleased for the oil fund soon, but state-owned PNOC will have to findother sources for the remaining balance of Ps3.6bn. The fund was set upby the government in the 1980s to protect consumers from wild swings inworld oil prices and forex problems. Oil companies give money to thefund if world oil prices are soft and if the peso is strong versus thedollar, then draw against it if the opposite occurs.With the rise in crude prices and a weakening of the peso, the fund hasbeen dwindling and a deficit of Ps7.6bn was reached by year-end. Toshore it up, the country's three main oil groups, Petron Corp,Pilipinas Shell Petroleum; and Caltex Philippines have asked thegovernment to hike the price of oil products, which it did so last weekby three centavos per litre.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996INDONESIAN CILACAP REFINERYThe giant Cilacap refinery will operate at 200,000 b/d, or about 70% ofits 300,000 b/d capacity until May 1996, says Pertamina. Full capacitywill be restored by May. The refinery has been hampered by limitedstorage space following the destruction by fire of seven kerosene andnaphtha tanks last October. Construction work to replace the storagetanks was under way and would be completed by early 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MALAYSIAN CONTROVERSY OVER OIL DISCOVERIESMalaysia is embroiled in controversy as to whether it is preventingforeign companies from bringing new oil discoveries into commercialproduction. Petronas chairman Azizan Zainul Abidin denies that this isso. "They (foreign oil majors) paid the risk money for exploration andif they make a discovery and that discovery is commercial, there is noway we can stop that." Petronas president Hassan Marican added that itwas not possible for Petronas to turn away development plans once acontractor declares commerciality. But there is much grousing abroad,with foreign oil company managers saying Petronas stalls the process bybureaucratic foot dragging over approvals for budgets and fielddevelopment plans, including types of platforms, pipelines and othertechnical issues. "Technically they are right, you can declare a fieldcommercial," said one manager. "And once you do that the clock startsticking on the lease."Over the past decade, foreign oil groups have found 2.4bn bbl of oiland equivalent gas in Malaysia, 20% of Malaysia's remaining recoverablereserves,but none has been put into production, says Wood Mackenzie.The 2.4bn bbl of new petroleum finds were discovered by 16 companies.But since Malaysia offered its first production-sharing contracts toforeign groups in the 1970s, only Shell and Esso, the original twocontractors, are in production. Of the 16, ten have closed theiroffices in Malaysia. Under a standard production-sharing contract,Petronas is entitled to 85% of all the oil produced, once the foreignpartner recovers costs. The terms are considered among the mostunfavourable to foreign partners. But analysts point out thatproduction costs are cheap, which is what makes the market reasonablyattractive.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CHINA SEEKING FOREIGN CAPITAL TO FUND OILFIELDChina's first joint venture investment bank, the China InternationalCapital Corp., is seeking Yn6bn ($750m) in foreign capital to fund thefurther development of a large oilfield in Jilin province. The bank isa venture between Morgan Stanley, China's Bank of Construction, andsmaller shareholders including Singapore Investment Corp. Cal Jinyongtold the Financial Times that the bank was sole financial adviser tothe Jilin development. Funds would be raised  in the next five years tolift production at the field, where reserves are estimated at 170mtonnes.  Planned output would be 2mt; CICC might take a small stake inthe venture, but wants large oil companies as equity partners. Morganshas a 35% stake in CICC, the Bank of Construction 42.5% and the balanceis spread among the others.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CHINA PLANNING TO BECOME MORE ACTIVE ABROADChina is planning to become more active abroad in oil exploration inorder to counterbalance its own weak productivity in this sector, saysChina News. It plans to produce 10mt of crude by 2000 and 20mt a decadelater. It is looking at the Middle East and Russia, mainly centralAsia, says Zhou Yongkang, vice-president of China National PetroleumCorp. Meanwhile geologists have discovered natural gas reservesestimated at 10cu. m in Taicang in Jiangsu province., Initial surveyand exploration has shown the field is only 50 metres underground withgas of a high quality suitable for industrial and household use. Nodetails were given.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996KOREA COULD PLAY ROLE IN OPENING RUSSIAN GAS RESERVESING Barings Bank says that Korea, rather than Japan, could play apivotal role in opening up Russian far eastern gas reserves. It is anatural LNG market and lifts large amounts of LNG from the Middle Eastand South East Asia. Far Eastern reserves would be virtually in its ownback garden and would give it greater diversity of supply. According tothe report, Seoul wants to boost relations with Russia and China andwould welcome a natural gas pipeline, which would be a symbol ofregional co-operation.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SOUTH KOREAN ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDSSouth Korea has toughened environmental standards by lowering thesulphur content in diesel fuel, effective January. Local oil refinersnow have to sell diesel with less than 0.1% sulphur compared with theprevious 0.2%. The content will be further lowered to a maximum of0.05% in 1998, said the Energy Minister. It also said it will graduallyreduce the sulphur content in kerosene, currently set at a maximum of0.08%.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-3IA059-000325-B007-238http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey06.html 205.156.212.5 19970114234920 text/html 111437HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:46:50 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:48 GMTContent-length: 111249Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey06.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER IN EUROPE via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CLO CONCEDES ALL TO ENEL (917 words) COMMISSION STRENGTHENS IEM RESOLVE (1210 words) WIJERS PROPOSES DRIVE TO PRIVATISE (1242 words) TAXING TIMES FOR NORWAY (677 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW FOOTING THE NUCLEAR BILL (1232 words) AUSTRIAN ENERGY TAXES (202 words) OKA TO BE PARTIALLY PRIVATISED (262 words) REGULATION OF ELECTRICITY TARIFFS (207 words) RESULTS FROM THE FEDERAL VERBUND (317 words) VERBUND PARTICIPATION IN RETAIL MARKETS (239 words) SALE OF SHARES IN VIW CHALLENGED (105 words) AUSTRIAN UTILITIES TO ESTABLISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (126 words) SLUMP IN POWER CONSUMPTION IN BELGIUM (613 words) DANISH CHP REPORT (539 words) NEWS EIB LOAN FOR HEAT/POWER PLANT IN DENMARK (58 words) ELECTRICITY INTERCONNECTIONS BETWEEN ITALY AND GREECE (142 words) ENERGY TAXES (165 words) CGT CALLS FOR FRESH ACTION (227 words) FRENCH WINDPOWER PILOT PROGRAMME (163 words) LA MANCHE NUCLEAR WASTE DUMP (125 words) FUEL CONSUMPTION IN ITALIAN POWER STATIONS (225 words) ENEL RAISES INTERNATIONAL PROFILE (367 words) ABB ANNOUNCES CONTRACT IN ITALY (70 words) EDF WITH EDISON PURCHASE 75% OF ISE (199 words) DEMAND FOR ELECTRICITY IN THE NETHERLANDS (292 words) PNEM SIGNS AGREEMENT WITH WINDFARMERS (172 words) NORWEGIAN-SWEDISH POWER BOURSE (337 words) PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICIDADE DE PORTUGAL (339 words) HEAVY RAIN FILLS PORTUGAL'S HYDRO-ELECTRIC DAMS (248 words) SPAIN'S 1996 ELECTRICITY TARIFFS FROZEN (472 words) ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION IN SPAIN (172 words) BASQUE PLANS TO ACHIEVE ENERGY SELF-SUFFICIENCY (518 words) ENHER COMPLETES ACQUISITION OF HIDRUNA (95 words) THIRD WIND FARM AT TARIFA (208 words) SPAIN'S NEW CONNECTION WITH PORTUGAL (79 words) SPAIN'S NUCLEAR MORATORIUM DEBT (200 words) ENDESA AND SEVILLANA PULLING OUT OF CERSA (258 words) ENDESA TO BUILD SPAIN'S BIGGEST DESALINATION PLANT (84 words) IBERDROLA TO PURCHASE STAKE IN EUSKALTEL (57 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW AUTOPRODUCTION IN SWITZERLAND (613 words) SWISS REGIONAL ELECTRIC COMPANIES TO FREEZE TARIFFS (188 words) RESULTS FROM CKW GROUP (321 words) TURKEY NEEDS 183 POWER STATIONS TO MEET PROJECTED DEMAND (595 words) MISSION ENERGY ACQUIRES FIRST HYDRO (268 words) LITTLECHILD PUBLISHES MODIFICATIONS TO LICENCES (446 words) NATIONAL POWER TO CUT 400 JOBS (257 words) CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CLO CONCEDES ALL TO ENELItaly's industry minister Alberto Clo gave a year-end present to thestate electricity corporation. By putting his signature to thecontroversial concession which licenses ENEL to operate, Clo has notonly taken the corporation a further step down the path to an initialpublic offering of its shares, but also appears to have ensured thatprivatisation will not significantly effect the comfortable status quo.Clo's decision to sign the concession has not won universal approval,however. Indeed some wonder whether a hidden agenda lies behind themove of a non-elected minister in a technocrat government that seems tobe rapidly approaching the end of its time.The haste with which Clo has despatched ENEL's operating concessionfrom his desk has not been well received by the anti-trust authority.The competition watchdog's firmly held view is that Clo has put thecart way ahead of the horse. How Italy's electricity sector should bereorganised should have been settled before drafting and signing theconcession. But a new structure for the electricity industry requiresparliamentary approval and the industry minister, who may not be muchlonger in that job, was not prepared to wait for the politicians tohave their say.UNAPACE, the autoproducers' association chaired by Giuseppe Gatti, theformer energy director general at the ministry of industry who wasreplaced last February shortly after Clo became minister, was whollyopposed to the minister's precipitate action. In a note sent to theminister in the week before Christmas, the association wrote,"UNAPACE's fundamental position is that this concession should not besigned, but that attention should be directed towards the necessarylegislative reforms".According to the autoproducers, the concession that Clo has given toENEL introduces incurable contradictions with possible new structuresfor the Italian electricity industry. The present system will remain astraitjacket in which ENEL will continue to operate "not only inmonopoly conditions, but substantially as a government offshoot, with apublic-type role incompatible with real privatisation".In its note, UNAPACE raised various objections to Clo's concession forENEL and suggested that:* the exchange and transmission of electricity produced by othercompanies must be made possible to all operators on equitable and non-discriminatory conditions, on the basis of prices approved andregulated by the regulatory authority;* cogeneration should be encouraged as well as renewable sources;* sub-concessions of ENEL's activities should not be limited to wholly-owned ENEL subsidiaries or to companies owned jointly by ENEL andpublic local utilities;* the planning of plant capacity needed to satisfy nationalrequirements should be entrusted to a government body or the regulatoryauthority, not to ENEL;* competitive bidding for new generating plant should apply only forcapacity aimed at supplying the tied, mass market, while simpleauthorisation should apply to capacity needed for supplying large,'qualified' customers, distributors and consortia.UNAPACE expressed particular concern over ownership and control ofItaly's grid. The autoproducers' association considers that, regardlessof EU decisions or recommendations, a separate grid company should beestablished in order to ensure that the costs of transmission andrelated activities should be made transparent and to reduce thepossibility of cross-subsidies between production and distribution."This company should be made completely autonomous and independent ofevery other operator in production and distribution, particularlyENEL", stated UNAPACE.The association's note to Clo expressed concern that control ofactivities so important to the system's functioning by a privatecompany could heavily condition access. This would "risk prejudicing toa substantial extent the effect of liberalising sales to large'qualified' consumers". UNAPACE told the minister that an alternativeto an independent grid company would be one in which independentproducers and distributors, public utilities and ENEL would have equitystakes. "However, none should have a controlling interest in thecompany."On the question of grid access tariffs, UNAPACE said that these shouldbe detailed by type of service and directly correlated to relevantcosts. To guarantee transparency, the regulatory authority should beresponsible for tariff setting.Clearly, while the operating concession may have brought some seasonalgood cheer to ENEL, Clo's signature on the document has disappointedUNAPACE, and runs contrary to the ideas of Italy's competitionregulator.The anti-trust authority gave its opinion in December, though this hasnot yet been published, because, it says, it would be improper to makeknown its opinion before the concession has appeared in the officialgazette. This is expected in mid-January. The anti-trust authority is,however, unlikely to let go of an issue on which it has on severaloccasions taken a stand wholly divergent from the line Clo hasfollowed. Italy's competition watchdog is, however, able to bark ratherthan bite.* The year has opened with speculation about who will be appointed tothe chairmanship of the regulatory authority for the electricityindustry. Among the names that have been mentioned is that of industryminister himself, Alberto Clo.If the technocrat government headed by Lamberto Dini is replaced orreshuffled, Clo could be looking for a job. Being able to show a CVthat contains placing the law establishing the regulatory authority onthe statute book and the drafting and signing of ENEL's operatingconcession might make him seem the right man for regulator. And, havingbeen regarded by some as ENEL's man at the ministry, he could then beknown as its man at the authority.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996COMMISSION STRENGTHENS IEM RESOLVEIn an unprecedented move at the end of 1995, the European Commissionput forward its first white paper on energy. Basing its document onthree broad objectives - overall competitiveness, supply security andenvironmental protection - the Commission said it will use all the lawsat its disposal to liberalise the EU's internal market for electricityand gas. But it warned that new constitutional powers may be necessaryto reach that goal.Unveiling the document, Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutis said: "Ifwe are to achieve all these objectives, the Commission must raise thequestion of whether a modification of the Treaty of Rome is necessary,as Community action I believe is now limited by the absence of clearprovisions."He said a sound and sustainable energy policy "is critical for ourfuture economic development. This white paper will be our blueprint foraction into the 21st century."The 40-page document lays down a programme for the next three years,covering everything from vehicle emissions to promotion ofcogeneration. It also singles out completion of the EU's internal powermarket and achievement of a level playing field for economic operatorsin the sector as fundamental objectives.For example, the paper says the EU needs a set of coherent criteria inorder to apply the Treaty's competition rules more effectively in caseswhere public service supply obligations are involved. It also insiststhat all forms of energy, including fossil and nuclear fuels, shouldhave a fair chance to compete, meaning more transparency in theirpricing and taxation is necessary."Energy prices, especially electricity prices, should not be used asparafiscal instruments to support specific forms of energy, since thiswill create distortions of competition unless such measures reflectexternal factors", says the paper. However, it makes allowances forsupport measures in favour of renewables. The Community's range ofinstruments that govern the reporting of fuel prices "will be furtherdeveloped with a view to including taxation transparency," it observes.At the same time, the Commission wants a more transparent businessenvironment for investments in the EU's energy sector and says it willuse the "appropriate tools" such as energy-impact analysis to assessnational regulatory measures in the environmental, social and taxfields.Of particular concern, it said, is a need to ensure that procurementprocedures for infrastructure projects "respect key criteria in termsof transparency and objectivity." Brussels said it will push forestablishment of a new "Energy Consultative Committee" under itsauspices (consisting of representatives from industry and labourunions) to ensure "as much transparency as possible on the developmentof Community initiatives" in energy policy.Creation of the EU's internal energy market and a multiplicity ofplayers within it is necessary, says the white paper, for furtherdiversification of the Union's domestic fuel base, particularly forelectricity production: "Electricity producers should be able to choosethe most appropriate and cost-effective fuel within a competitiveframework as long as it does not undermine diversification "Thus, according to the white paper, it is difficult to justify acontinued application of the EU's Directive 75/404, which forbids useof fuel oil under certain conditions for electricity production.Overturning the directive, it says, "would give electricity producersincreased flexibility, [while] an adjustment of indirect taxation toensure equality of opportunity between substitutable fuels would favourfuture flexibility in power generation".In the same vein, the Commission will wage battle against the trend toencourage intensive energy use across the union. "The evidence suggeststhat there remains a substantial potential for improvement," observesBrussels in its paper. It said EU bodies will have to "mobilise alltheir instruments" to support energy efficiency. The Commission plansto issue a communication later this year analysing how fiscal tools canbe used to promote energy efficiency and renewables.The Commission will also issue proposals in 1996 to ensure that energyefficiency is incorporated as an industrial requirement when Europeantechnical standards are drawn up for energy-consuming equipment. Itwants the EU's technical standardisation bodies located in Brussels -CEN and CENELEC - to create an energy working group to ensure thattheir draft technical standards promote energy efficiency, renewableenergies and energy transportation. This could run into problemshowever: such an approach will have to reconcile efficiency objectiveswith trade freedom and sufficient flexibility for industrialinnovation.Tipping its hat to the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission saysless direct intervention in the energy market will be the rule of theday. But it argues that more efficient monitoring tools will be neededto analyse the sector and ensure that its structural and technicalchanges do not conflict with the EU's energy policy goals.A reinforced monitoring capability is needed, says the paper, to:* ensure the proper functioning of the internal energy market;* verify that new production capacity enjoys freedom of establishment,especially for independent electricity producers;* enforce fair competitive conditions for independent electricityproducers;* confirm that different network-access systems yield comparable marketopening and market access in member states;* establish cooperation on interconnected systems between nationalregulatory authorities in both the gas and electricity sectors.The paper notes that the instruments currently at the Commission'sdisposal for ensuring transparency of investments, prices and energyimports and exports "are unsatisfactory because the administrativeburden is not offset by an operational usefulness."Such ineffectiveness, it said, is linked to delays in the publicationof data and poor coordination between member states. To correct thesituation, Brussels is proposing to provide national administrationswith a new energy data bank as well as an information network thatprocesses data more quickly. At the same time, it will lobby for a more"complete, reliable and harmonised statistical system" at Communitylevel in the field of energy.How national capitals will react to such a broad range of initiativesis still unclear. Most have fought tooth-and-nail against anyintrusion, direct or otherwise, by the Commission on the territory oftaxation. While Brussels can justifiably argue in favour of moretransparency in energy prices, it will probably meet resistance to"improved monitoring tools" that peek too much into national taxationregimes and decisions.Moreover, its call for yet more consultative committees and workinggroups may fall on unresponsive ears, considering that the Belgiancapital is already groaning under the weight of endless suchcommittees.Perhaps in anticipation of the opposition that its energy policy paperis sure to spark, the Commission ends its document with a bow to theneed for a proper division of work between EU and national authorities- subsidiarity - but hedges its position nevertheless. The white paperplaces energy policy "within the existing institutional framework" ofthe EU. But it concludes saying the Commission will make proposals "onthe question of whether a modification of the Treaty in the 1996intergovernmental conference is necessary" via a report to be releasedin the coming months.Do not expect any bold move, though. The Commission made a stab atinscribing energy policy in the Rome Treaty during the previousintergovernmental conference in Maastricht, and got a resolute slap onthe wrist.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WIJERS PROPOSES DRIVE TO PRIVATISEThe publication at the end of December of the Dutch government's long-awaited energy policy document confirmed many of the details leakedthrough the month (PiE 212/18). The main thrust of the Energie Nota isthat the government is to privatise 35% of the electricity market and40% of the natural gas market "in the very near future". Within fiveyears, two-thirds of the country's energy market will be privatised.The energy infrastructure, however, will remain in public ownership tosafeguard supply and optimal central production.The policy paper was formally presented by economic affairs ministerHans Wijers at the end of last month.The other two goals highlighted in the document - which sets out thegovernment's vision for the energy sector for the coming 25 years - areto increase energy efficiency by one-third by 2020 and boost the shareof electricity production from renewable sources from the current 1% to10%.The aim, said Wijers, is to stabilise CO2 emissions rather than strivefor a reduction. The minister said that although this was a departurefrom existing policy (and contradicts statements by the environmentminister) it is more realistic approach.He said it was meaningless for the Netherlands to impose stricter normsunless these were adopted by the EU as a whole. And he added that thestabilisation of emissions in itself calls for considerable effortparticularly as the country's economy is expected to grow at a rate of2%/yr in the next 25 years. Unless measures outlined in his policydocument are implemented, energy consumption and CO2 emissions couldactually rise, he warned.The government's plans concerning privatisation were, to a largeextent, unveiled in advance of the energy policy paper. The documentnow outlines the timetable as follows: in the immediate future,consumers who use more than 10 GWh of electricity or 10 MMcm of gaswill be free to choose their supplier.They will be followed within five years by users of 50 MWh ofelectricity or 170 Mcm gas. In fact, companies in this category will beable to apply for so-called "non-binding" status before the legislationis in place although they will have to give a period of notice to theirexisting supplier.Users falling under the specified volumes will remain tied to onesupplier with regulated tariffs. It remains to be seen when thiscategory of smaller (non-domestic) consumer will enjoy the same freedomof choice as other commercial users, says Wijers.The electricity market will also be open to new distributors, bothDutch and foreign. But the grid will, says Wijers, remain in the handsof the current owners (the central electricity generating board SEP).This is the best way to safeguard supplies and ensure optimal centralproduction, insists the minister. But he adds that an appeal procedurewill be available for electricity suppliers who feel they are unfairlyhandled. This "natural monopoly" will also have an independentwatchdog.Wijers claims that his proposals will place the Netherlands at theforefront of energy market liberalisation in Europe, along with Britainand the Scandinavian countries.ConcessionsAccording to major users, however, the plans fail to meet conditionsfor increased competition in the market. Vereniging Krachtwerktuigen,the association of large-scale users, which account for 80% ofcommercial consumption, has urged economic affairs minister Hans Wijersto focus more on opening up distribution to provide a counterweight tohis proposals to concentrate production.Wijers' estimate that the reforms will deliver a cost saving of Dfl 500-600m ($312-375m) is fine, but electricity users can only be sure theyare getting the lowest possible price when there are sufficientalternative sources of power, a spokesman for the association said.He said there are too few guarantees that new suppliers would haveaccess to the national grid under the same conditions as the centralelectricity board producers and distributors.Wijers' plan for an independent watchdog to ensure that every producerwill be treated equally is too vague and open-ended, the associationsays, adding that free trade outside the sector will be obstructed byestablished players.Distributors could charge such high fees that it becomes impossible forindependent producers to make money from supplying customers via thenational grid.While acknowledging the need for a powerful producer to enable theDutch energy sector to compete in a liberalised European market, theassociation doubts that the plans will stimulate competition fromabroad and from independent producers as envisaged by Wijers. The onlyway to achieve this is to give the electricity sector a fullyindependent legal and economic status, it concluded.The proposals contained in the policy document also indicate asignificant concession on the part of the minister on two points. Thefirst concerns his plans to merge the four existing producers (UNA,EPZ, EPON, EZH) to create a single electricity production company withdistributors as shareholders. Wijers said this was necessary becauseconflict between regional and national interests has led to overcapacity and operational inefficiencies.The merger proposal caused an uproar (PiE 213/1) and the wording in thepolicy document now calls for "one large-scale production company"which leaves the option open for one or more breakaway productioncompanies to operate.This could be the case in the south where the regional producer EPZ andthree local distributors PNEM, NUON and Deltan are already involved ina far-reaching co-operation agreement. They have calculated that theformation of a national electricity giant would result in extra costsof Dfl 265m ($164.4m) for consumers in one province (Noord Brabant)alone. Larger users would have to pay 25% more for electricity whilesmaller customers would see a rise of 13%, they claim.In the east, distributor NUON also prefers regional integration andopposes the idea of "its" producer EPON being swallowed up by a"bureaucratic monopoly".Nevertheless, the move towards the integration of the production sectorwill, says the policy document, have priority and energy director-general Dessens has since said the outline of the new company will becompleted this year. A merger of all four producers would create aconcern with an annual turnover of Dfl 6bn.Wijers has warned that reluctant shareholders may be forced to co-operate with the government's merger plans, although he would prefer toreach agreements with the parties involved.Wijers argues that a large production company would benefit fromeconomies of scale, ensure more compatibility in terms of supply anddemand and - perhaps most importantly - would put the Netherlands in abetter position to compete with foreign producers once the EUliberalises the electricity sector.The second concession relates to the shareholding of the new productioncompany and is aimed specifically at appeasing Amsterdam city council.The council is currently a shareholder (33%) in its regional productioncompany UNA but would have to sell its stake to a distributor under theoriginal proposals, something which it objects strongly to. Now Wijershas said local authorities can also be direct shareholders in thenational producer.Wijers' policy paper allocates Dfl 6m a year for a wide package ofenergy efficiency measures for electricity generated by fossil-firedplants. These include more long-term agreements with industrial sectorsand stricter standards for new buildings. Investment is needed because"simple solutions will be exhausted by 2000" said the minister.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996TAXING TIMES FOR NORWAYThe minority Labour government's plan to change the way generatingutilities are taxed is facing mounting hostility from some of theaffected interests.The keenest criticism is being voiced by the so-called "hydro powerkommunes", local authorities which derive much of their tax revenuesfrom hydro plants located within their borders. LVK, the nationalassociation of hydro power kommunes, called an extraordinary meeting onJanuary 10 to discuss the proposals, which it claims will underminelocal authority taxation rights and hit the country's sparselypopulated rural districts. A day earlier the opposition Centre(Farmers') Party, which traditionally stands up for rural areas, held aseminar on the tax reform. One of its conclusions was that the measurewas an "attack" on these areas. Media reports predict that LVK willmobilise "massive opposition" to its approval by the Storting(parliament).The draft bill containing the proposed changes was tabled by thefinance ministry on December 15 (PiE 214/21). Initial reactions to it -by all concerned - were moderate. This was mainly because the ministryforecast, in the text of the bill, that the hydro power kommunes wouldactually see their revenues from the sector rise under the new regime.Since then, however, LVK has been doing its own sums to see howspecific local authorities would be affected. It claims that thesecontradict the official figures.In a letter to the ministry, LVK director Arvid Lillehauge says that"... so far [our calculations] indicate that it is impossible to reachthe result indicated by the draft bill. On the contrary ourcalculations show a fall in local authority tax revenues of suchmagnitude that it does not accord ... with the intentions of the bill".Lillehauge's request for the background material on which the officialcalculations were based has been refused by the ministry, which saysthat this material was collected on the understanding that detailswould remain confidential.The main changes proposed by the draft bill are:* abolition of wealth tax on publicly-owned power utilities (privatecompanies - including privately owned power plants - have been exemptedfrom paying wealth tax since the general tax reform of 1992. Treatingpublicly and privately-owned power companies in the same way, theministry points out, will have the advantage of eliminating anincentive to privatise publicly-owned power undertakings for taxreasons.)* a switch from assessment on the basis of estimated value toassessment on the basis of [annual] accounts, where publicly-ownedpower utilities are concerned. That means, says the ministry, that thelatter will pay tax on profit, like other enterprises, and not tax onthe basis of estimated value as at present.* abolition of tax exemption for power utilities in the kommunes whichown them. This will effect, inter alia, local authority-owneddistributing activity, which, recalls the ministry, is "to a greatextent ... exempt from tax at present".* introduction of a 30% tax on the "ground rent" arising from powerproduction, with the central government and the counties receiving,respectively, 95% and 5% of the take from this tax. Ground rent isdefined by the ministry as "the return on a natural resource over andabove a normal return... it is proposed to protect the normal return bycalculating an annual free income, which may be deducted from theground rent income".* abolition of the present state production tax, which will be replacedby the tax on the ground rent.* the fixing of a minimum level for income tax [payable] to localauthorities (tax on hydro power income). "Hydro power income", says theministry, "is to be calculated separately for each individual powerplant for both publicly and privately [owned plants] as a proportion ofan estimated gross income. The aim of hydro power income is to ensure aminimum level of stability in the income tax [take] of the hydro powerkommunes. It is proposed that hydro power income should be set at 35%of the estimated gross income."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FOOTING THE NUCLEAR BILLCity lore has it that if the price is right you can sell anything.Apply this to the UK's viable nuclear industry stripped of its Magnoxpark, and the right price is obtained by prudently discounting a numberof factors - liabilities first, political and regulatory instabilitynext, perhaps public antipathy last. You are left with a business worthconsiderably less than its newest, most prized asset, Sizewell B, whichcost #2.5bn.Crudely put, this is the message coming from analysts, unions andacademics studying the government's plans to privatise Nuclear Electricand Scottish Nuclear's merged AGR/PWR business as British Energy.Public enthusiasm for the proposal, never high, has been diminished bya perceived volte face by the government on its pledge to abolish theNuclear Levy on privatisation. The government's position is far fromstable; defections to opposing parties and a shrinking majority may yetforce it to take a more circumspect line on potentially divisive policydecisions. Nevertheless, privatisation of nuclear and the railwaysremain on the agenda.With this as background, the Commons Trade and Industry SelectCommittee investigating the nuclear proposal (PiE 213/4) is due toreport its findings on February 1. Among the most significantcontributions to the committee is a report* commissioned by Friends ofthe Earth and the anti-nuclear local authority grouping COLA. Itsuggests the government will be tempted to retain the #3bn ($4.658bn)cost of reprocessing spent AGR fuel presently residing in the coolingponds of Sellafield to ensure the AGR/PWR business fetches somethinglike the #2.6bn value it has placed on it.The report's authors, Gordon MacKerron of the Science Policy ResearchUnit (SPRU) at Sussex University and Mike Sadnicki, a consultant, statethat such a scheme, while superficially attractive, is unsatisfactoryand possibly illegal under European Commission state aid rules.Provisions in BE assetsThe argument that the reprocessing costs constitute a historical legacyand have nothing to do with the operation of a new company isfallacious, the report says; "There are provisions in the accounts ofNE and SN of some #3.5bn to cover these liabilities for reprocessingAGR fuel irradiated to 1995, and these provisions have in principlebeen invested in the assets which British Energy will acquire. In otherwords the assets contain the provisions for paying for the inheritedspent fuel. To exempt BE from the need to pay for them would be toallow the company to enjoy the future incomes from the assets whileescaping a major liability which those assets are designed to pay for."Exemption would result in the total public sector fund necessary toassure payment of all liabilities growing from #7.8bn (the report'sestimated figure for a Magnox decom fund) to #10.35bn. This possibilitycomes on top of regulator Stephen Littlechild's disclosure on December19 that, despite perceived government promises to the contrary, theNuclear Levy will continue after privatisation in order to recoveraround #450m of revenue arrears.The announcement caused outcry from the Labour party, which branded thegovernment's promise of an 8% reduction in electricity bills "anextravagance the government clearly can't afford to pay for".Littlechild said the government had stated the levy would cease onprivatisation "subject to the recovery of outstanding arrears". TheLevy will remain at 10% on English and Welsh electricity bills fromApril 1 1996 until privatisation, when a reduction in the rate isanticipated. Energy minister Tim Eggar said power bills should fall by6% by autumn 1996.#809 million o.n.o.So what value does the report put on BE's worth with all liabilitiesfactored in? MacKerron and Sadnicki's conventional base case using a 2%discount rate on liabilities (the rate which the industry itself hasapplied in the past) and a 13% discount rate on operational costsvalues the company at -#2.6bn. Using a 13% discount rate on liabilitiesand present costs - nearer the rate private investors are likely to usewhen evaluating costs - the sale value is #809m.The above cases have of necessity been partly based on statisticalassumptions given the shortage of operational data in the publicdomain. BE itself is unable to comment in detail under the FinancialServices Act but was quoted as saying it would rather be judged on itstrack record; indeed the report acknowledges the improvement in AGRperformance and Sizewell B's consistent operation at full power.Neither is the report anti-privatisation per se; it concludes that ifit works well, the electricity market would be completed, someliabilities would be transferred to the private sector and some cashraised for the taxpayer. Analysts welcomed the attempt to detail theindustry's value but observers conceded there is as yet not enough coredata for the prudent investor.If the approximations are at all accurate, the maximisation of the salevalue for nuclear power will almost certainly not correspond to thedivision between Magnox and AGRs/PWR, the report continues. Assuming aprice of 2.5p/kWh, Heysham 2's estimated cash cost of 2.07p/kWh makesit eminently privatisable. AGRs at Dungeness B and Hunterston B(2.79p/kWh estimate) are not. "Quite probably a combination of Heysham1 and 2, Torness, Sizewell B (and possibly Wylfa among the Magnox)could all make money in the private sector, whereas Dungeness B,Hartlepool, Hinkley Power B and Hunterston B might not", the reportsays.Add in the report's estimated 0.29p/kWh contribution to the independenttrust fund covering AGR decommissioning (PiE 213/5), and British Energyis left with even fewer viable power stations. Of course, MacKerron andSadnicki could be wildly off the mark. After all, the report was partlypaid for by anti-nuclear pressure groups, as BE points out. SPRU,however, has been near the mark in the past on the viability of new PWRbuild and the desirability of a segregated decom fund.* UK Nuclear Privatisation and Public Sector Liabilities, GordonMacKerron and Mike Sadnicki, supported by the Economic and SocialResearch Council, FoE and the COLA. SPRU, Mantell Building, Falmer,Brighton East Sussex, BN1 9RF. tel: +44 (0) 1273 686758.Net present estimated value of AGRs and PWR (#m)                                       NE AGR   SN AGR   PWR   TotalCase A - reprocessing discounted at 2%Income present value                    6036     2742    1438  10216Operational cost present value          3287     1523     738   5549Net operational present value           2749     1218     700   4667Net liability present value             4653     2319     303   7275Privatisation price                    -1904    -1101     397  -2608Case B - reprocessing discounted at 13%Income present value                    6036     2742    1438  10216Operational cost present value          3287     1523     738   5549Net operational present value           2749     1218     700   4667Net liability present value             2458     1096     303   3858Privatisation price                      290      122     397    809Source: SPRU, generated from authors' modelsAGR load factors (%)                   Average for                          Assumed for                   1989/90-94/95                        1996 onwardsDungeness B        40 (worse than this in 94/95)        50Hartlepool         64 (fairly consistent since 92/93)   65Heysham 1          69 (worse in calendar 1995 to date)  70Heysham 2          66 (well over 80% in last 3 years)   75Hinkley Point B    77 (generally consistent performer)  75Hunterston B       73 (generally consistent performer)  75Torness            62 (improving after weak start)      75Average            64.7                                 69.6(weighted by capacity)Total annual AGR electricity generated with assumed load factorsfrom 1996: 50.76 TWhSource: SPRUBack to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996AUSTRIAN ENERGY TAXESThe sudden change in finance ministers will delay but not derail plansto introduce an energy (CO2) tax on electricity, gas and coal.Regardless of the government's make up after the mid-Decemberelections, both the social democrats and conservative Volksparteifavour extending the energy levy beyond motor fuels, taxed since lastMay.No one pretends any longer than the resultant funds would be applied toCO2 reduction as originally intended; rather, the income would helpovercome a drastic budget deficit. Arguments have been flying over theamount of tax to be levied (PiE 210/10) and this will be an ongoingdebate between the two parties as they attempt to reform the coalitionwhich came undone over budget issues last October. The conservativescan be counted upon to hold back social democratic moves for a tax atthe higher end of the proposed scale, to avoid making Austria lessattractive for industry.Coalition negotiations come first, but the energy tax could be a partof the ultimate package. Nevertheless, given that formation of a newgovernment is not expected until the end of at least February,introduction of the tax on electricity probably will not occur beforemid-year at the earliest.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996OKA TO BE PARTIALLY PRIVATISEDOberosterreich Kraftwerke AG (OKA) will be partially privatised thisyear, according to the Upper Austrian provincial governor. Currentlythe utility - which supplies the industrial centres of Linz and Steyras well as substantial agricultural areas with its own as well asVerbund power - is wholly-owned by the province and, in addition, has a36% holding in the Salzburg regional utility Salzburger AG furEnergiewirtschaft (SAFE; PiE 192/12).No date or procedure has been set for OKA privatisation, but anyarrangement is likely to include a condition which would avoidshareholding by a German electricity utility: earlier moves topartially privatise the Salzburg regional and municipal utilitiesstumbled when a German purchase was feared. German utilities such asBayernwerk have made no secret of their interest in obtainingtransmission right-of-way across Austria, which would enable cheaperelectricity exchange between Germany and Italy.Meanwhile, OKA has set major rationalisation and investment programmesfor the short-term future. Following a study by consultant AT Kearney,OKA will reduce personnel from 2,410 to 2,000 through attrition.Administration will be cut sharply, departments reduced from 60 to 38and, local offices from 75 to 40. Savings in personnel costs over thenext six years are estimated in the "three figure millions", accordingto management, with a Sch800m ($79.1m) cost reduction by 2001.Growth, meanwhile, is expected from new business areas. The utilitywill invest some Sch1.5bn in 1996, Sch1.1bn in plant and equipment, theremainder in participation investments. The current major plantinvestment is in the disputed Lambach generating facility (PiE 213/12).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996REGULATION OF ELECTRICITY TARIFFSThe time-consuming procedures for altering electricity tariffs havebeen simplified as of the start of this year. The new arrangement (PiE211/12) allows utilities to institute tariff changes followingnotification of the ministry for the economy. Detailed figuressupporting the change must be publicised and the adjustment justified.The new regulation puts a cap on the amount of any increase and stillallows intervention by interest groups in Austria's "socialpartnership" (labour, industry, agriculture) if the adjustments arejudged unwarranted. A 12% "deduction" from the gross increase isrequired on the grounds that this amount must be achieved by theutilities themselves through rationalisation. No increase may exceedhalf of the then-current inflation rate.For the arrangement to apply, individual utilities must agree to abideby the new regulations. All nine of the country's regional utilitiesplus the major municipal utilities have subscribed to the rulesgoverning the new procedure, but the responses of about 180 smallprivately-owned electricity suppliers remains open.The new arrangement has been criticised by the country's greens,amongst others, who say the procedure gives utilities no moreinitiative to introduce real cost-cutting or efficiencies, nor does itsubject tariff increases to the same scrutiny as did the previoussystem.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996RESULTS FROM THE FEDERAL VERBUNDHigh water flows through hydro plants and a 3% increase in electricityconsumption have assured a good year in 1995 for the federal Verbund.The authority nevertheless has noted the impact of two majorcogeneration plants which have come on-line, measurably trimmingindustrial electricity usage.On the financial side, the Verbund last year experienced unbudgetedcosts of some Sch400m-500m ($39.6m-49.4m) when its long-term borrowingsin Swiss francs had to be revalued to reflect exchange ratedifferences. About a fifth of Verbund bonds or Sch10bn are denominatedin francs. Notwithstanding, the Verbund will again pay its (49%)private shareholders a 16% dividend based on the nominal Sch100 shareface value: this amounts to a 2.6% return relative to the year-endmarket price of Sch606 per share. The government as 51% shareholderwill receive an 8% dividend on its stake, or half the privateshareholders' return.No detailed export-import figures have been released, but the Verbundnotes an export surplus in its electricity trading for 1995. Highersales to Germany, Slovenia, Croatia and Hungary have been registered,although in part these have been achieved at below-cost prices in orderto reduce untenable coal stockpiles (PiE 214/14). Exports to EasternEurope made a profit of Sch500m last year, according to management.Faced with a surplus of electricity as well as generating capacity, theVerbund has succeeded in cancelling import contracts with the Ukraine,postponing for another year an exchange contract with Russia andsuspending for five years a 500 GWh contract with Bayernwerk which wasto have come into effect last October. Verbund director JohannesSereinig estimates that these moves will save the federal authoritysome Sch300-350m annually. At the same time, however, the Verbund hasbeen unsuccessful in negotiating changes to its 20-year 1,200 GWhsupply contract with Hungary (PiE 213/12) and has begun importingunwanted and expensive electricity under the terms of the 1986 deal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996VERBUND PARTICIPATION IN RETAIL MARKETSRegional utilities which have opposed federal Verbund participation intheir retail markets will not be comforted by recent statements byVerbund director Hans Haider."Our direction heads toward heavier participation in the regionalutilities", Haider stated, underlining that the Verbund will "seek tosecure the market" rather than allow intrusion by powerful Germanutilities."Were Bayernwerk last year to have acquired a holding in Kelag[regional utility], we'd also now have them in [the generating utility]Drauwerke", Haider argues. Kelag has a 49% holding in Drauwerke;intervention by the Verbund last year pre-empted a bid by Bayernwerkfor a controlling holding in Kelag (PiE 185/11).Next on the Verbund shopping list is STEWEAG, the regional utilitysharing supply to Styria, which could be partially privatised onceownership in the provincially-owned concern is transferred to a holdinggroup. The Verbund already controls STEG, the other utility serving theprovince, which it acquired in 1992 from Swiss owners (PiE 138/9) inthe face of strong protest from STEWEAG and other regional utilities.While the Verbund sees greater involvement in Styria as bringingconsiderable potential for efficiency, other regional utilities fearthat the federal organisation is seeking to ensure its future at theirexpense while protecting itself against divestiture under EU rules ofits import-export and transmission grid monopolies. Haider hasjustified wider Verbund shareholding in regional utilities on groundsthat this assures Austrian control over energy polices.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SALE OF SHARES IN VIW CHALLENGEDThe sale of shares in Vorarlberger Illwerke (VIW) by the federalgovernment to the province of Vorarlberg has been challenged by Swissminority (4.5%) shareholder Finelectra. The Swiss concern asserts thatthe deal between Vorarlberg and the Ministry of Finance for transfer ofuser rights to VIW's high-voltage transmission lines (PiE 207/11) isillegal as it was not put to shareholders.Vorarlberg officials have registered surprise at the suit since talkswere held with Finelectra shortly before conclusion of the purchasedeal. Details of the Swiss charge are not known, but the challenge hasbeen dismissed by Vorarlberg's provincial governor as having nosignificance.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996AUSTRIAN UTILITIES TO ESTABLISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKAustrian electricity utilities have pledged to band together toestablish a ground-based telecommunications network. The decisionfollows the failure of either of the consortia in which they had aninterest (PiE 213/12) to win the single mobile telecoms license award.Both Energieversorgung Niederosterreich (EVN) and the federal Verbundhad been reasonably certain that consortia in which they wereparticipants would gain the mobile telephone license. Both lost, withthe franchise going instead to a group supported mainly by the GermanDeTe Mobil concern, Siemens Austria and the Austrian bank BAWAG.The electricity utilities now plan to concentrate on development oftheir fixed-based facilities with transmission via glass fibre cablessuspended from their high-voltage distribution pylons, in anticipationof the anticipated telecoms liberalisation in 1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SLUMP IN POWER CONSUMPTION IN BELGIUMPreliminary figures released by the Belgian federation of electricityproducers and distributors (FEB) show a slump in power consumption inBelgium in 1995 from September, reflecting the wider cooling inEurope's economy. Net power consumption in the country grew by anestimated 2.9% last year compared to growth of 4.9% in 1994, said FEB.In volume terms, net consumption in 1995 was 69,821 GWh versus 67,822GWh in 1994.Most of the slowdown was attributed to plunging demand from industry.Though demand for energy from the sector remained strong during thefirst half of the year (5.4%), it tapered off sharply after the summer,leading to growth in industrial consumption for the year as a whole of3.7%, or slightly less than in 1994. Demand from Belgium's domesticsector grew by a moderate 2.0% last year, while its tertiary (services)sector saw consumption grow by 2.4%.Net production rose by 3%, from 68,563 GWh in 1994 to 70,605 GWh lastyear, according to FEB. As usual, Belgium's private sector accountedfor the overwhelming share of production: 64,943 GWh or nearly 92% ofthe total. Public utilities accounted for 4.2%, while the balance of3.8% came from auto-producers.Nuclear energy was the largest fuel source, generating 39,063 GWh lastyear or 55.3% of total power production. This was followed by solidfuels (22.9%), natural gas and gas derivatives (17.8%), liquid fuels(1.5%), hydro-power (1.8%) and recovered steam (0.7%).Belgium's fuel mix for electricity produced in 1995 saw the greatestchanges in the natural gas and liquid fuel categories. Use of naturalgas and derivatives last year to produce electricity, for example, shotup by 19.4% compared to 1994. Indeed, according to the country's gasfederation, sales of natural gas to Belgium's power sector ballooned by20.9% from 70,151 TJ in 1994 to 84,800 TJ last year.Though its absolute share is minuscule, power derived from recoveredsteam rose 18.9% compared to 1994 (523 GWh vs 440 GWh). Nuclear energysaw its share in total production rise slightly by 1.4%, reversing thetrend of recent years. Liquid fuels and wind power fell sharply (22.6%and 11.1%, respectively).Separately, FEB said the sector imported a total of 9,416 GWh fromFrance, Luxembourg and Holland last year and exported a total of 5,307GWh, leaving a net balance of imported power of 4,109 GWh. Belgium hada net balance of imports of 3,983 GWh in 1994.One gas-fired co-generation unit of 51 MW was put into service at Ham,near Ghent, in 1995 while a scattering of small steam-power units wentinto service at Brugges (0.44 MW), Bressoux (3 0.9 MW units), Deurne(0.76 MW), Harelbeke (0.165 MW) Middelkerke (0.165 MW) and at Wanze(0.23 MW and 0.31 MW). As part of Belgium's current ten year (1988-1998) plan, two 350 MW gas-fired co-generation stations will be putinto service at Ghent and Brugges in 1997.The country's next equipment plan for the 1995-2005 period, which wasgiven final government approval on December 20, places even greateraccent on natural gas-fired stations. It also calls for a reduction inthe growth of demand for electricity of 0.9% for the coming year andlower tariffs, starting in the second trimester of 1996.FEB said Belgium's electricity grid expanded modestly in mostcategories: 0.5 km for 220 kV lines, 3.3 km for 150 kV lines and 15.8km for 70 kV lines, including 13.8 km of cable. Total capitalinvestments in production, transport and distribution activities wasBfr 35.6bn($1.205bn) or nearly 17% more than in 1994 (Bfr 30.5bn).Electricity prices during the year rose with inflation, or byapproximately 1.5%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DANISH CHP REPORTElsam's recent report to the Danish Energy Council - IntegratedResource Planning - struck a far from sanguine note. It claims Denmarkis heading towards a major imbalance between electricity production andconsumption. Elsam reckons that 40% of the power produced by windturbines and CHP units in 1998 will be superfluous to local consumerrequirements. The company predicts that Danish electricity oversupplywill reach a massive 1,000 GW in four year's time.Elsam lays the blame with what it calls a "too rapid and uncontrolleddevelopment of CHP" in Denmark. After a heated and very public argumentbetween the Danish energy minister, Svend Auken, and Elsam in the weeksleading up to Christmas, Elsam agreed to accept power from 64 new smalldecentralised CHP units. When completed, they will have a combinedcapacity of 1,225 MW, or about one-fourth of Elsam's entire capacity atpresent.The Danish Energy Council (controlled by the energy ministry) believesthere is scope for 1,500 MW of CHP-produced electricity in the region.Elsam insists there is no need to build a single new CHP unit before2003 at the earliest, and says that state operating support for CHP -Dkr 0.10/kWh ($0.018) and 30% capital construction grants - hasencouraged far too many investors.Politicians and Elsam have been at odds about the small decentralisedpower plants since parliament first decided to promote them vigorouslytowards the end of the 1980s. The decision was made on the basis ofseveral reports which suggested that CHP and biofuel formed the mosteco-friendly solution to Denmark's electricity needs. However, theiropponents now claim that a major disadvantage with CHP is that there isno central dispatch system co-ordinating them. Electricity productionby CHP is dictated by the need for heat and this means they produce atfull capacity in the winter months while the larger centrally-placedpower plants are forced to cut back on production.One result of the CHP argument is the resumption of the debate onconnecting Denmark's two separate East and West grids. In 1992parliament urged Elsam and its Eastern Denmark counterpart, Elkraft, towork towards establishing a cable to join their grids. As yet, however,the plan has come to nothing. New calculations on the economicviability of the plan show that income derived from inter-regionalelectricity sales would only meet the ordinary operating costs of a newcable.Income would thus be insufficient to pay the estimated Dkr90m interestassociated with the capital costs of the project. However, energyminister Svend Auken has requested the Energy Council to undertake anadditional assessment of the project. He accepts that the capital costswould be high, but "it would be a once-off investment which would giveus a great advantage in the coming European energy market", heconcluded. On a more up-beat note, the Elsam reports says it expects toachieve its targeted CO2 emission reduction five years earlier than thegovernment had anticipated.According to the government's energy policy law Energy 2000, Danishpower producers must cut total CO2 emissions to a maximum of 24m tonsper annum by 2005. Elsam claims western Denmark's targeted 14m tons canbe achieved as early as 2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EIB LOAN FOR HEAT/POWER PLANT IN DENMARKThe European Investment Bank is lending Ecu43.9m ($57.4m) for theconstruction of a gas-fired combined heat/power plant in Silkeborg inDenmark in order to replace ageing coal-fired capacity. The funds go tothe mixed public/private company of Silkeborg Kraftwarmevaerk, apartnership set up between Silkeborg's municipal authority and theDanish power company, Midtkraf, to run the new plant.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ELECTRICITY INTERCONNECTIONS BETWEEN ITALY AND GREECEThe European Commission is setting aside more than Ecu 75m ($98.1m) toimprove electricity interconnections between Italy and Greece. Thegrant, approved on January 11, will be financed from the EU's RegionalFunds and forms part of the "INTERREG II" programme.The lion's share of the money - Ecu55.772m - goes to Greece, with thebalance of Ecu20m for Italy. It will be used to strengthen powerdistribution links between the two countries, notably between the 400kW electricity supply networks that link Arachthos in Greece toGalatina in Italy.Two AC to DC conversion stations will be built, along with a line tocarry direct current to connect the two stations. The money will alsofund the installation of a 160 km underwater cable to carry 600 MWbetween Oporto Badisco in Italy and the Greek town of Aetos.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENERGY TAXESThe Commission approved on December 20 a set of Dutch fiscal measuresdesigned to encourage energy savings and a reduction of CO2 emissions.The centrepiece of the legislation is an energy tax on small-scaleenergy consumers.The tax will be levied on consumption of the first 50,000 kWh ofelectricity and the first 170,000 cubic metres of natural gas. Onlysmall-scale energy consumers - mainly households and small businesses -are subject to the tax.The revenues will be channelled back to taxpayers via a reduction indirect taxes on capital and labour income, thus constituting a "taxneutral" mechanism. Large-scale electricity users are exempt from thetax, as other measures apply to them. Similarly, Holland's"horticulture under glass" - ie, its sizeable agricultural and flower-growing sector - is exempt from the tax on gas consumption in order tomaintain its competitive footing internationally.The Dutch government says its will amend its legislation if a common,EU-wide CO2/energy tax is introduced.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CGT CALLS FOR FRESH ACTIONThe French CGT (Confederation Generale du Travail) trade union calledon its members at Electricite de France (EdF)-Gaz de France (GdF) toundertake fresh action on January 9 and 11. The latest protests wereaimed at the decision to hold back salary increases this year to 0.7%.The government has issued instructions to all state-owned firms, aswell as official bodies to hold salaries back in line with an officialtarget of 2% for inflation. All that EdF-GdF has so far promised itsworkforce is an end of year bonus which will increase pay by 0.7% from1995 levels.Earlier this year, the CGT was trying to relaunch general protestsaimed at preserving "public service" and the state employees' slightlyprivileged pension systems, which were interrupted by a truce overChristmas. This met with very little support. According to managementfigures, no more than 1% or 2% of the utilities' employees backed them;the four other main unions - FO, CFDT, CGC, and CFTC - did not supportthe protests. They were content with the pension guarantees that theyhad obtained, and with the delay that had been imposed on liberalisingEurope's power supply system.* EdF is to pay the state a dividend of Ffr1.5bn for 1995, while Gaz deFrance is to pay Ffr970m, according to figures published in theofficial journal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FRENCH WINDPOWER PILOT PROGRAMMEA working group on renewable energy sources has proposed that theFrench government buy between 250 MW-500 MW of wind turbine generatorsto connect to the grid.  The proposal is being considered by thegovernment.Director of energy and raw materials at the industry ministry, ClaudeMandil, noted that ADEME (Agence de l'Environnement et de la Maitrisede l'Energie), as well as the turbine manufacturers wanted to install500 MW by 2005, while Electricite de France would prefer 250 MW with afirst tranche of 50 MW.He added that wind turbines had made considerable technical progress inrecent years and were becoming increasingly competitive.A committee of experts would supervise the proposed pilot programme.Tenders would be carried out in stages, allowing the project managersto benefit from experience in the preceding rounds. Operators wouldprobably be asked to tender on the basis of the electricity purchaseprice that EdF would have to offer to make their proposal viable.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996LA MANCHE NUCLEAR WASTE DUMPFrance's environment ministry has confirmed that an independentscientific commission is being set up to supervise the La Manchenuclear waste dump near La Hague.Activity at the centre has been in abeyance since November 30, when theappeal court in Caen ruled that it must be stopped. The court was facedwith a plea by ecological groups arguing that the site was notfunctioning properly. The court is due to rule on January 31 whether onwork at the centre can resume.ANDRA, the nuclear waste agency which manages the site, stoppedstocking additional materials in 1994, and had almost finished coveringthe site - with a view to monitoring it for 300 years - when the courtorder to stop intervened.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FUEL CONSUMPTION IN ITALIAN POWER STATIONSFigures for fuel consumption in Italian power stations in the firstnine months of last year show increased gross thermal production, 8.9%higher at 143,203 GWh than in the comparable 1994 period, compensatingfor the 12.0% fall in hydro production to 31,920 GWh.While gross production from coal increased sharply by 30.7% to 17,444GWh, it, nevertheless, only provided 12.2% of total gross thermalproduction. Fuel oil continued to dominate the Italian scene. Althoughgross production from fuel oil increased by a modest 2.3%, from 83,341GWh in the first nine months of 1994 to 85,265 GWh in the same periodlast year, it accounted for 59.5% of gross thermal production.Natural gas maintained its clear second place, recording an advance of15.8% in gross production to 33,917 GWh, equivalent to 23.7% of totalgross thermal production. Other fuels used in Italy's thermal powerplant provided gross production of 6,577 GWh during January toSeptember last year, an increase of 19.2% on 1994 and equivalent to4.6% of the total.In terms of consumption, Italy's thermal power plants burnt 18.38mt offuel oil between January and September last year (up 2.8% on the sameperiod of 1994), 8.27 Bcm of natural gas (plus 19.1%) and 5.95mt ofimported coal (plus 28.8%). The statistics show that there was noconsumption of indigenous coal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENEL RAISES INTERNATIONAL PROFILEState corporation ENEL raised its international profile over Christmasby providing 300 kW illumination modules for lighting the holy placesin Bethlehem.Following an approach from the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO),ENEL decided that equipment from its 'Luce per l'Arte' programme shouldbe made available to light up the Basilica of the Nativity, the grottoand the walls of Bethlehem's square. The illumination project ran fromChristmas Eve until January 8, the date of the Islamic new year. In theseason of goodwill, ENEL hopes that its Bethlehem illumination projectwill help to bring some business to its international project workload.The corporation has had discussions with the PLO about electrificationwork in the former Israeli occupied territories, and will try to usethe presence of its 'Luce per l'Arte' modules in Bethlehem as a leverto keep the door open for a successful Palestinian crusade by itsengineering division.The marketing possibilities of other 'Luce per l'Arte' initiativesundertaken by ENEL over Christmas and the new year are less obvious.Since the autumn, the Vittorio Emanuele monument in the capital'sPiazza Venezia has been floodlit by ENEL's modules, and at the otherend of the Via del Corso, the Piazza del Popolo was speciallyilluminated for New Year's eve festivities. At the beginning December,a tailor-made 35 kW fixed but programmable lighting system comprising259 lamps was switched on in the Basilica of Santa Maria in Trastevere.Thanks to ENEL's intervention, visitors are now better able toappreciate the basilica's XIIIth century mosaics and XVIIth centuryceiling.Earlier this week, the buildings in the Campidoglio capitoline hillarea of the capital and the nearby Roman fori were illuminated by ENELfor ceremonies inaugurating the start of Italy's European Unionpresidency. Perhaps ENEL, whose privatisation plans have earntcriticism from the Brussels competition authorities, wanted to cock asnook at the Commission's chairman Jacques Santer and his commissionercolleagues who were in Rome. Or, by bringing a sparkle to the capital,the state electricity corporation may have been offering thanks toLamberto Dini's government which has allowed ENEL to avoid theprivatisation upheavals that would have been likely under a lesscomplaisant government.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ABB ANNOUNCES CONTRACT IN ITALYABB in Baden has announced a Sfr100m ($86.95m) contract to supply thegas and steam turbines, heat recovery boiler, control technology andall engineering for a turnkey 260 MW gas/steam cogeneration plant wortha total of Sfr536m. The plant will be built in Falconara near Ancona,Italy, for the Italian distribution company Api Energia, a jointventure owned by ABB and Anonima Petroli Italiana. Work is due to startimmediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EDF WITH EDISON PURCHASE 75% OF ISEContinuing its international acquisitions, Electricite de France (EdF)has completed the purchase of 75% of the Italian electricity producerIlva Servizi Energie (ISE), in partnership with Edison. The two firmspaid L370bn ($233m) for their stake, which will be held through a jointcompany called Finel, in which Edison has 60% and EdF 40%. The deal wasagreed conditionally at the beginning of 1995, but the conditions werenot met until towards the end of last year.EdF commented that this was an important step in developingcollaborations with other power generators in countries which wanted toencourage independent electricity producers.ISE already has capacity of some 600 MW, including a thermal powerstation at Taranto (in Puglia), two at Piombino (in Tuscany), and ahydro power plant at Terni (in Umbria). In addition, ISE is building a500 MW thermal power station at Taranto, which will be fired with gasesfrom the blast furnaces of the local steelworks.  It will use combinedcycles to generate both electricity, which will be sold to ENEL, andsteam, which will be used by the steelworks. The project is due to comeinto operation in the second half of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DEMAND FOR ELECTRICITY IN THE NETHERLANDSDemand for electricity in the Netherlands peaked at an all time high of11,160 MW on December 20 last year, but overall demand of 70 TWh wasdown 0.4% or 300 GWh on 1994, according to provisional figures fromSEP, the Dutch central electricity generating board.SEP said the 1995 peak was 3.3% higher than the previous year's figureand the first time demand passed the 11 GW mark.SEP supplied 90% of the power provided through the national grid, withthe remaining 10% coming from combined heat/power plants owned byindustry and energy distributors.SEP generators produced 2% less electricity last year, reflecting arise in power imports, which accounted for 17% of SEP's output comparedto 15% in 1994. At the same time, SEP exports increased four-fold to320 GWh in 1995 from 75 GWh in 1994.The steady advance in the share of power generated from coal continuedlast year, climbing to 45% from 42% in 1994 and 37% in 1993, SEP said.The share of natural gas declined further, to 49% from 525 in 1994 and57% in 1993. Nuclear power accounted for 6% of production, the same asin previous years.SEP's total production capacity fell to 14,44 MW last year, 590 MW downon 1994. Heat supplies from power stations expanded by 1% to 13,997 TJin 1995 from 13,773 TJ a year earlier.SEP said the fuel component in the national basic tariff (LBT) had beenfixed at DFl 0.052 ($0.032) per kWh for daytime production and DFl0.044 for night-time production for the first quarter of this year. Thenight-time tariff is DFl 0.001 lower than in the last quarter of 1995,while the daytime rate is unchanged.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PNEM SIGNS AGREEMENT WITH WINDFARMERSSouthern Dutch energy distributor PNEM has signed a ten-year agreementwith Windfarmers BV in Moerdijk for the supply of electricity for itsGreen Power scheme under which customers can opt to buy electricitygenerated from renewable sources (PiE 201/15). Windfarmers will buildfour wind turbines, each with a capacity of 1 MW, which will deliver atotal of around 6 GWh of power annually, starting in March next year.PNEM was the first company to introduce the Green Power programme inthe Netherlands and has won 2,500 clients since the scheme was launchedin June. The company hopes to increase this to 10,000 by the end ofnext year.Customers currently pay Dfl 0.085 ($0.053) more per kWh forelectricity, but this will drop to around Dfl 0.05 when the new eco taxis introduced on January 1 according to the government's proposals.* PNEM has announced a Dfl 0.0024 price rise for its conventionalelectricity to Dfl 0.1912 (up Dfl0.0047 to Dfl 0.2382 for peak periodsie 07.00-21.00).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NORWEGIAN-SWEDISH POWER BOURSEThe difference between Norwegian and Swedish power prices has beenshrinking since the Norwegian-Swedish power bourse began functioning onJanuary 1 - creating what is claimed to be the world's firstinternational power bourse (PiE 212/20).From that day, Swedish traders have been able to buy and sell on themarket - operated by Statnett Marked and located at Lysaker, on theoutskirts of Oslo - regardless of whether their companies have thephysical infrastructure needed to import and export electricity betweenthe two countries. Previously, this was a condition of their beingallowed to do business there.On January 2, the first working day of the year, 20 Swedish playerstraded on the market, according to Hans Randen, a director of StatnettMarked. This compared to only nine before the new year. January 1,moreover, saw the abolition of border tariffs charged on powerexchanges between the two countries. Power exchanges between Norway andFinland and Norway and Denmark are still subject to these tariffs;apart from this, however, Finnish and Danish traders can operate on thebourse under the same terms as the Swedes and Norwegians. "We expectthat most of the trade will take place in the day market, and that thiswill lead to increased liquidity", Randen told the Oslo business dailyDagens Naeringsliv.He predicted that by the end of the year there would be some 40-50Swedish players dealing on the joint bourse, in addition to theapproximately 100 Norwegians already using it. According to Per Hjorth,managing director of Statnett Marked, the latter include around 40generating utilities, 40 distributing utilities, eight to tenindustrial companies and ten brokers.Power volumes traded via Statnett Marked rose to some 38 TWh in 1995,from 28 TWh in 1994. Average annual output capacity in Norway is 112TWh."I believe we shall reach 50 TWh this year, and much of the volumegrowth will of course be due to the new joint market with Sweden", saidRanden.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICIDADE DE PORTUGALOfficials of Portugal's new Socialist government have indicated changesin the way Electricidade de Portugal (EdP) is to be privatised. Butapparent contradictions in their announcements remain to be clarified.Economics Minister Daniel Bessa told a Lisbon newspaper the first stepin privatising the group would involve finding major institutionalinvestors willing to buy up to 50% of an initial offer.Secretary of State for Energy Jose Penedos was quoted as saying thegovernment plans a gradual privatisation of the group as a whole,rather than in parts, and intends to disperse the capital widely. Hesaid this would help stimulate capital markets and make the purchase ofshares more accessible to Portuguese investors.The previous centre-right government had planned to privatise up to 49%of Companhia Portuguesa de Producao Electrica (CPPE), the productionarm of the EdP group, and subsequently sell up to 49% of the country'sfour regional distribution companies. Penedos said the limit wouldremain at 49%. More details are expected when the government presentsits overall privatisation programme, due towards the end of January.The new government also plans to change the regulatory system for thepower sector approved in mid-1995, making the regulatory body set upfor the industry responsible for energy issues as a whole, not just forthe electricity sector. Penedos said the scope for governmentintervention in the regulation of the energy sector would also bereduced but gave no further details. In particular, the new governmentwants the regulatory body to cover natural gas, due to be introduced inPortugal by 1997.Meanwhile, EdP has announced price cuts for industrial and commercialusers of 5%-8% in nominal terms in 1996. Taking account of expectedinflation, this represents a reduction in real terms of 8.5%-11.5%,says EDP. Prices are to be 5% lower during peak hours and 8% lower atother times. Prices for domestic consumers will be held flat in nominalterms in 1996. EdP also forecasts its 1995 profits will double from1994's Es30.5bn ($203.9m).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996HEAVY RAIN FILLS PORTUGAL'S HYDRO-ELECTRIC DAMSWeeks of heavy rain after five years of drought have filled Portugal'shydro-electric dams to the extent that production has had to be haltedat several plants. All five hydro units on the Douro river in thenorth, the country's most important source of hydro power, were shutdown in mid-January because the dams were too full to produce therequired fall of water to drive the turbines that produce energy.However, annual production was expected to be above average in 1996after current high water levels subsided.More than half of Portugal's 64 dams were reported full and some weredischarging water to reduce excess capacity. All but four of the 24hydroelectric dams belonging to Rede Electrica Nacional, the state-owned national power grid operator, were full.Three people died in accidents as parts of Lisbon and other regionswere flooded in the second week of January. The Tagus river overflowedits banks in the area of Santarem 80 kms north of Lisbon. Portugueseauthorities were monitoring the river upstream in Spain, concerned thatthe heavy rains could force Spanish reservoirs to discharge water,aggravating Portugal's difficulties.Officials said Portugal's five years of drought were over but theability to meet irrigation requirements fully next spring would dependon rainfall in January and February. Rainfall in the southern Alentejoregion over the past two months was more than in the previous fouryears and risks of flooding continued in several regions of Portugal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SPAIN'S 1996 ELECTRICITY TARIFFS FROZENSpain's 1996 electricity tariffs have been frozen for the first timesince 1973. The utilities' association Unesa said the tariff freeze was"the electricity sector's contribution to the stability of the economyand the general price index," although Unesa chairman Martin Gonzalezdel Valle said that the tariff had fallen 10.7% in real terms since theStable Legal Framework (MLE) was first approved in 1984.The MLE allows the utilities to factor certain costs - such as assetcosts, some overheads and hydroelectric generation costs - into theirtariff rates.The December 28 decree which set the 1996 tariff also modified the MLEin order to cut the utilities' income by Pta29.2bn ($241.3m), or 1.42%of the tariff, but this will be made up by making other adjustmentsaccording to interest and exchange rates.The industry ministry's MLE modifications are broadly in line withthose proposed in November by the regulatory body, the NationalElectricity Commission (CSEN), which wants to see more competition inthe sector.The tariff increase has been below inflation for the past five years -in 1995 it rose an average of 1.48% on inflation an estimated 3.5%.this year's inflation forecast is also 3.5%. Unesa said on January 5that between 1959 and 1995 the average price of electricity had fallenby 39% in comparison with the consumer price index rise over the same35 year period.Days earlier, European commissioner for competition Karel van Miert hadtold the European Parliament's Foreign Economic Relations Commissionthat Spain's electricity tariffs were the highest in the EU.The industry ministry has also bowed to consumer groups' pressure andagreed to a new electricity bill which for the first time will containinformation on the client's consumption over the past 12 months, theaverage cost per day in that period, as well as the percentage paidfrom the bill for domestic coal subsidies, and to subsidise theutilities' nuclear moratorium debt.The latter two, being fixed rates, penalise higher consumption. The1996 percentages, based on the estimated 1995 tariff turnover of Pta2trillion and a forecast 1996 growth of 3.65% are the same as in 1995 -3.54% or Pta72.6bn in nuclear moratorium debt, and 4.86% or Pta99.8bnin coal subsidies.Unesa said the new invoice model is designed to separate the directproduction costs - supply, generation and maintenance - from theexternal and political costs such as the nuclear debt and subsidies.Announcing the MLE changes, industry minister Juan Manuel Eguiagaraysaid the electricity sector would not have to make investments in newgeneration until at least 2000. But he said some fuel oil-fired powerstations would be converted to gas. "By February we shall authorise theconversion to gas of fuel-oil stations with a capacity of 1,400 MW."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION IN SPAINIndustry association Unesa's provisional figures show that electricityconsumption increased by 3.8% in 1995. High-tension industrialconsumption grew by almost 6%, consumption in services and commerce wasup by 2%, while domestic demand fell by 1.5%.Total consumption last year was 149,834 GWh, while generation was up2.6% at 168,686 GWh. The fourth year of the century's worst droughtmeant that hydroelectric generation fell by 16.8% at 23,968 GWh,although it shot up in the last two weeks of the year as Spainexperienced almost constant rain from November. Unesa estimates thatthe drought resulted in hydro generation at 30% lower than in normalconditions, costing the utilities more than Pta50bn ($413.2m) in lostproduction.Thermal generation rose by 11.1% over 1994 to reach 89,276 GWh, whichUnesa said was an all-time high, while nuclear generation was up by0.2% at 55,442 GWh. Spain increased its imports from France by 250%,and total imports stood at 7,623 GWh, while exports were 3,145 GWh.Together, imports and exports rose by 143.6%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BASQUE PLANS TO ACHIEVE ENERGY SELF-SUFFICIENCYThe Basque regional government in northern Spain has warned that it is"very seriously" studying plans to develop an independent gas-firedelectricity system if the industry ministry in Madrid continues toblock its plan to achieve energy self-sufficiency.In an interview with the financial daily Expansion, Basque industryminister Javier Retegi reminded Madrid that the existence ofindependent operators outside the integrated electricity system isenshrined in the government's own year-old Electricity Sector Law(Losen), even though certain regulatory norms have not been fullydeveloped.Retegi's comments are bound to increase tension between the Basquecapital Vitoria and Madrid, which opposes much of the Basque projectsuch as the conversion of the unfinished Lemoniz nuclear power stationinto a combined cycle plant on the grounds that Spain does notcurrently need new energy sources.Euskadi (Basque Country) retorts that it wants self-sufficiency becauseit feels that it is at the end of the 'energy line' in the far north,and it wants to diversify its sources of primary energy, mainly gas. Itis no secret that the Basque nationalists who control the regionalgovernment want energy autonomy as well as political autonomy.Ironically, the development of independent operations outside theintegrated system is very much in line with the government's plans tointroduce greater liberalisation and competition in the sector. Theproblem is that the Basque energy plan is in contrast with the industryministry's national plans.Under the Basque government's Estrategia Energetica de Euskadi, or Plan3E, the Basque Country would generate 42% of its own electricity by2000. At the moment, it 'imports' 85% of this energy from outside theregion. Retegi claims that 10% of electricity is lost in transport."Our goal of electricity self-sufficiency is quite reasonable", hesays. "We are already negotiating with various foreign companies whospecialise in gas, electricity and independent systems, such as Enronand Mitsubishi."Basque energy independence would be based on four gas-fired electricitygeneration stations, only one of which is currently on-line. This isthe 360 MW Santurtzi fuel-oil plant which would be converted tocombined cycle operation.The uncompleted Lemoniz nuclear plant would be converted into a 300 MWcombined cycle plant. Construction was halted in 1982 after ETAseparatist gunmen killed two engineers at the plant, two years beforeSpain's nuclear construction moratorium came into effect.A further two gas-fired generators are to be built - Zabalgarbi, two 90MW units, and Zergarbi, with a single 90 MW unit.Retegi said natural gas consumption would rise from the current 15% to29% of total primary energy use by 2000, which would mean building aregasification plant in Bilbao port and connection to the French gasnetwork. "the interconnection between gas and electricity obliges us todevelop a global energy scenario", he says."If we had a good understanding with central Administration to achievegreater self-sufficiency, to use Lemoniz and to guarantee [alternative]gas supplies, everything would be in order and it would not benecessary to seek alternatives to the integrated system", concludedRetegi.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENHER COMPLETES ACQUISITION OF HIDRUNAEnher, the Catalan affiliate of Endesa, has completed the 100%acquisition of Hidruna with the purchase of 30% from Iberdrola, 15months ahead of schedule. The Grupo Enher, which with Hidruna includesTermicos del Besos, is now complete and in 1995 had a combined turnoverin excess of Pta200bn ($1.7bn).Iberdrola agreed to sell Hidruna to Endesa through Enher in a 1993asset-swap, but the remaining 30% was to have been acquired in twostages by March 1997. The Pta21.7bn deal was brought forward because ofthe healthy situation of both Enher and Hidruna.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996THIRD WIND FARM AT TARIFAA third wind farm has been commissioned at Spain's wind power capitalof Tarifa in the far south. The Pta1bn ($8.3m) farm was built by PlantaEolica Europea (Peesa), a group led by Danish company Nordtank (44%),Danish engineering firm Elsam Project (44%), and Spain's Sevillana deElectricidad (12%). The farm's 12 x 500 kW air turbines have a combinedinstalled capacity of 6 MW.Sevillana is active in all three wind farms, which have a combinedcapacity of 66 MW. It holds 23% of Sociedad Eolica de Andalucia, and 9%of kW Tarifa.Spain could be the world's second wind power producer by 2000,according to energy secretary general Alberta Lafuente who waspresenting the four-year Pta16bn energy research Plan Estela, whichwill investigate all areas of energy generation.The industry ministry announced that the capacity of all renewableenergies had increased by 80% in the past five years in Spain andstands at 407 MW. Including hydro generation, renewable energiesaccounted for 5% of the national total. Oil accounts for 54%, coal for19%, nuclear power 15%, and gas 7%. Although wind power has increasedtenfold since 1990, it still accounts for only 0.2% of renewable energyand 0.01% of all energy generated.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SPAIN'S NEW CONNECTION WITH PORTUGALSpain's high tension grid Red Electrica de Espana (REE) has switched ona new connection with Portugal to increase the exchange capacitybetween the neighbouring countries to 2,500 MW. REE invested more thanPta4.5bn ($37.2m) in the northwest region of Galicia above Portugal toincrease the capacity of the Trives substation and build two new linesas well as the new Cartelle substation.The grid is to invest another Pta4bn to build the Meson-Cartelle linebefore the summer.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SPAIN'S NUCLEAR MORATORIUM DEBTThe government has finally approved a Royal Decree that will solve theproblem of the Pta729bn ($6.02bn) nuclear moratorium debt. The debt hasbeen borne by three utilities since construction was frozen in 1984 onfive nuclear power stations in Spain, one year after the ElectricitySector Law (Losen) incorporated the means to clear the debt.Losen enshrined the right of Iberdrola (Pta540bn), Sevillana deElectricidad (Pta178bn) and Union Fenosa (Pta11bn) to receivecompensation for their investments in the plants either through a 3.54%share of the tariff, with the debt paid off within 25 years, or theright to pass on to investors the chance to gain the compensation inthe form of securities.The decree ensures that the State gives a triple guarantee to theutilities or, in their place, the investors. First, a minimum annualcompensation is guaranteed via the utilities' turnover; second, thestate will make up any difference remaining after 25 years; and third,the state guarantees to cover the interests incurred by the debts.* Union Fenosa has reduced its financial debt by Pta30.7bn toPta507.4bn. Some 19.3% of this is in foreign reserves, lower than theaverage for the sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENDESA AND SEVILLANA PULLING OUT OF CERSAPublic utility Endesa and its associate Sevillana de Electricidad havemade a joint announcement with Gas Natural that they are pulling out ofSpain's third largest telephone paging company, Compania Europea deRadiobusqueda (Cersa), in which each holds a 9% stake.Endesa and Sevillana have also broken ranks with Spain's largestprivate utility Iberdrola by leaving the telecommunications holdingcompany Secomtel that they formed in the late 1980s. Iberdrola, whichholds 16% of Cersa signalled its intention to stay in thetelecommunications sector by announcing plans to purchase 40-50% of theInternet connection company Servicom.The three utilities have operated in telephone paging since 1992through the consortium Servicio de Radiotelefonia Movil (SRM), whichholds 96% of Cersa. Secomtel's shares will be divided between SRM andanother mobile telephone company, Teletrunk.The main reasons for the break-up are the different strategies beingundertaken by Endesa - which has joined forces with Banco Santander andBanco Central Hispano - and Iberdrola, which appears to be movingtoward an alliance with semi-public telecommunications giantTelefonica.Endesa and Sevillana are also moving out of SRM/Cersa for economicreasons. The late arrival of the paging service in Spain meant thatthree large operators with important investors emerged in 1992 just asthe more successful mobile telephone sector was taking off.This meant that Cersa, with 25,000 clients, lost Pta420m ($3.5m) lastyear. A leading contender to purchase the 27% of SRM shares on offer isSistelcom-Telemensaje, a consortium which includes two other utilities,Union Fenosa and Fecsa.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENDESA TO BUILD SPAIN'S BIGGEST DESALINATION PLANTPublic utility Endesa is heading a consortium that is to build Spain'sbiggest desalination plant on the southern Costa del Sol at Marbella.The Pta7bn plant will be able to desalinate 60,000 cm of seawater a dayand it is scheduled to begin operating this summer.The consortium consists of Endesa with 25%, its affiliate Sevillana deElectricidad (25%), Aguas de Barcelona (10%), and construction companyLain (40%). The project is part of Endesa's diversification plans, andwill not serve for cogeneration purposes.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996IBERDROLA TO PURCHASE STAKE IN EUSKALTELIberdrola is to purchase a 10% stake in the Basque telecommunicationsand cable television company Euskaltel before the end of the year.Euskaltel is currently owned 40% by the Basque regional government,with the rest in the hands of the three Basque savings banks.Iberdrola, based in the Basque city of Bilbao, is Spain's second-biggest utility.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996AUTOPRODUCTION IN SWITZERLANDAutoproducers in Switzerland will continue to benefit from federaltariff recommendations until end-1998. These have been in force sincemid-1993, have now been extended until the end of 1998. As Switzerlandhas few industrial autoproducers, the scheme mainly benefits smallhydro producers and gas-fired CHP plant in buildings.According to an Evaluation Report just published, 80% of small hydroplant (less than 300 kW) surveyed have seen the prices paid for theirenergy rise and profitability improve since the recommendations tookeffect. The federal recommendations are applied "almost entirely" byelectricity companies in eight cantons, but are followed only partly innine cantons, and entirely ignored in the principal hydro-producingcantons of Graubunden, Ticino and Valais.Here the difference between the production cost of about Sfr0.04/kWh($0.035/kWh) and the Sfr0.16/kWh recommended for autoproducers is justtoo great. The authors of the report claim that a promotion ofdecentralised energy production is a national objective, which does notjustify forcing the three "hydro cantons" to accept conditions whichwould result in unfair local tariff increases.The five remaining cantons (Geneva, Neuchatel, St Gallen, Schwyz andAargau) provided no information to the evaluators.The report noted that participating cantons have asked for the creationof a national fund to finance the extra cost of the scheme todistribution companies. The report recommended increasing tariffs paidto CHP operators by 20-50% (solar producers have long been campaigningfor such a rate increase). It noted that in cases where more than 30%of the energy produced by a CHP unit was consumed on the premises, thereward for supplying excess energy to the grid was not sufficient tomake CHP attractive to investors. This meant that while the trend tomultiplication of CHP in buildings and heating grids continued, itreceived no extra boost from the tariff recommendations.The report also pointed to disputes over whether or not therecommendations should apply to an independent autoproducer's totaloutput or just amounts in excess of own needs. Finally, it recommendedrenaming the recommendations as federal "directives" to make them seemmore consequential.Responding to the report, Martin Renggli, who heads the Federal EnergyOffice (FEO) policy service, told PiE that:Efforts will continue to be made to use the tariffs to promote smallhydro plant, even though technically many are not "autoproducers". Hesaid there is unlikely to be any question of increasing the tariffspaid to CHP operators producing from fossil fuel (gas), in view ofparliament's insistence that such measures target renewables, and notfossil fuels.He noted that the legislation clearly intends that the special tariffapplies only to excess production. Thus, to avoid unfair profiteering,independent producers must use the energy themselves as far astechnically possible. A leaflet is currently being prepared to makethis absolutely clear.Despite another of the report's recommendations, he said there will beno change in the "5% rule" which requires the REC to pay whenautoproducer input exceeds 5% of a local distributor's total energysupply.On the financial points, he noted the Sfr0.16 average tariff paid toautoproducers who use renewable energy sources is the equivalent of thelong-term marginal production cost. Meanwhile, as the idea of a tarifffund was broadly opposed during an earlier consultation period for thenew Energy Law, it is unlikely to be considered now.Switzerland is virtually the only country to apply such a tariff andthe biggest electric companies have not really embraced therecommendation. According to the report, the amount they "reinject"from autoproducers is a "minute" 0.2-1.3% of total energy turnover, orjust 0.5-0.7% of costs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SWISS REGIONAL ELECTRIC COMPANIES TO FREEZE TARIFFSFive major regional electric companies have agreed to freeze tariffsfor the next three years. The five companies are BKW, NOK, Atel, CKWand EOS. Announcing the agreement, the ombudsman's office in Berne saidit was made possible by the RECs' "good, and in some cases very good,1994 results".Joseph Deiss, one of the members of the ombudsman's team, told PiE thatthe announcement was not really the result of a general "agreement" butrather of separate negotiations with each REC. It was the ombudsman whohad taken the initiative, on the assumption that the excellent 1994-95results announced by these companies, and the very good hydroconditions, should benefit the consumer.Deiss pointed out that as there are over 1,200 electricity companies inSwitzerland, the office had chosen to deal only with the big players onthe assumption that the effect will trickle down. "Our objective is toreverse the trend of the many recent tariff increase, in excess of therate of inflation and at a time when there is an abundance of energy onthe market. We are pleased with our success."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996RESULTS FROM CKW GROUPSwitzerland's CKW Group had total energy turnover of Sfr480m ($417m),an increase of Sfr33.6m improving the Group net profit by Sfr6.3m toSfr25m. This was obtained with the help of a 5% tariff increase inOctober of 1994, a demand increase in the CKW distribution grid of5.2%, and to a slight improvement in prices for energy sold on theinternational spot market.Carl Mugglin, chairman of the board of directors, told a January pressconference that CKW would not increase tariffs in 1996, thus giving"voluntary support to the price ombudsman's efforts to stabilisetariffs".Mugglin repeated warnings about the danger of further increases in theproduction cost of Swiss electricity, and particularlyhydroelectricity, due to various new taxes. CKW and other Swisselectric companies have decided to abandon any major new hydro projectsin the near future, such as the Mauvoisin dam.CKW's profit-and-loss account for 1994/95 amounted to Sfr551.4m.Operating expenditure was Sfr428.1m. Total investments, in plant andfor drawing rights, were Sfr81.7m. The dividend will be unchanged at 8%(Sfr40 per Sfr500 share).Production increased 7.3% and energy from increased use of drawingrights by 45%. The Leibstadt and Gosgen nuclear reactors supplied 7.6%more power, due to greater efficiency. CKW's own nuclear productionamounted to 874 GWh, with another 466 GWh from drawing rights.Nuclear generation accounted for two thirds of the energy supplied toCKW's grid. The total cost of production increased almost Sfr23m toSfr270m. Total demand in the CKW Group distribution grids to 2,400 GWh,up 4.8%. Total CKW Group energy turnover was 4,300 GWh, up 7.1%.Demand in the CKW company's distribution grid increased 5.2%, thanksmainly to a 13.7% increase in demand by three major accounts, and a4.3% increase in demand by "general industry", indicating a strongrecovery in the Lucerne region's economy. The household/trade/agriculture/services sector showed a demand increase of just 1.1%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996TURKEY NEEDS 183 POWER STATIONS TO MEET PROJECTED DEMANDTurkey will have to build a total of 183 power stations over the next15 years costing around $16bn to meet projected soaring demand,according to a report compiled by the country's Energy & NaturalResources Ministry. The report says generating capacity must increaseat around 8% over the period to 43,590 MW from 15,235 MW at end-1995 toserve a rise in demand to 271,450 GWh from 94,605 GWh at present.In particular, the report says that a power bottleneck could emerge in1997, unless existing projects are completed on schedule, no existingpower plants are closed down for environmental reasons, and there is noshortage in gas supply or upgraded lignite.To prevent shortages, construction work should also start on plannedbuild-operate-transfer (BOT) schemes as soon as possible, the reportadds. And state-owned Turkish Electricity Generation & TransmissionCorp (TEAS) should install a sufficient amount of shunt capacitors inall power distribution systems operating at ratings of 34.5 kV orbelow.The demand forecast is based on rapid population growth, rising livingstandards and industrial expansion. Per capital consumption isprojected to rise to 3,267 kWh in 2010 from 1,978 kWh, for example.The power stations required break down into 106 hydro-electricstations, 16 thermal plants and two nuclear stations. Further thermalstations will also be required: 33 lignite or hard coal fired stations,14 natural-gas fuelled plants and 12 stations fuelled by imported steamcoal.The present nominal capacity is 20,857 MW, but due to ageing, effectivecapacity is only 73% of this figure. The report therefore also saysrehabilitation and modernisation of existing plants will also beessential.Because of the high investment costs, foreign financing and capitalinvestment will be essential, according to the report. The governmentwill look to the private sector franchise, BOT method as one answer, aswell as the privatisation of existing units requiring updating andexpansion, the report adds.Contracts so far signed on a BOT basis involve projects with a totalcapacity of around 3,710 MW, including two gas-fired plants of around500 MW each at Eregli on the Sea of Marmara, and a 180 MW plant atEsenyurt in an Istanbul suburb. Also included is the 672 MW Birecik damscheme on the Euphrates river in the southeast, says the report.Bids were also invited by the ministry for the BOT implementation ofthe following plants: Beysehir-Konya (2 x 170 MW); Saray-Tekirdag (2 x150 MW), Afsin Elbistan (4 x 340 MW), Tufanbeyli (2 x 150 MW, or 1 x300 MW).Generally, the report foresees:* commissioning of the first natural gas-fired plant with a rating of680 MW in 1996;* start-up of the fifth and sixth units at the Afsin-Elbistan ligniteplant, each with a rating of 340 MW;* start-up of the first hydro-electric plant in 2000;* commissioning of the first nuclear plant with a rating of 1,000 MW in2005;* start-up of the first imported coal fired station with a rating of 2x 500 MW as well in 2005.* In a separate development, the ministry reckons there is a potentialin Turkey for 30% energy savings annually amounting to 13.2m toeequivalent or $2.6bn, based on 1994 production and consumption figures.Had electricity been generated and consumed in the most productive way,savings would have amounted in the construction sectors and industrygenerally to 5.3m toe, or around $1.2bn each; and in the transportationsector, 2.8m toe, or $262m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996MISSION ENERGY ACQUIRES FIRST HYDROMission Energy of the US has joined Eastern Group at the head of theindependent generator league after its #652.5m ($1.01bn) acquisition onDecember 21 of First Hydro, the National Grid's former pumped storagebusiness.First Hydro's two plants in North Wales have a combined capacity of2,088 MW, adding to Mission's 80% holding in the 220 MW Roosecote CCGTin the northwest and a 33% interest in Derwent Cogeneration Limited, a214 MW plant in Derby. The final price was considerably in excess ofthe #450m value put on the business in NGC's flotation prospectus.The two stations give Mission a key role in ensuring the security ofsupply in England and Wales, particularly in winter when Dinorwic andFfestiniog frequently set the pool price. Mission has indicated thesize of the bid - #325/kW - was made possible by its favourable taxposition; it will also have taken into account increasing pricedifferentials in recent price spikes (PiE 214/28). Its bid topped thoseof two others, Scottish Hydro-Electric and Dominion Energy of the US.Mission and Eastern Group, along with Enron and Applied Power Systems,are bidding for National Power's (NP's) 4 GW of capacity (PiE 212/24).James Iaco, Mission's senior vice-president, said the First Hydro dealmade the company keener to win the auction for the three NP coal-firedstations.The 12 regional electricity companies who owned First Hydro after ithad demerged from the Grid stated on December 28 that they would retainthe proceeds from the sale. They will, however, have to pay capitalgains tax on their profits.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996LITTLECHILD PUBLISHES MODIFICATIONS TO LICENCESRegulator Stephen Littlechild has published his proposed modificationsto the licences of South Western Electricity (SWEB) and Eastern Groupfollowing their respective takeovers by Southern Electric Internationaland Hanson.The modifications, already agreed by Southern and Hanson, deal withfinancial ring-fencing of the electricity businesses, restrictions onactivities, availability of resources, disposal of assets and provisionof information to the regulator. The modifications will be applied toother merged companies in due course.Littlechild said: "the merged companies will continue to have to meettheir existing obligations under the Electricity Act and licences.These additional licence modifications will allow me to continue toregulate effectively and to ensure that customers continue to be fullyprotected."Meanwhile, Ian Lang, President of the Board of Trade, in early Januarycleared the proposed #1.6bn southeastern distributor Seeboard by Dallasutility Central & South West (CSW; PiE 212/25). The bid will not now bereferred to the Monopolies & Mergers Commission, as were the bids bylocal generators National Power for Southern Electric and PowerGen forMidlands (PiE 213/9).CSW's offer went unconditional the day after the clearance. Unusually,all executive directors of Seeboard will retain their positions, whilechairman Keith Stuart and six non-executive directors resigned. JimEllis will combine the role of chairman with his current position ofchief executive.The clearance of Welsh Water's #880m agreed bid for South WalesElectricity (SWALEC; PiE 214/28), meanwhile, is not proving quite assmooth. The Office of Fair Trading has delayed its ruling on the bid -the second by a privatised UK water firm for a privatised UKdistributor - until January 25.The bid prospects clouded further in early January as Welsh Waterrejected a proposal by the water regulator Ian Byatt that it maintain aseparate stock market listing for the companies following any takeover.This proposal was believed to be the main condition in a clearance ofthe deal by both water and electricity regulators, both of whom areconcerned to retain sufficient comparators to regulate their respectiveindustries.However, Welsh Water, noting that North West Water (NWW) was notrequired to maintain separate listing prior to clearance of its bid forNorweb (PiE 211/25), claimed a separate listing would make efficientmanagement of the new group difficult. The company is continuingdiscussions and says it will seek alternative ways to meet Byatt'sobjectives.* The merged NWW and Norweb were merged into a new holding company,United Utilities, on January 1. The combined group will have a turnoverof over #2.5bn and is capitalised at over #3bn. The companies willcontinue to trade under their former names.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NATIONAL POWER TO CUT 400 JOBSNational Power (NP) has announced it is to cut 400 jobs in a cost-cutting exercise that is expected to save #100m ($155.3m) over twoyears from its #1.4bn annual costs. The redundancies will come fromsupport divisions  in its Swindon headquarters, and equate to about athird of its headquarters staff and almost 10% of its total 4,900.Most of the cost savings, however, are expected to come from reviews ofbusiness processes, with some #35m as a result of propertyrationalisation.NP said the review was sparked by the increasing competition in theelectricity market, and was the result partly of its enforced sale of4,000 MW of coal plant, which is expected to be agreed by March (PiE209/2).NP has already cut its workforce by over two-thirds from the 16,000staff it had at privatisation in 1991.The move follows the company's mid-December buy back of a further 57mshares, or 4.4% of its issued capital. The buyback, at a cost of #243m,would increase gearing by 9 percentage points, said the company, butwould boost earnings per share by 2-3% in a full year.* The company's finances may also be assisted by a surprising #300mloan awarded in late December by the European Investment Bank for theinstallation of flue gas desulphurisation equipment at its 3,750 MWDrax coal-fired plant in Yorkshire.NP, which applied for the loan several years ago, is due to completethe so far self-financed #750m work on Drax this year.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-4IA059-000325-B007-292http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey24.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235028 text/html 110087HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:48:21 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:00 GMTContent-length: 109899Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey24.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES VENEZUELAN FLOTATIONS EXPECTED BY SUMMER (755 words) CHILE'S COLBUN: PREPARING FOR PRIVATE LIFE (1604 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW COMMERCIALISING POWER TARIFFS (1230 words) CHILE CONTINUES ARGENTINE WOOING (956 words) HAITI REFORMS AWAIT NEW LEADER (367 words) $4BN BID FOR YACYRETA? (461 words) PEREZ BUILDS BA THERMAL PLANT (281 words) A LITTLE LIGHT TROUBLE (508 words) NEWS MACHADINHO DAM GO-AHEAD (77 words) ENERGETICA SALE SET FOR APRIL (257 words) CEEE, CERJ PRIVATISATION PROGRESS (629 words) CPFL UPS SALES, CUTS COSTS (348 words) ENERGY DEMAND RISES 7.6% (170 words) HYDRO OUTPUT BREAKS RECORDS (185 words) NEW CHAIRMAN FOR BOLPOW (253 words) TOCOPILLA FLOATED (365 words) CONSUMPTION SOARS 9.2%, ANOTHER 8.8% SEEN IN `96 (291 words) LUKSIC, US GROUPS TIE UP ATACAMA PIPE SCHEME (325 words) ENDESA GETS RALCO DAM LICENCE (102 words) CHILGENER PLANS $500M INVESTMENTS FOR `96 (221 words) ENERSIS BOOSTS CAPITAL THROUGH MAJOR SHARE OFFER (206 words) POWER CRISIS DEEPENS (274 words) PERU OUTLINES EXPANSION PLANS (243 words) MANTARO HYDRO HITS TROUBLE (175 words) OUTPUT UP 3.3% IN 10 MONTHS (195 words) AGUAYTIA DEAL FORMALISED (179 words) GUYANA POWER SECTOR REHAB PLANS HIT SNAGS (504 words) LOCAL TIE-UP STRENGTHENS BIDDERS CHANCES (698 words) MEXICO PUTS ITS CLOCKS FORWARD (439 words) NEW ENERGY MINISTER APPOINTED (260 words) CFE CONFIRMS EXPANSION PLANS (342 words) ARGENTINA CALLS FOR TENDERS FOR OIL EXPLORATION (186 words) CHANGO NORTE X-1 EXPLORATION WELL (130 words) PACIFIC EXAMINING PURCHASE OF STAKE IN ARGENTINE GAS COMPANIES (55 words) BOLIVIA RECEIVES BIDS IN PARTIAL PRIVATISATION OF YPFB (142 words) CALOR GROUP EXPANDING IN LATIN AMERICA (181 words) OFFSHORE RIG CHARTER ORDER FROM PETROBRAS (88 words) YPF OPENS FIRST SERVICE STATION IN CHILE (55 words) PETROBRAS LAUNCHES PRODUCTS IN CHILE (39 words) ENAP ANNOUNCES PROFITS IN 1995 (60 words) PIPELINE MAY NOT GO AHEAD (198 words) COLOMBIAN CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION (57 words) ECOPETROL PLANS TO INVEST $4.7BN (62 words) BP'S COLOMBIAN OIL AND GAS RESERVES (103 words) ECOPETROL TO ATTEMPT TO SELL ITS STAKE IN PROMIGAS (100 words) CUBA HOPES TO PRODUCE MORE CRUDE THIS YEAR (94 words) GOVERNMENT NAMES PRESIDENT OF PETROECUADOR (127 words) MEXICAN ENERGY MINISTER TO PRESS AHEAD WITH MODERNISATION (96 words) PROPOSAL TO DEVELOP GAS FIELD IN NORTHERN MEXICO (131 words) PETROPERU PLANS TO CUT WORKFORCE (82 words) PERU'S OIL PRODUCTION (120 words) PDVSA PLANS TO INCREASE CRUDE RESERVES (133 words) PDVSA EXPECTS OIL OUTPUT BOOST (108 words) VENEZUELA'S AMUAY REFINERY RECORD (99 words) STATOIL CONSIDERING JOINING MARAVEN TO UPGRADE CRUDE (75 words) CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VENEZUELAN FLOTATIONS EXPECTED BY SUMMERThe Venezuelan government has set out target dates for theprivatisation of its electricity sector, which it plans to start thissummer and extend through 1997.Potential investors looking for a widely-spread flotation with thepotential for a large shareholding by the investing public will bedisappointed because the government's intention, at least at thisstage, is to place the bulk of power generation in the hands of asingle private sector investor or joint venture. Indications are that aminority portion of shares will be more widely sold.The initial piece of the sector to be placed on the market will be theMargarita Island utility, which comprises a 146 MW power plant and a100 MW submarine cable, as well as transmission and distributionnetworks.The regional utility has 90,000 subscribers, a high, 92% billcollection ratio, and forecasts a demand rise of 8%-10% per year. Theutility, serving a resort area, is 15 miles off the coast.The privatisation programme, disclosed by officials in Caracas, wasfurther explained in statements by Luis Xavier Grisanti, Director ofthe Fondo de Inversiones de Venezuela (FIV), the state holding companythat is overseeing the unbundling process. FIV has $10bn of assets,half of which are in the power sector (Enelven-Enelco and Enelbar).According to officials, the state plans to sell Enelbar (EnergiaElectrica de Barquisimeto), Enelven (Energia Electrica de Venezuela)and Enelco (Energia Electrica de la Costa Oriental), and to follow this- at an as-yet undisclosed date - by the sale of the Planto Centrothermal power generator. FIV owns 99% of the shares in these threecompanies. Planto Central is more problematical, being the country'slargest power generator with 2,000 MW of capacity. Its preparation forsale will take longer, said Grisanti.One generation operation definitely not set for privatisation is themassive Guri hydroelectric complex which is responsible for 10,000 MWof electricity, more than half of all the country's capacity. Thegovernment has said it will never privatise the hydropower complex;most analysts concur that it would probably be impossible to do so.According to Grisanti, the flotations are part of a large privatisationprogramme involving tax reforms, establishment of a market-relatedforeign exchange rate for the bolivar, a lifting or exchange controls,price hikes for gasoline/petrol, the opening of the oil sector toforeign investment (already under way), and an agreement with the WorldBank to supervise the privatisation of the power sector (PLA 5/19, Nov1995).In preparation for the flotation, the FIV has outlined a framework, oraction plan, which calls for the establishment of a rational tariffschedule for 1996/97; a rationalisation of energy prices, such as oil,gas and hydropower, improvement of utility management, and a market-oriented regulatory framework for the sector. This last framework waspresented to the Electric Energy Regulatory Commission (CREE) lastautumn and to the utilities in December. The government says thefinalised framework should be ready by next month.The regulatory framework calls for the following:* Legal separation of generation, transmission and distribution.* A single company to operate the national grid; free access totransmission grid; and establishment of a single power pool.* Freedom of entry to build generation capacity.* Distribution companies and large industrial/commercial clients freeto sign direct P & S contracts.* A new pricing mechanism for the wholesale market; and establishmentof short and long-term wholesale markets.The action plan also calls for large end users to be able to buy freelyfrom generators and for distributors to buy wholesale at negotiatedtariffs.Enelven generates, transmits and distributes thermal power. It has alabour force of 1,702 and its 1,336 MW of capacity generates 3.6 TWh.Enelco has a payroll of 480, installed capacity of 40 MW and an outputof 172.953 GWh.Enelbar's labour force is 896, and its prime operation is to serve Larastate. Its 150 MW of installed capacity, of which 120 MW is in use,provides a gross generation of 1.6 TWh.According to Grisanti, the plan is for a minimum sale of 79.9% ofshares in each of Enelven-Enelco  to a single investor group,supplemented by an employee stock plan of up to 20%.A minimum of 79.9% of Enelbar's shares also will be put on the market,but these will be through an international tender, supplemented by anemployee stock ownership plan of up to 20%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHILE'S COLBUN:  PREPARING FOR PRIVATE LIFEColbun-Machicura, Chile's state-controlled hydroelectric generator, islooking for a partner, or even partners, to provide finance andexpertise for a $400m development plan which will double its output inthe next three years.If the search for a compatible associate is successful, Colbun willeventually be a sizeable player in the industry, which is currentlydominated by two aggressive private sector companies, Endesa andChilgener.Colbun is not selling off assets, as Jose Luis Mardones, its generalmanager, explained in an interview with Power in Latin America.Instead, the government is using the state company as a way to bringnew competitors into the field, specifically into the centralelectricity grid (SIC).Its model is the northern electricity network (SING), where there arethree private generators - Edelnor (controlled by Southern Company ofthe US), Norgener (Chilgener) and Endesa. A controlling share in thefourth, Tocopilla, owned by Codelco, the state copper corporation, wasawarded this month to a consortium of Powerfin, Iberdrola and Enagas(see News). In this network prices have fallen steadily over recentyears.The Colbun management began to develop its plan in the early days ofthe Frei government in 1994, and gained approval for it the same year.It is targeting three main areas, hydro power, gas generation andtransmission.HydroIn the hydroelectric sector, Colbun plans to increase capacity from 500MW to around 730 MW by mid-1998. A first modest increase comes intocommission in May this year, with its 35 MW San Ignacio plant, downriver from the Colbun and Machicura plants. This, its third generatingcentre, has cost $30m and was financed mainly with an equity issuesubscribed by existing private shareholders, bringing their share ofthe company up from 7% to 15%.Its fourth centre is the new 108 MW Rucue project, on a new river,Laja, where it bought water rights from rival Endesa in 1994. Mardonessays preliminary studies are almost finished and a tender is expectedto go out before the end of January. The plant is scheduled to comeinto operation in mid-1998 and represents an estimated investment of$140m.Gas plantsColbun plans a move into gas-fired generation by 1998, with a plant atLimache, in the Fifth Region, one of the most densely populated areaafter Santiago. This is a turnkey project (PLA 4/24, Oct 1995), forwhich General Electric, Mitsubishi and Siemens are reported to havebeen short-listed. The plant will have a capacity of 340 MW-390 MW,depending on the bid chosen. Colbun had originally budgeted $250m forthis project but now expects to be able to cut the cost by as much ashalf.Mardones said an important reason for locating the plant outside theSantiago region was that it would not add to pollution in the capital,which should be declared an ozone-saturated area in March this year. Inaddition, being close to sea level gives greater efficiency, comparedto a Santiago site at 1,500ft. Also, the distance is not so significantas to make transmission costs a major factor in supplying power to themetropolitan region.One other factor was also important. According to  Mardones thegovernment specifically wanted to see natural gas from Argentina takento the Fifth Region. Without Colbun's Limache plant, existing andprojected industrial and domestic consumption would not have justifiedthe $50m extension of the GasAndes pipeline from its route to Santiago.The Fifth Region is industrially depressed, and the government hopesthe availability of natural gas will give it a comparative advantagewhich will enable it to attract new industrial development. (Promotinggovernment decentralisation policy is not new to Colbun - it openedoffices in the southern provincial town of Talca on governmentinstructions.)TransmissionThe third plank of Colbun's strategy is a move into transmission, in adirect challenge to Endesa, whose Transelec subsidiary has a monopolyto carry power from the hydroelectric generating centres of the southto the Santiago area.The decision to build its own transmission line goes back to 1994 whenTranselec announced a hefty rise in its rates, and Colbun startedlooking at the option of going independent. Its management decided thatthe strategic advantage of having its own lines, and being able totransmit up to 600 MW at peak time would be a valuable asset, as wellas making it independent of its competitor.Endesa not surprisingly, has challenged Colbun's project (PLA 6/16, Dec1995)  and has first option on the most convenient transmission route.But negotiations are continuing, Mardones says, and Colbun is willingto share the route and connect with Transelec to avoid duplication. Inthat case, Colbun would be willing to upgrade its line to 500 kV andbring forward its construction schedule to April 1997 to accommodateEndesa's 447 MW Pangue plant, due on-line then.But Mardones said a sine qua non was a satisfactory commercialagreement giving his company freedom to use or sell the excess capacitywhich will become available once a transformation bottleneck isremoved. This condition would only be fulfilled, according to Mardones,if Transelec were to be made independent of Endesa.In the meantime, Colbun intends to proceed with its plans. On January3, it announced that it had awarded a contract to Asea Brown Boveri tobuild the double-circuit 220 kV line, and given instructions to beginwork immediately. The value of the contract was not revealed, butMardones had previously estimated the cost as in the region of $50m.AdviceKleinwort Benson, the UK merchant bank, has been advising Colbun onfinancing for its development plan, and the government is consideringits report. Kleinworts - which also advised on the Tocopilla sale -recommended that Colbun's best option was to take one or more strategicpartners. In the case of multiple partners, Colbun would be dividedinto three companies, covering hydroelectric and gas-fired generationand transmission.Among those mentioned as potential partners for Colbun are SouthernCompany (operating in Chile as Southern Electric), CMS Energy, Entergyand Luksic, a Chilean financial-industrial conglomerate (See News).The latter recently sold a 6% stake in Enersis (PLA 6/16, Dec 1995),the holding company which controls Endesa and the Chilectradistribution company, in a move which was widely interpreted as adeclaration of interest in Colbun, though it is also said to havewanted the cash. It is expected that, as in the case of the Tocopillasell-off, current players in the SIC will not be allowed to bid.Mardones indicates considerable interest in a Colbun partnership,claiming the company has already received many enquiries from potentialpartners. The timing is still not clear, however, and Colbun hasgovernment authorisation to borrow to bridge any financing gap that mayoccur.Colbun is looking for a partner which will not only bring finance,Mardones insists, but which shares a philosophy and a set of strategicgoals for the future of electricity generation in Chile. Colbun wantsto promote competition in the sector, reduce prices, to protect theenvironment and its workers.In the meantime, Colbun has instituted a restructuring designed toincrease the company's asset values and make it attractive tooutsiders. Management changes have been implemented, and programmes tocut costs, increase efficiency and strengthen the company's salesportfolio have been put in place.Mardones was brought in at the beginning of 1995 from Enami, the statecopper refining and marketing company. In July a new finance andadministration manager with a private banking background was recruited,and in September, a new development division was set up. This divisionhas responsibility for the expansion plan.Since July, Knox D'Arcy, a UK management consultant, has been workingwith Colbun on a cost-cutting programme. This, recently completed, isexpected to bring savings of $1m a year, Mardones says, mostly as aresult of cutting out overtime payments. One of the objects of theexercise was to increase productivity without staff reductions.Employees have been redeployed to new projects.A major change has already taken place in sales policy. Until 1990,Colbun was allowed to sell energy only to the SIC, essentiallysupplying other generators. Changes in the law, introduced in 1990,opened the way for the state company to sell direct to its customersand it has since built up a portfolio of clients which it considers oneof its major assets.As of end-1994 it was supplying six distribution companies, includingChilectra and Chilquinta, and a selection of industrial users,including El Teniente, Codelco's major underground mine.Colbun's direct sales activity was boosted further last year with a 29MW a year contract to supply the Ventanas copper refinery, belonging toEnami. And it is targeting further growth in direct supplies todistributors and industrials, irrespective of - but useful to absorb -its projected capacity increases. Mardones says that there will be newson this front in the near future.In 1994, Colbun made an after-tax profit of $55m, with operatingprofits of $53m on sales of $124m. Profits in 1995 will show a drop toaround $40m. Although operating profits increased slightly, non-operating profits were down as a result of lower monetary correction.Beyond 1998, Colbun expects to continue investing around $100m peryear, developing a series of small hydroelectric plants, using waterrights which it bought in 1994 at the same time as those for the Rucueplant. It will also eventually be considering a second gas-fired plant.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMMERCIALISING POWER TARIFFSOne of the biggest obstacles to creating a truly commercial electricitysupply industry in Latin America is the continued subsidisation ofpower tariffs and, in some cases, a political reluctance to wind downsuch practices.The phenomenon is not new, nor is it exclusive to Latin America, beingrampant in Asia and lurking, chameleon-like, within the power sectorsof Europe and North America.As students of the power sector in the Third World know, no twocountries are exactly alike - populations, histories and politicalsystems are different. The same holds true of their electricity supplyindustries (ESI), with some systems staggering under the weight ofsubsidisation and others attacking the challenge of commercialisationwith vigour.The theme forms an important part of a new study*, ElectricityGeneration in Latin America, by David Kurtz, which examines, on acountry-by-country basis, the generation and supply systems of allcountries - save the Caribbean islands - south of the Rio Grande River.Kurtz points out that electricity subsidisation grew out of the beliefthat lower power prices could curb inflation and stimulate economicgrowth, a belief, however honourable, which proved to be folly.What happened instead in the 1972-88 period was that electricity pricesdeteriorated in real terms by 22%, while operating costs rose by around14%. Power was used inefficiently, bill collection deteriorated and thefinancial burden on utilities and governments - most power sectorsbeing nationally owned - increased to the extent that funds to maintainand upgrade power generating and delivery systems dried up.By 1990, the Latin American Electricity Organisation (OLADE) was ableto report, unhappily, that only five of the trade association's 26-members in Latin America and the Caribbean were charging prices at orabove the long-term marginal cost of power.Even now in Brazil, which is preparing for a major restructuring of itspower sector, electricity prices are kept low for electoral purposes,with low prices serving as a disincentive to private investors, whichare unable to gain the necessary returns. (It must be noted that thenoises coming out of Brazil for the past year indicate that the centralgovernment is trying to devise formulas to `take this on' so as tosmooth the way for the partial unbundling of Eletrobras.)According to Kurtz's study, Brazil's tariffs, through July 1994, are,at best, very marginal, with domestic tariffs being set at 4.78o perkilowatt hour; commercial at 5.65o and industrial at just 2.86o. (It isto be noted that commercial rates in the Indian Subcontinent rangearound 7o-plus per kilowatt hour on average. Anything much below 6.5o,the formula used in Pakistan, is a tight squeeze for independent powerproject sponsors.) The study indicates that the worst-case scenario isseen in Venezuela, where domestic power tariffs average just 0.79o/kWh,commercial 2.31o and industrial 1.61o/kWh.There is an upside to this as well, notably in Chile, Argentina andPeru which have embarked on major privatisation programmes which, inthe case of Chile and Argentina, are all but complete. Their collectivetariff levels are, if anything, slightly higher than those of the US,where domestic tariffs averaged 8.82o/kWh through mid-1994, commercial8.08o and industrial 5.02o.The study takes note of some of the individual tariff variations. InArgentina and Colombia (See Table) domestic rates are much lower thancommercial rates and lower also than industrial rates. "This pricingmethod, which is aimed at gaining favour from the voting public,disadvantages industry", says Kurtz. "However, with the exception ofArgentina, where many industries are in the public sector, what thegovernment loses in higher industrial electricity costs it gains fromhigher electricity revenues."By charging the commercial and industrial sectors higher prices, thegovernment is, therefore, better able to subsidise the residentialsector's prices, in return for electoral gains."New playersThe report is encouraged, nevertheless, by the momentum behindelectricity reform - there is scarcely a country mentioned in thereport that has not undertaken reforms or that is at least activelyplanning them. This will mean an enhanced role for foreign concernseither through sponsorship of new projects within the region or through acquisition of existing assets.The report breaks down the likely big players - many of them alreadystakeholders in various countries even now - into three categories.Among regional companies are such active Chilean majors as Chilgenerand Endesa; from North America, there are Enron, Duke Power, DominionEnergy, CMS Generation and Liberty Power/Cogentrix (See Bolivia News).From abroad, meanwhile, the report notes the activities of Broken HillProprietary of Australia, Spain's Endesa and Iberdrola, and the Frenchstate utility Electricite de France. Not mentioned but certainly verymuch a player is British Gas which, since the date of the report'spublication, has decided to shift its all-Americas operationalheadquarters out of Texas to Argentina.In spite of the economic difficulties that have beset Latin America -some of them almost unique by  global standards, such as hyperinflation- the region's share of electricity supply is, on a per capita basis,better than that of Asia, the world's fastest-growing economic region.The Indian subcontinent, with more than 1bn people, has 3% of totalglobal installed capacity of 2,911 GW, whereas Latin America, with lessthan half that population level, has 6%.China, bigger again, has 7%, with the rest of Asia and Australasiataking a 13% share. Europe's share is 35% and North America's 28%(albeit North America's installed capacity per head is nearly twicethat of Europe). Bringing up the rear are Russia/Middle East at 5% andAfrica at 3%.What will Latin America's share be by 2003? Kurtz claims, using figuresfrom General Electric of the US, that total new generating capacityworldwide by then will be 1,089 GW.  Latin America's share will haveclimbed to 8%, while other Third World growth areas, such asAsia/Australia, the Indian subcontinent and China will have increasedtheir shares to 22%, 6% and 16% respectively.It is acknowledged that the European and North American electricitysupply industries are "mature", to say the least. Therefore theirglobal share of new capacity will have diminished to 18% and 17%respectively. (It is for that reason that European and Americancompanies are taking such a high profile role in investing in theelectricity industries of developing countries.)Another area of significant development is the progress made in recentdecades on the rate of electrification. According to OLADE, thisincreased from 40% in 1970 to 70% in 1989. The report does caution,however, that some of this growth increase stems more from urbanisationof national populations rather than rural electrification. The reportdoes not ignore the `convenience' factor in spurring growth - thegrowth in the sale of refrigerators, of cookers/stoves and even ofmicrowave ovens.The most electrified countries so far are Uruguay, Argentina and Chile,all at around 92% as a percentage share of population with electricity.Those with the lost level of achievement are Paraguay, at 60%, Boliviaat about 53 % and Peru at 48%.* Electricity Generation in Latin America: Sector Reform andPrivatisation, by David Kurtz, FT Energy Publishing, Maple House, 149Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 9LL. Tel. no (44-171) 896 2222; fax(44-171) 896 2275; 175 pages.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHILE CONTINUES ARGENTINE WOOINGThe love affair between Chilean energy groups and their Argentinecounterparts continued in January, when companies from Chile madefurther incursions into the electricity market of their trans-Andeanneighbour. New deals followed the important acquisition last Decemberof 39% of Buenos Aires utility Edesur by Chile's Enersis for $390m.Chilean companies, looking for opportunities beyond their ownrelatively small - though fast growing - domestic market of 14m people,have increasingly turned their attention to neighbouring Argentina withits far larger market of 33m consumers. In the past four years, theyhave spent well in excess of $3bn on acquiring large chunks ofArgentine distributors and generators, mainly through the privatisationprocess that broke up the old state-owned SEGBA. Along with a few othercountries such as the US and Spain, Chile is now one of the mostimportant players in the Argentine energy market.For years Chile and Argentina, very different countries despite their3,000-mile long shared border, were arch rivals. They nearly went towar in the early 1980s, when both countries were ruled by militarydictatorships, over a dispute about the Beagle channel. In those darkdays, when Argentina was still pursuing a protectionist developmentmodel, the idea of big cross-border investments was unthinkable.But stability, democracy and rapprochement between former presidentPatricio Aylwin of Chile and President Carlos Menem of Argentina pavedthe way for much closer economic ties. Chile's participation inArgentina's electricity privatisation process, an already functioningoil pipeline and two planned gas pipelines between the two countriesare evidence that old suspicions are being consigned to history.Indeed, Chilean groups, facing the possibility of a future energy glutat home, show no sign of losing interest in Argentina, richer thanChile, though less stable. With most opportunities in Argentina'snational network having been already bought up, Chilean companies arenow turning their attention to the country's provincial power sector.Early in January, a consortium led by Emec, a subsidiary of Chile'sSidgo Koppers group, beat off bids from three other hopefuls, paying$63m in the privatisation of 90% of Empresa Electrica de San Juan. Theregional utility, which supplies an estimated 130,000 consumers in thewestern Andean province, turns over around $60m a year. Emec will hopeto raise revenue well above this level by emulating other Chileancompanies which have a strong track-record of clamping down on theillegal electricity connections, until recently endemic in Argentina.The Agua Negra consortium, in which Emec has a 66% stake with theremaining 34% held by Chilgener unit Hidroandes, may have been promptedto invest in San Juan by the province's significant potential as amining region. Argentina's nascent mining industry, concentrated in theAndean provinces, will need a reliable energy supply should the bigprojects that are being predicted come on-line.Chilean companies are likely to see further opportunities to purchaseprovincial energy companies in Argentina. The federal government inBuenos Aires is making financial aid to its 23, mostly cash-strapped,provinces subject to a provincial government's willingness to transferstate assets to the private sector.Top on the list with banks are provincial generators and distributors,many of which lose money and tend to be grossly overstaffed. TheChileans, with hard-won experience of downsizing Argentine energycompanies, may feel they are up to the job of turning round these loss-making provincial entities.Among local governments that have already announced plans to privatisetheir energy companies are Mendoza, the prosperous Andean province,Santa Fe, one of Argentina's main industrial centres, Jujuy in thenorth-west and Rio Negro in Patagonia. Chilean groups may to beinterested in all these sell-offs.On the national scene, the Argentine investment arm of Chile's Endesahas been active, buying an additional 17% stake in Buenos Aires-basedgenerator Central Constanera, which, following several expansions, nowhas a nominal installed capacity of 1,260 MW, the largest in Argentina.The purchase brings to 45% Endesa's stake in Central Constanera. Only afew days before, Endesa had bought a 9% stake in generator CentralTermoelectrica Buenos Aires, itself 51%-owned by Central Costanera.These purchases follow a flurry of activity towards the end of 1995,which represented something of a second-wave in the assault onArgentina by Chile's cash-rich utilities (PLA 6/12, Dec 1995).This saw Enersis paying $390m for 39% of Edesur and then swappingshares with fellow-Chilean Endesa to raise its Edesur stake stillfurther. Enersis is now to concentrate on generation, while Endesa willstick more to distribution. Chilectra, in which Enersis is the biggestshareholder, and Chilgener, a Chilean generator, also have importantslices of Argentine utilities. Chilean groups also have stakes inArgentina's provincial hydroelectric plants, such as El Chocon.According to Charles Barnett, energy analyst at Smith Barney, Chileaninvolvement is a positive development for the Argentine energy sector.Chilean electric utilities are " undoubtedly the most efficient andbest-managed in the region", he says. Most have now overcome theinitial resentment of Argentine consumers, many of whom baulked atpaying their electricity bills to a company from Chile.Barnett says the fact that, for example, the future of CentralCostanera is in the hands of "top-notch" management from Endesa shouldhelp to ensure this Argentine generator a bright future. The company'sshares are valued at half those of a typical Chilean energy utility,but over time, says Barnett, their value is likely to catch up withthose of its Chilean rivals.Chilean groups have had such success in Argentina that some are nowseeking to repeat the performance in Peru. When Brazil liberalises itsenergy sector, there is little doubt that Chilean companies will bethere too.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HAITI REFORMS AWAIT NEW LEADERAn improvement in Haiti's deteriorating power supply will have to awaitthe installation in February of Rene Preval, who will succeed PresidentJean-Bertrand Aristide. Preval will then indicate whether he will startthe implementation of politically unpopular reforms, including thedivestment of several state enterprises, including the power company.The state of the company's generation and transmission facilities,however, will deter "even the most optimistic of potential buyers"according to a confidential report prepared by a US consulting firm."The amount of money which will be needed to make the company viablewill be an obstacle, if not to privatisation, at least to the plans fora significant expansion in generating capacity", the report said.The modernisation of the power company will cost about $970m, said ErnsExceus, head of the government's privatisation programme. The company,which uses oil-fired generators, has nominal capacity of 217 MW, but isgenerating 101 MW, he said.According to the country's economic development plan, Haiti will need1,250 MW by 2004, reported Exceus. Current demand is 390 MW, saidgovernment officials, and the shortfall from the power company is beingmet by small private generators."These are expensive problems, but they also represent opportunitiesfor investors", Exceus said. The government hopes to set up ruralelectrification projects using hydro-electric power, he added. The costestimates are "frightening", said Richard Archi, an economist with theInter-American Development Bank, which is Haiti's biggest internationalcreditor.In addition to financing the expansion of company to meet the planneddemand, the investors will have to deal with the politically sensitiveissue of a significant increase in tariffs.Haiti, with a population of 7m, is the poorest country in the Americas,and the report suggests that there is an inadequate client base tofinancially support the magnitude of expansion which the governmenthopes will happen.Commercial consumption has also been reduced in recent years ascompanies closed after an embargo was put on the country to force outof office the military which had overthrown and exiled Aristide forthree years. "The prospects for a rapid and significant improvement inHaiti's power supply are not bright", the report said.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996$4BN BID FOR YACYRETA?A consortium formed by Ontario Hydro of Canada and the US company AESAmericas is reported to have offered $4bn to take over Yacyreta, themonstrously expensive 3,000 MW hydroelectric plant that the Argentineeconomy ministry is keen to shuffle off to the private sector.Argentine newspapers reported that the consortium had offered $4bn,more than double the $1.8bn set as a target by the government, afterdiscussions with Argentina's Energy Secretary, Carlos Bastos. Bastosdenied any such offer had been made, although he admitted talks hadtaken place.A western diplomat close to the negotiations confirmed thatrepresentatives of the consortium had been in Buenos Aires on severaloccasions with a view to putting together an offer. He did not know ifa concrete bid had been made."Everything is still very much in the air", the diplomat said. TheArgentine government, which owns the still uncompleted dam jointly withParaguay, had not obtained the go-ahead to privatise Yacyreta eitherfrom the Paraguayan government or from its own Congress, he said."It's not clear whether the Argentine Congress will be amenable to thedeal." Neither had the basis for the sale been properly laid out, whichcould explain the huge discrepancy between the supposed offer and thegovernment's figure. "It`s like trying to shoot at a moving target. Thegovernment is still trying to put a package together and explainexactly what is on offer."The proposal from the consortium is said to involve payment of a fixedsum in return for ownership of, rather than an operating concession forthe dam. The government's idea had been to offer a 20-30 yearconcession on Yacyreta. The consortium would then assume all the risksinvolved in completing the project, a process that would involve adding15 turbines to the bring the dam to its full complement of 20, as wellas raising the level of the dam from 76 to 83 metres.The latter process could involve the potentially controversial andcostly displacement of thousands of people. Indeed, it has taken solong to complete the project that several hundred poor Paraguayanfamilies are said to have moved close to the dam so that they can suefor compensation should they need to be relocated.Bastos, reacting to the reports, said that if the $4bn referred to wassupposed to represent the whole value of Yacyreta, it vastlyunderestimated the dam's worth. Yacyreta, dubbed by President CarlosMenem of Argentina "a monument to corruption", cost an estimated $8bnto build.* Central Costanera has reported a rise in revenues and profits for1995. Net profits reached $40.9m in 1995 compared to $36.7m in 1994, onrevenues up to $302.2m from $271.9m in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PEREZ BUILDS BA THERMAL PLANTPerez Companc, the huge energy-based conglomerate, is to spend $230m onbuilding a 660 MW gas-fired power station in Ezeiza, a Buenos Airessuburb. The power station, to be called Genelba, will be the secondbiggest in the country after Central Costanera. Perez, which hasimportant stakes in electricity generation, transmission anddistribution, will feed energy from the plant into its own network.Perez controls 16.6% of Edesur, through its 32.5% stake in theDistrilec holding company, 5.99% of Central Costanera, the Buenos Airesgenerator, and 9.75% of Transener, which owns and operates the 500 kVand part of the 220 kV Argentine interconnected system.Work started in mid-January and the plant is expected to be inproduction by 1997. Given current market prices, Genelba should produceenergy worth an annual $130m.Meanwhile, a second new Buenos Aires plant is also on the cards.Generator Central Puerto has announced that it is planning to install a360 MW combined cycle plant in the Argentine capital. The plant,estimated to cost $140m, should be completed by 1998 and is expected toproduce energy at a 30% discount on conventional thermal power.Central Puerto is keen to reduce production costs given the sharp risein power supply and falling prices. According to ING Barings, thecompany is already the most leveraged electric utility in LatinAmerica, with a net debt/equity ratio of 88.7%Separately, Central Puerto has merged formally with its 60%-ownedsubsidiary Central Neuquen, which supplies electricity to parts ofPatagonia in southern Argentina. The purpose of the merger is to allowCentral Puerto to take advantage of tax credits held by Central Neuquenworth about $25m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996A LITTLE LIGHT TROUBLEThe privatisation of Light, already delayed from December to March 13(PLA 6/1, Dec 1995), has run into more trouble.A few days before the scheduled December 28 publication of Light'sprivatisation prospectus, the electricity workers' union, which holdsshares in the company, lodged a legal objection to the proposal tosplit the company into two - the viable Light Rio, and LightParticipacoes, which would retain the company's 47% stake in thecountry's largest distributor Eletropaulo and the R$1bn or so of thelatter's debts to Light.Light has around half the capital of Eletropaulo whose total value isput at R$3.5bn (US$3.6bn)  - interestingly close to the new, higherestimates of Light's value, R$3.7bn, despite its R$1bn of Eletropaulodebt. According to the Brazilian press, Eletropaulo - whose cost-cutting includes laying off 5,000 staff in 1995 - is expected to beoperating efficiently in three year's time when Light's stake isexpected to be worth around R$4.5bn.Although the objection was subsequently overturned in the courts, itled to the postponement of a shareholders' meeting to OK the split,which in turn is considered likely to delay the auction date by afurther two weeks to the end of March.Brazilian observers of the process say, however, that even the endMarch deadline is too optimistic and is likely to be met only if Lightdesists from the split, which is now due to be approved by shareholdersat the end of January and sells the company along with its debts.Otherwise, they say, the auction is likely to take place at theearliest in May.This will include an element of shares for sale to consumers via a fundset up in the middle of January by Banco do Brasil. The minimuminvestment in the new fund, BB Investment Privatization Fund-Light, hasbeen set at R$200. Deposits will be held in a fixed interest accountuntil the Light auction date, when they will be used to purchaseshares. Banco do Brasil estimates that the fund would attract R$50m-100m. It intends to establish similar funds for subsequentprivatisations.Meanwhile, once Light is out of the way, Eletrobras intends to move onto other sales. It is currently studying a strategy for furtherprivatisations that would begin with Furnas, the south easterngenerator, which has been asked to prepare alternative scenarios forits future.These include the sale of one hydroelectric dam; the sale of severaldams on the same river basin or the division of Furnas into severalparts. Furnas is to present its recommendations by the end of January.Eletrobras controls three other regional generators - Eletrosul,Eletronorte and CHESF - but Furnas is the most important in terms ofpopulation, industry and consumption. The company currently generates54 GW and plans to double its capacity in the next 12 to 15 years.* Emmanuel Nobrega Sobral was appointed president of Eletropaulo at theend of December. Sobral, formerly Eletropaulo's financial director,replaces Paulo Feldmann.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MACHADINHO DAM GO-AHEADBrazil's energy minister, Raimundo Brito authorised the go ahead forthe $1bn Machadinho Dam project at the end of December. The 1,200 MWdam, located on the border of Santa Caterina and Rio Grade do Sulstate, is scheduled to go on-line by 2003.Eletrosul, the regional electricity generating company controlled byEletrobras will supervise the project which will have majority privatecapital.Eletrosul will issue a tender by March to choose its private partners.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGETICA SALE SET FOR APRILThe auction of Nacional Energetica has been set for April. Originally,it was thought that the company - with assets of R$185m (US$190.2m) -would be sold in January, following the November liquidation of itsparent, Banco Nacional, which went into liquidation and was absorbed inDecember by Unibanco.Nacional Energetica, left on the shelf by Unibanco, is currently underCentral Bank control. Its main asset in the energy sector is a 51.54%stake in the 1,300 MW Serra da Mesa dam on the River Tocantins in Goiasstate. The project, under construction in partnership with regionalgeneration company Furnas Centrais Eletricas, is scheduled forcompletion by April 1998, and is expected to generate earnings of $100m-$400m a year.Work on the dam continues apace despite the uncertainty over NacionalEnergetica's ownership thanks to Brazil's National Development Bank,BNDES, which is providing project finance to the tune of R$57m. Thisamount is sufficient for construction work to continue until the end ofMarch. Camargo Correa is carrying out civil engineering on the damwhich is now 70% complete. Nacional Energetica had invested R$247m inthe dam up to the start of this year, and and BNDES - which has pledgedto provide the remaining finance for the project - R$153m.Nacional Energetica's president, Victor Paranhos, said in late Januarythat he had already been approached by 28 parties interested in thecompany, including nine power companies (seven from the US) the IvenConsortium which controls Escelsa, and Camargo Correa, Brazil's largestconstruction company.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CEEE, CERJ PRIVATISATION PROGRESSThe state energy company of Rio Grande do Sul state, Companhia Estadualde Energia Eletrica - CEEE, was authorised to open its capital to theprivate sector by the state legislature in late December following thepresentation of a bill to this effect in November (PLA 6/2, Dec 1995).A maximum of 49% of the shares in CEEE - estimated to be worth betweenR$2.8bn (US$2.9bn) and R$5bn - will be sold under the proposal. Thecompany, which has debts of $90m, 9,800 active staff and 2,600pensioners, is currently 99.8%-owned by Rio Grande do Sul state.The next step is the evaluation of the company's assets and the drawingup of a model of energy production and distribution in the state. Threeconsortiums and an individual company submitted bids for this task onDecember 28: Fator, Nera, Mercados and Arthur Andersen; AndersenConsulting, Kleinwort Benson, Termoconsult and MMSO; Projeta, Deloitteand Engevix; and consultant Booz, Allen & Hamilton do BrasilConsultores.Prequalifying technical proposals drawn up by the competitors will besubmitted for judgement in mid-January, while their prices for CEEEwill be presented in early February. The winners of the process will beannounced at the beginning of April.The state government wants the consultants to give a clear definitionof all the steps necessary to place CEEE shares with their true valueon the market. It expects to have this information plus  details of anenergy plan for the state ready by the end of June 1996.According to state energy secretary, Assis Alberto de Souza, CEEEshould invest R$150m in 1996 with $100m being financed by an issue ofdebentures. In 1995 CEEE invested just $37m.Rio Grande do Sul is the only Brazilian state where coal-fired powerstations predominate using local low grade, high ash deposits. Foreigncompanies have shown an interest in making the plants moreenvironmentally-friendly in recent years. Neighbouring Uruguay hascomplained of acid-rain caused by the plants.The state government will be pressing for coal-fired solutions giventhe jobs they sustain in the local mining industry.Other regional privatisations are also progressing. Rio de Janeirostate's Companhia de Energia Eletrica de Rio de Janeiro (CERJ) iscurrently speeding towards the private sector.At the end of December the state established a commission to manage theprocess of selling off 14 of the state's 26 companies, and has justpublished a prospectus for consultants to evaluate CERJ's assets andprepare it for privatisation. CERJ distributes 25% of the state'spower, serving 1.2m customers; employs 4,806 staff (down from 5,758 ayear earlier) and had debts of R$54m in 1994.The deadline for bids for the contract to advise on the CERJprivatisation model isMarch 11, with the state announcing the winner amonth later. The privatisation reports are scheduled to be presented bythe end of August, allowing for privatisation in September. TheNational Development Bank (BNDES) has agreed to lend the state R$244mon the back of anticipated privatisation receipts.Meanwhile, Mato Grosso state has also recently joined the bandwagon,with an announcement that the state government was launching a seriesof administrative reforms that would make possible the privatisation ofCemat, as well as the regional bank, Bemat.These will include regulations for offering concessions for publicservices to the private sector and the removal of state subsidies. Abill authorising the privatisations is expected to be sent to thelegislature by June this year.* Sao Paulo state's secretary for energy, David Zylbersztajn, has senta bill to the state legislative proposing the creation of a publicenergy service commission which will have the mission of regulating andcontrolling electric energy services in the state.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CPFL UPS SALES, CUTS COSTSSao Paulo state electricity company, CPFL (Companhia Paulista de Forcae Luz), has registered increased power consumption of 6% in 1995, withan increase of 90,000 in its customer baseto 2.2m, mainly locatedoutside of Sao Paulo city.Whether this will be sufficient to help stave off the worst of itsimmediate financial problems, however, remains to be seen. In the firstnine months of last year, the company produced a five-fold increase innet losses, and analysts at Brazil's Garantia bank are forecasting fullyear losses of R$84m (US$86.4m) compared to a profit of R$22m in 1994,as a result of higher operating costs and lower tariffs in real termsfollowing the July 1994 price freeze.According to company president, Cesare Manfredi, CPFL is tackling itscosts, and anticipates savings of R$27m in 1996. In 1995, itrestructured its administration and reduced staff from 7,700 to 6,900.The company has also worked on a restructuring of its businessdivisions. In line with the unbundling proposals of state energysecretary David Zylberstajn, it has now separated the accounting of itsgeneration, transmission and distribution sectors. CPFL has alsodivided its operations into three business units: South East, NorthEast and North West.CPFL plans to continue to invest next year, despite the cutbacks,planning expenditure of R$90m, with R$30m of this used to maintain andexpand its system. During 1996 CPFL intends to build new sub-stationsat Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Lencois Paulista, Campinas, Sumari, Itapiraand Americana.Amongst Brazil's electricity supply concessionaries, CPFL boasts theshortest and the least frequent electricity supply interruptions.CPFL's maximum period of interruption was 8.7 hours while the Brazilianaverage was 16.5 hours. CPFL had an average interruption frequency of6.7 per client compared to 21.5 nationwide.There are three electricity concessionaries operating in Sao Paulostate, CESP (Companhia Estadual de Sao Paulo); CPFL and Eletropaulo.Sao Paulo, covering an area the size of the UK, is Brazil's mostpopulous state with over 33m inhabitants and is responsible for around45% of the country's GDP.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGY DEMAND RISES 7.6%Brazil used 7.6% more energy in the eleven months to November 1995 thanin the same period in 1994, according to the latest statistics releasedby Eletrobras. The figures for the full year should show a rise of 7.8%says Eletrobras, well above the annual average of 3.3% registered in1990-1994.Electricity consumption clearly outstripped Brazil's GDP growth ofaround 4% and points to energy shortages in the short-term ifinvestments are not stepped up in the sector.A significant part of Brazil's increased energy consumption comes fromresidential users. Since the introduction of the country's successfulanti-inflation plan in July 1994 there has been a marked increase inthe purchasing power of low income families who have acquired moreelectric domestic appliances.In 1994 these sales rocketed by 35% over 1993. In 1995 these rose afurther 15% with 40m units sold. As a result of using these appliances,a large number of electricity consumers have moved into the category ofusers of over 200 kW/month.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HYDRO OUTPUT BREAKS RECORDSThe world's largest dam, Itaipu, jointly-owned by Brazil and Paraguaybroke its own record in 1995 by producing 77.21 TWh. This was 11.2% upon the level achieved in 1994. The increase was due to reducedgenerator stoppages through improved maintenance programmes. The 18turbines operated at 93% capacity during 1995. The 77.21 TWhrepresented 31% of all Brazil's energy production in 1995.Despite the progress, Itaipu is still owed large sums - R$1.4bn(US$1.44bn) - by Brazilian energy distributors. The state government ofSao Paulo (CESP, CPFL and Eletropaulo) is the largest debtor, owing$1.2bn for energy used. The remaining $200m is owed by Eletrosul,Furnas and ANDE.Meanwhile, output is also breaking records at Companhia Estadual de SaoPaulo (CESP), which beat its 1993 annual generation high at 10 a.m. onDecember 22 last year, with output of 52 TWh. CESP is Brazil's largestgenerating company, responsible for 22% of the country's energyproduction. It is able to cover the equivalent of all consumption byBrazil's 38m households. The company expects its revenue fromdistribution to increase by R$9m in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW CHAIRMAN FOR BOLPOWBolivian Power Co, the only private sector power generator in Bolivia,has announced the appointment of E. Glen Biggs to succeed Frank Benneras board chairman. Benner will remain a director of the company, whichhas the rare distinction for a Latin America power generator of beingquoted on the New York stock exchange.The company also announced that Bruce McMillen, senior group vice-president and chief financial officer of Cogentrix Energy of the US,had resigned from Bolivian Power's board. He is succeeded by DavidLewis, presently chief executive at Cogentrix Energy.Bolivian Power, founded in 1925, distributes and transmits power in LaPaz and Oruro. It has a 34% share of all generation in the country,operates 13 hydo facilities with a total capacity of 134 MW and isexpanding by 62 MW its hydro capacity in the so-called Zongo Valleyproject.Part of this capacity will be on-line this year and all will bedelivering power by 1998. It is also installing a gas-fired plant of 17MW at El Alto near La Paz, which went on-line last summer. It isconsidering a 230 MW hydropower operation in the Miguillas Valley. Itsgrowth rate this decade has been in excess of 6%.Bolivian Power's shareholding includes a 17% stake held by LibertyPower/Cogentrix Bolivia Inc. According to the New Electricity Law, itwill divest itself of power distribution responsibility, and will focuson generation. Its net income last year was $7.7m on a turnover of$45.9m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOCOPILLA FLOATEDCodelco, the state copper corporation, has chosen a consortium ofBelgium's Powerfin, Spain's Iberdrola and the domestic Enagas as itsstrategic partner for the Tocopilla power plant.The decision was made eventually a month later than the scheduled lateDecember date as a result of a lengthier and more complex due diligenceprocess than Codelco had anticipatedThe agreement calls for the formation of a new equity partnership inTocapilla Holding Ltda., which controls the 615 MW, coal-firedTocopilla power plant near Antofagasta in northern Chile.Powerfin has a 62.5% stake in the bidding consortium, with Iberdrolaholding 25% and Enagas having the balance. The consortium will pay$177. 8m for a 51% stake in Tocopilla, with Codelco controlling theremainder. Codelco is to set up a new company to own the 51% stake,which will in turn be 51% owned by the bidders.The remaining 49% of Tocopilla will also eventually be sold, 10% to theplant's workers and the remainder through local exchanges or ADRs.Powerfin's parent Belgian utility Tractebel said that some $70m neededto purchase Tocopilla will be funded through project financing. Thebalance of $110m will come from the three bidding companies.Tocopilla consists of ten units, a port and 600 km of high-voltag etransmission lines. It has a workforce of 400 and will be operatedjointly by Iberdrola and Powerfin under the latter's lead. The site'selectricity is sold mainly via long-term contracts to northern Chile'scopper mines, including that of Chuquicamata, the world's largest open-pit copper mine, and will supply Codelco's El Abra joint venture withCyprus Amax Minerals (130,000m tpy), when it starts producing in late1996.Meanwhile, the plant has recently picked up yet another mine contract,signing a 20-year deal to supply Codelco's Radomiro Tomic mine, whichwill have output of 130m tpy from 1997. The Radomiro Tomic contract isestimated to be worth $55m and is for 70 MW from 1998 to 2002, risingafterwards to100 MW. It will use part of the same transmission systemas the El Abra mine. A contract for the latter has been awarded to theSpanish-Chilean firm Abenor S.A.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONSUMPTION SOARS 9.2%, ANOTHER 8.8% SEEN IN `96Chile's electricity consumption soared by 9.2% last year compared to1994, reports the National Energy Commission (CNE). The figures showeddemand for liquid fuels climbed 7.4%, while coal consumption was 14%higher."The sector has been able to supply in an opportune way the growingenergy requirements which are the result of the country's strongeconomic and social development", CNE president Alejandro Jadresicsaid.The forecast is for a further increase of 8.8% this year. The energysector is one of Chile's most active, with projects worth more than$4bn under construction or in advanced planning. These include thermaland hydropower stations, two natural gas pipelines and expansionprojects at oil refineries.According to the CNE, the two trans-Andean pipeline schemes continue toadvance. CNE`s records show that the GasAndes scheme, led by Chilgenerand Canada's Nova Corp. had already presented its environmental impactstudy for approval and has negotiated 85% of the rights of way neededfor the pipeline scheme. TransGas, headed by Tennedo of the US andBritish Gas had not yet presented its environmental impact study. Ithad agreed 65% of its rights of way, said Jadresic.Both plan to supply Chile with natural gas from central Argentina butby different routes, Gasandes linking the Neuquen gasfields in northernArgentina to Santiago, the Chilean capital, and TransGas traversing theAndes by a more southerly route.GasAndes says it will start laying pipe on the Argentine side of theborder in January. In Chile, they are waiting for approval of theirenvironmental impact study but say they are still on schedule. They aremeeting steady opposition from neighbourhood groups on the route downto Santiago through a local beauty spot, the Cajon del Maipo.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LUKSIC, US GROUPS TIE UP ATACAMA PIPE SCHEMECMS Energy and the Williams International Pipeline Co. of the US planto go ahead with the Atacama gas pipeline project and have signedletters of intent with the local Luksic group. Luksic would take a 15%-20% stake in the $350m project while CMS and Williams keep 40%. Theproject is still looking for an Argentine partner.The pipeline would bring gas from Jujuy in northern Argentina, near theArgentinan-Bolivian border with northern Chile, to Tocopilla on Chile'snorth coast, with branches further north to Iquique and south toAntofagasta. The new timing is for an open season in the first half ofthis year with work starting before the end of the year and the pipecoming into operation in early 1998.CMS and Williams say they need to sign contracts with power generatorsfor between 600 MW and 800 MW of capacity for the project to be viable.The initial capacity of the pipeline would be 3.4 MMcm per day. Somedoubt has, however, been expressed as to the immediate viability of theproject.The new Collahuasi copper mine has signed a contract with Endesa (PLA3/13, Sept 1995) for power which will be generated by its new coal-fired Patache plant. In the view of the government's National EnergyCommission (CNE), this alone is sufficient to postpone the supply ofgas to the area for the short and medium-term.It is not clear that the generating companies of the northernelectricity network will want to convert from coal to gas. But aspokesman for Williams says they are confident about getting thecontracts they need.The project, if it goes ahead, could bring to three the number of gaspipelines running from Argentina. The northern link would complementthe more complex Gas Sur and Gas Andes pipelines schemes being preparedto deliver gas from Central Argentina to the Santiago/ Concepcion areason Chile's central west coast.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENDESA GETS RALCO DAM LICENCEEndesa has been awarded a two-year provisional licence by the stateauditing board for the controversial 570 MW Ralco dam project on theBio Bio river.The authorisation was given in the face of strong opposition fromenvironmentalists and locals, who were concerned about the visualimpact on the site, a beauty spot, and the enforced relocation of thePehuenche Indians who live nearby.The licence will allow the state generator to begin detailed studiesinto construction prospects for the $600m dam and to examine its impacton the environment. Endesa wants the hydro plant to be on-line by 2002.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHILGENER PLANS $500M INVESTMENTS FOR `96Chilgener's G-M Jose Antonio Guzman announced investments of $500m for1996. These could rise to $650m depending on the success of thecompany's bids in privatisation sales in other Latin Americancountries.Financing will come mostly from bond issues. For example Chilgener thismonth issued a `yankee bond,' placing $150m on the US market in theform of 10-year bonds. The bond issue was placed by Smith Barney, ChaseSecurities and ING Barings. A separate private place of $180m will helprefinance its Gualcolda power plant.The Empresa Electrica de Santiago, which is building the Nueva Rencagas-fired power plant and in which Chilgener has a 51% stake, will not,according to Guzman, need new financing. The plant will be built usingsuppliers credits.* Moody's Investors Service has assigned a Baa-1 rating to the $150mbond. The rating reflects Chilgener's solid financial position andsound business strategy, says Moody's, emphasising that the company isalso operating in a stable regulatory and economic regime.About two thirds of the company's resource portfolio is thermal, withthe balance mainly run-of-river hydropower units. Concerns aboutChilgener's higher production costs relative to hydro-based competitionare largely offset by growing electrical demand in Chile and Argentinaand by the company's ability to maintain reliable production regardlessof rainfall conditions, says Moody's.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERSIS BOOSTS CAPITAL THROUGH MAJOR SHARE OFFERThe holding company, Enersis, which controls Endesa, the powergenerator, and Chilectra, the Santiago distributor, has made a $240mshare offering. The 30-day preferential share option lasted to mid-January.Demand in the Chilean market, however, has been high and the optionswhich the private pension funds have been unable to take up because oflegal limits on exposure have been bought up by other shareholders orfuture investors.The capital increase will go towards financing the company's two majorinvestment projects - its successful bid for 39% of Edesur, thedistribution company which serves the south and centre of Buenos Aires,and a planned bid for Rio Light of Brazil.Together with its distribution subsidiary, Chilectra, Enersis paid$390m for its new stake in Edesur. Short-term financing took the formof a syndicated loan from five international banks but a bond issue isexpected to follow.At the end of December, Enersis transferred a 5.6% stake in Edesur tothe local Chispas investment companies for an estimated $55m. The pre-arranged move is to help diversify the holdings of the Chispas so thatthey become eligible for private pension fund investment. Currently,the Chispas' main asset are their shares in Enersis.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POWER CRISIS DEEPENSAfter a year of chaos in electricity sector, with brown-outs of up toeight hours a day in the second half of last year (PLA4/4, Oct 1995),Ecuador is settling down to an equally difficult 1996.The year began about as badly as was possible. In the second week ofJanuary, electricity employees declared a two-day strike in protest atthe government's power sector privatisation bill, which was expected tobe passed by Congress that week.The bill foresaw the unbundling of generation, distribution andtransmission and the extention of private sector access to the system.It also proposed the consolidation of the existing 19 distributors inthe country into four or five companies, as well as the restructuringand sale of 49% of state-run INECEL. Its proposals also included thecreation of a regulatory agency.The strike, only affecting administrative functions, was threateningalso to hit the country's already disabled power station production asPLA went to press, notably the Paute hydro plant, which was in thehands of the strikers and which provides some 60% of the country'spower.President Sixto Duran Ballen, meanwhile, has ordered the army to takeover the running of the plants should the bill be passed.The bill, deadlocked in parliament for almost two years, had beenhailed as the solution to the country's deeper capacity problems, byfacilitating the construction of privately-owned plant. Ecuadorcurrently has 2,300 MW of installed capacity, but only 1,590 MW ofeffective, guaranteed capacity, short of the current 1,760 MW of demandand leaving no margin for the 6% growth forecast for last and thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PERU OUTLINES EXPANSION PLANSJorge San Roman, Peruvian vice-minister for energy, is predicting afurther 218 MW expansion of generating capacity in 1996. This should beenough, he says, to preclude power supply problems - always providedthat rainfall is normal.The bulk of the extra 218 MW will be made up as follows: 100 MW in thefirst phase expansion of Edegel, the recently-privatised collection ofhydro and thermal plants serving Lima; 20 MW from the expansion ofthermal capacity at the Zorritos plant, 60 MW from Pucallpa and 13 MWfrom Tarapoto.Additionally, by early 1997, San Roman expects there will be a further140 MW available from Ventanilla, Lima's thermal power station whichwas acquired in December by Endesa of Spain (PLA 6/18).In a recent interview, San Roman justified the government's decision tocontinue with the exemption from the selective consumption tax (ISC)for fuel used for thermal electric generation."There should be no exceptions to taxes applied", he said, "but in thiscase it is necessary, otherwise electricity tariffs would have risen".He accepted that Peru's increased reliance in the short-term on thermalenergy would mean steeper import bills for diesel.Not all government officials are as sanguine as the vice-minister overelectricity sector prospects. Luis Haro, director-general forelectricity at the mines ministry, told a conference in early Januarythat current reserves stood at barely 5% of generating capacity whenthey should ideally be at 20%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MANTARO HYDRO HITS TROUBLEThe Mantaro hydro complex, backbone of electricity generation forcentral and northern Peru and scheduled for privatisation in the nearfuture, is facing serious problems.Experts predict that, given the precarious state of the concrete liningof the main, 20km tunnel between the main intake and the machine house,the jewel in Electroperu's hydro crown may fetch far less thananticipated when it reaches the auction block later this year or next.Mantaro comprises two separate hydros known as Santiago Antunez deMayolo and Restitucion. Together they account for a quarter of totalnational electricity generation capacity.Mantaro's generating potential is 1,015 MW, with normal output rangingbetween 850 and 900 MW. Today it is generating a bare 715 MW due,according to consultants, to build-up of solids in the tunnel and,probably, the deterioration of the interior walls. The tunnel has neverbeen emptied for maintenance work in the 22 years since it opened.Attempts last year by the Canadian company Aquatic Sciences to carryout inspections with robots were unsuccessful.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OUTPUT UP 3.3% IN 10 MONTHSElectricity output rise by 3.3% in the first ten months last yearcompared to 1994, reports the Energy and Mines Ministry. Total outputstood at 12,236 GWh, said the report.It said that electrical production, including output from Peru'sinterconnected north-central, southwest, southeast and other isolatedsystems reached 11,840 GWh in the January-October period. Power fromhydro plants accounted for 84.6% of total output while thermal powergeneration made up 15.4%.According to the statistics, public service firms produced 10,521 GWhwhile companies generating their own captive power accounted for 861.3GWh. Electroperu, the largest of the country's seven state-owned powergenerators, produced 6,332 GWh, followed by recently privatised Edegel,which had an output of 2,203 GWh, and Egasa 587.8 GWh. Peru's totaloutput in October rose 2% to 1,233 GWh compared to 1,209 GWh in thesame month in 1994.* The Peru stock exchange has approved the listing of Edelnor. Thestate sold 60% of Edelnor, which distributes power in northern Lima toa consortium of Chilean, Peruvian and Spanish interests for $176m. Theconsortium comprises Inversions Distrilima, led by Enersis, andDistribuidora Chilectra Metropolitana of Chile and Spain's Endesa.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AGUAYTIA DEAL FORMALISEDA formal agreement has now been signed with a six-company consortium todevelop the Aguaytia gas and related power project.The project involves the development of the Aguaytia gas field, whichhas proven reserves of 223 Bcm; the construction and operation ofnatural gas processing facilities,NGL storage facilities,  some 140miles of gas pipeline and 65 miles of NGL pipeline. A 145 MW gas plantand 265 miles of transmission lines to connect with the existing gridsystem were to be added at a later date.Only three of the initial four US companies which signed an MOU lastAugust (PLA 2/20) to develop the $200m complex - El Paso Natural Gas,Panhandle Eastern Corp and Maple Resources Corp - are still on board.Entergy, which was to have operated the power plant, has pulled out.The three new participants are Pennsylvania Light & Power arm, PowerMarkets Development Company; Illinois Power arm, Illinova GeneratingCompany; and Scudder Latin American Power.Work on the project is scheduled to begin in the first quarter of thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GUYANA POWER SECTOR REHAB PLANS HIT SNAGSGuyana's urgent effort to rehabilitate its decrepit electricity systemand impose a measure of private commercial discipline (PLA 6/20, Dec1995) is running into snags.Trade union pressure last month forced the resignation of RaymondGaskin, chairman of the Guyana Electricity Corp. (GEC). He had beenappointed by President Cheddi Jagan himself. The main electricityunion, the National Association of Agricultural, Commercial andIndustrial Employees (NAACIE), had taken exception to the speed withwhich Gaskin, with government backing, was trying to commercialise theoperation, including successive power supply rate hikes and the sackingof up to 213 workers.NAACIE even called a strike at GEC, illegal in an essential service, toput pressure on Gaskin to withdraw retrenchment notices. He accused theunion of having a `political agenda' and blamed him for the fact that`things are not going well at GEC.'Gaskin said he felt he had no option but to resign after the union fed`lies' about him to the People's Progressive Party (PPP), the seniorpartner in the governing coalition, and to the government itself. Theformer chairman can claim some credit for making efforts to improve thetroubled utility, whose performance record is probably the worst in theCaribbean, with the exception of the Dominican Republic's state-ownedelectricity company.He was instrumental in obtaining additional units from various foreignsources to reduce the gap between supply and demand, and the rate hikesenabled GEC to do away with treasury subsidies. he also tried to rootout corruption at the corporation, and several former employees arebefore the courts on charges of electricity theft and misuse of GECfunds.Gaskin's forced departure is only one of the setbacks facing GEC in itsdesperate effort to move forward.The $12m joint venture between the government-owned bauxite company,Linden Mining Enterprise (Linmire) and the US Resources RecoveryInternational, has been put on hold following objections by thegovernment's privatisation unit. The government unit felt the projectshould have been put to tender on a wider basis. The joint venturecompany was to install 19 MW of new capacity, 5.5 MW of which wouldhave been sold to GEC.The $309m investment by four US companies, trading under the name ofUnited Health Clinics (UHC), to create power from waste, has also beenstalled.Senior government officials apparently do not believe the group candeliver what it says. The proposal was to supply up to 60 MW to thenational grid by using heat generated from all types of local waste.The government investment promotion agency, the Guyana Office forInvestment (GO-Invest) was in favour of the scheme and seemed satisfiedwith the bona fides of the participants. But other officials havestepped into the picture and demanded better feasibility studies of theproject.GO-Invest's director, Dr. Ivor Mitchell, says he will pursue the matterbecause he has seen waste-to-electricity plants operate successfully inthe US and says "I believe they can work in Guyana".Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LOCAL TIE-UP STRENGTHENS BIDDERS CHANCESThe two front runners in the bid to purchase the state-owned JamaicaPublic Service Company, the island's electricity monopoly, have formedconsortia with local companies - a move which bankers say willstrengthen their chances of being selected.Although the government has an official short list of five prospectivebuyers, the two which are considered the leading contenders are HoustonIndustries Energy Inc of Texas, and Southern Electric of Georgia. Lessfancied are Enterprise Diversified Holdings and Charter Oak Energy,both of the US, and Ontario Hydro of Canada.Southern Electric has created its consortium by drafting Life ofJamaica and Mutual Life, two of Jamaica's largest life insurancescompanies. Houston Industries Energy has been joined by Island Life andManufacturers Merchant Bank."These arrangements will enhance the chances of the companies in theirbid to purchase the Public Service Company, and the final decision bythe government's Divestment Committee could be influenced by what thelocal firms can bring to the table", explained one of Jamaica's leadingbankers who is advising one of the consortia.Life of Jamaica and Mutual Life are joining Southern Electric asinvestors. Island Life will also be an investor with Houston EnergyIndustries, while Manufacturers Merchant Bank will provide financialservices support. Southern Electric has also recruited influentialsupport in the form of Andrew Young, the former US ambassador to theUnited Nations and mayor of Atlanta, who has been visiting Jamaicafrequently to lobby for the Atlanta company.Robert Pickersgill, Jamaica's utilities minister, and severalexecutives of the Public Service Company, have visited the USheadquarters and major power installations of both Houston IndustriesEnergy and Southern Electric. Government officials say "nothing ofsignificance" should be read into the fact the installations of theother three bidders were not visited.Jamaican officials are also studying the operations of Trinidad &Tobago's electricity company in which Southern Electric took a 49%stake just over a year ago.The government is hoping that the sale of the power company, which isscheduled to be concluded by the middle of this year, will be followedby increased stability in power supplies. The company currently hascapacity of 663 MW and average production is 505 MW to meet peak demandof 405 MW.With the commissioning of privately owned barge-mounted and land-basedplants, it will have output for the national grid of well over 700 MWby August.Jamaicans will feel the effect of the change in ownership almost assoon as the sale is complete. The government will require thesuccessful bidder to modernise and improve the Public Service Company'sefficiency by spending about $800m over 15 years. This will not befinanced solely from the company's operations. It reported a net profitof $5.8m in the 1994-95 fiscal year, $7.5m less than the previous year.Company officials have complained, however, that the firm's financeswould have been better had the government granted a tariff increase.The last increase was granted in 1991, and the government has beenreluctant to make adjustments, apparently because it would bepolitically unpopular.Lee W. Hogan, chief executive of Houston Industries Energy, has warnedthat divestment of the Public Service Company will be followed by arate increase. If his company's bid were successful, Hogan said, itwould try to curb the hike in rates by selling more power."You make more money by selling more energy", he said. "The way to makemoney in this business is to maximise growth, not price." An acceptablerate of return for the company would be between 8.5% and 9% on totalassets, adjusted to debt and interest charges, he said.The Public Service Company's financial position would have beenstronger in the 1994-95 year, were it not for an explosion at the OldHarbour Station which destroyed over 100 MW of capacity, said DerrickDyer, the company's chief executive. "This is not a fire sale", he saidof the impending divestment. "The company is very much alive andkicking and, in many respects, is a showpiece for other developingcountries. This is the opinion of international agencies."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEXICO PUTS ITS CLOCKS FORWARDMateo Trevino, who is head of the Mexican government's energy savingorganisation, has one very basic problem.His job is to convince consumers and producers that wasting electricitymakes no economic sense. But with electricity tariffs that themselvesmake little economic sense his task is a difficult one. This year, heand his organisation, the Support Trust for the Energy Saving Program(FIDE), have to convince the country to put its clocks forward by anhour for six months, a change the government thinks will bring aboutannual savings of $1.5bn.A presidential decree establishing Mexican `'summer time" appeared inthe Diario Oficial, Mexico's version of the Federal Register, onJanuary 4 of this year.Environmental interest groups and government officials said that themeasure,which will affect Mexico's three time zones from April 7 toOctober 27, should save up to 1% of the energy the country currentlyuses, through rationalising the use of extended daylight hours. From1996 on, clocks will be set forward one hour on the first Sunday ofeach April and back on the last Sunday of each October.According to Rogelio Gasca Neri, Director General of Mexico's FederalElectricity Commission (CFE) the time change should result in fewer aircontaminants being released, as well as more efficient dispersion ofairborn pollutants.The adoption of summer time is the first step of a six point energyplan Trevino has the responsibility of promoting. In its entirety, theplan aims to reduce Mexico's energy consumption by 7.3% by the year2000 through rationalisation of energy use. By the government's ownreckoning, electricity wastage has already fallen by 5% in recentyears.As a country with many remaining infrastructure problems and hundredsof isolated communities, Mexico rations itself when it comes toexecuting large scale changes in popular perceptions. A proposal tointroduce summer time in 1992 was brushed aside because at the time theMexican government was busy with a programme to re-denominate thecurrency.`'The need to introduce summer time has not been so pressing in Mexicoas it has been in countries further to the north, with greater seasonalvariations in their day", said Trevino. `'But we clearly need to createa culture of energy conservation.''Many of the campaigns promoted by Trevino and FIDE aim at theelectricity consumer rather than the producer, such as is the case withtwo programmes that seek to introduce the use of more efficient lightbulbs and air conditioners. Revamping existing electricity generationand transmission equipment to increase efficiency and reduce waste is,after all, a very costly proposition.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ENERGY MINISTER APPOINTEDA Mexican government reshuffle in the dog days of 1995 took mostcommentators by surprise by its timing and heralded changes in theenergy sector.President Ernesto Zedillo's late December restructuring of his cabinetremoved Ignacio Pichardo Pagaza, the former energy secretary, andsomething of a member of the ruling party's old guard, replacing himwith Dr Jesus Reyes Heroles, an economist.Pichardo's position had greatly weakened since he took office a littlemore than a year before. Troubled by ill health, and - particularlyduring the beginning of his time at the energy ministry - afflicted bypolitical controversy, Pichardo never seemed the natural choice topreside over the privatisation and liberalisation of much of Mexico'senergy policy.At the beginning of 1995, tensions appeared to arise between Pichardo'senergy ministry and the Finance ministry with regard to the futurecourse of energy privatisations and liberalisation. He will now move onto a post within the Mexican foreign office, most likely as a diplomatoverseas.Pichardo's successor, Jesus Reyes Heroles, son of a Mexican politicianfrom a generation before, won early recognition as head of a Mexicaneconomics thinktank, Grupo Economistas y Asociaciados.In the job he held immediately prior to his new appointment, ReyesHeroles served as head of Banobras, a Mexican state development bank,where he tried to up investment by innovative schemes including the useof seed money. Whether he will try similar mechanisms in a sector whereprivate spending has drawn close to a halt is yet to be determined.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CFE CONFIRMS EXPANSION PLANSMexico's Federal Electricity Commission (CFE) announced that over thenext two years it plans to increase its installed generation capacityby 2,250 MW, to reach a national total of 35,702 MW to meet nationaldemand.In a press release, the CFE emphasised the importance of plans to beginoperating units three through six of the geothermal Cerro Prietocomplex, in Baja California, as well as referring to the 350 MW unit 4of the coal fired Carbon II programme, in the northern state ofCoahuila, and the thermal combined cycle units 5 and 6 of the AdolfoLopez Mateos project, which between them will provide 700 MW for thetown of Tuxpan.The CFE said that hydroelectric dams will be put into commercial use inthe northwestern state of Sinaloa, where two 200 MW units should comeon-line, as well as between the southern states of Veracruz and Oaxaca,where the Temascal dam will have two units of 100 MW each, and betweenthe central areas of Hidalgo and Queretaro, where the Fernando Hiriartdam will have two units of 140 MW each.The release said that at the beginning of the Zedillo administration inDecember 1994, 1,675 MW of capacity was being tested to be put intooperation, while 2,251 MW was in the process of being contracted orconstructed, all of which should enter into operation before the end of1997.During 1995, 1,345 MW was put into operation, leaving 2,581 MW to beswitched on over the next two years.* Luz y Fuerza del Centro, the main electricity distributor in theMexico City area with 24m clients, has contracted the services ofSpain's Union Fenosa Acex to begin a modernisation process. Acex is theinternational consultancy arm of Union Fenosa, Spain's third largestutility.The contract, which will involve a major technical renovation at Luz yCentral, underlines Fenosa's presence in the region, where it alreadyhas development and technical transfer projects with utilities in theDominican Republic, Nicaragua, Venezuela and Colombia.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ARGENTINA CALLS FOR TENDERS FOR OIL EXPLORATIONArgentina is calling for tenders for oil exploration in seven areasnear disputed waters around the Falkland/Malvinas/Malouines islands.Tenders will have to be lodged by January 31, says the EnergySecretariat. Britain withdrew objections last year against oil tendersin waters bordering its claims after an historic agreement withArgentina. The agreement allows both countries to charge royalties forany oil or gas extracted from Falkland waters - Argentina plans to levy3% and Britain 9% without compromising their conflicting claims tosovereignty. British Gas and YPF will jointly study hydrocarbonpotential off the islands.As far as Falkland locals are concerned, there are still tensions, saysRichard Ralph, the new British governor. He said locals do not bearArgentina any ill-will, despite the 1992 Argentine invasion (andsubsequent eviction with extreme prejudice), but do not wish to havemuch, if anything, to do with Argentina so long as sovereignty isdisputed. Despite increased potential for co-operation, notably inenergy and fisheries, Argentines travelling on national passports arenot allowed on the Falklands, apart from relatives visiting the gravesof sons killed in the war.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHANGO NORTE X-1 EXPLORATION WELLAmpolex, the oil and gas producer, says that its Chango Norte X-1exploration well in Argentina, in which it has a 23% stake, has flowedgas and condensate from a short-term production test. Australia-basedAmpolex said a drill stem test conducted over the interval 3,318 to3,690 metres recorded a flow of 19 MMcfd of gas through a 3/4 inchchoke at a pressure of 2,300 pounds per square inch over a five-hourperiod. A total of 723 barrels per day was recovered.Ampolex has been active in the Aguarague field since June 7, 1995, whenthe XP-1 field showed gas in three formations. It is now test flowingat 25 MMcfd. Other participants are Tecpetrol 23%; YPF 30%; Petrobras15%; Cia General de Combustibles 5% and Ledesma 4%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PACIFIC EXAMINING PURCHASE OF STAKE IN ARGENTINE GAS COMPANIESThe international arm of Pacific Enterprises is examining a purchase ofa significant but minority stake in Argentine gas companies, SodigasPampeana and Sodigas Sur. Pacific, which has signed a non-bindingmemorandum of understanding for discussions on the purchase of 12.5% ineach for an estimated $47m-$52m, is to make a final decision by March.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BOLIVIA RECEIVES BIDS IN PARTIAL PRIVATISATION OF YPFBBolivia has received bids from 40 foreign companies in the partialprivatisation of state oil company Yacimentos Petroliferos FiscalesBolivianos (YPFB), according to vice president Victor Hugo Cardenas. Hesaid the government expected to complete the company's capitalisationand to announce the winning bidders by May.The bidders included BHP Petroleum, Elf Aquitaine, Repsol, Ampolex,Esso, Exxon, Nova, Panhandle and Unocal.The capitalisation programme will involve the division of the countryinto two regions for exploration and production. In addition,transport, refining and servicing divisions will be split into threeseparate companies, while marketing and distribution will be subdividedinto three other competing firms.The successful bidders will gain control of a 50% stake and managerialcontrol.of the companies, which they will be obliged to invest in. Theremaining 50% of shares will be allocated to Bolivia's pension funds.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CALOR GROUP EXPANDING IN LATIN AMERICAThe Calor Group of the UK is further expanding Latin Americanoperations with a $31m investment in Supergasbras Distribuidora de Gas,the Brazilian liquified petroleum gas major. The UK group's investmenthas been matched by SHV Energy, its joint venture partner in SHV CalorBrazil, which was set up last year. Calor and SHV are spending $62m fora 49% stake in Supergas and 50% of the voting rights. Supergas lost$4.2m in 1994.Calor was in the news last August with the acquisition of a majoritystake in Minasgas, a bottled gas supplier. It is understood Supergasand Minasgas will be operated as separate companies. Calor said itwould encourage rival suppliers to draw up a co-operation arrangementfor the future. The two companies supply a combined total of 1.35mt ofLPG to a customer base of 40m people. Calor announced last year plansto spend #70m ($110m) in projects in Latin America and Asia inconjunction with SHV Energy, the privately-held Dutch group withultimately controls Calor. The strategy is to broaden Calor's baseoutside the UK market.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OFFSHORE RIG CHARTER ORDER FROM PETROBRASCelsius, a Swedish defence engineering group, said a minority-controlled offshoot company owned by its GVA unit had won an offshorerig charter order from Petrobras. The contract is for five years and isworth SKr275m. Louisiana Overseas Inc., 30% owned by GVA, is to rebuildand charter an offshore rig used for servicing production equipment onthe sea bed and in deep sea drilling in Brazilian waters. The remaining70% of Louisiana Overseas is owned by Petroserve of Brazil. The totalvalue of the deal is SKr915m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996YPF OPENS FIRST SERVICE STATION IN CHILEYPF of Argentina has opened its first service station in Chile and hasannounced that it will be spending $22m in 1996 on expanding thenetwork. It has been operating the small Gazpesa service station chainsince 1995, after it bought the chain for $15m. The new station is thefirst under its own name.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PETROBRAS LAUNCHES PRODUCTS IN CHILEBR Petrobras Distribuidora has announced the launch of its products inChile where the lubricants market has been growing at a healthy10% ayear but is expected to slow down. The other major distributors areEsso, Castrol and Texaco.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENAP ANNOUNCES PROFITS IN 1995ENAP, Chile's state oil company, has announced profits of $110m in1995, with production at approaching 600,000 cubic metres. In 1996, itplans to invest $160m on expanding its two refineries, improving thequality of its products and on exploration, mostly in other countries.An agreement with Petroecuador to develop a joint exploration programmeis expected to be announced soon.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PIPELINE MAY NOT GO AHEADHondo Oil & Gas of the US is expressing fears that a natgas pipelineplanned by it and Amoco may not go ahead because of changes in pipelinetariffs and natgas prices. The company said also that its Opon No. 5development well has been delayed indefinitely because of right-of-waydisputes with landowners. Hondo said the Comision de Regulacion deEnergia y Gas had set a ceiling price for natgas and a maximum rate ofreturn of 12.5% (before local taxes) for pipeline tariffs. The ceilingis interpreted to include costs or fees for the processing of natgas,thus processing costs cannot be passed on to buyers.As a consequence, these regulations "will reduce the amount the companyexpects to receive for natgas and pipeline tariffs in the future", thecompany said. The regulations affect the terms agreed to in a MOU withEcopetrol for the construction of a pipeline and the sale of natgas.The agreement was signed on July 31. It calls for an 88 km pipelinefrom the contract area to Ecopetrol's refinery at Barrancabermeja.Negotiations are continuing with Ecopetrol to seek relief from theregulations so the project can be got under way.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COLOMBIAN CRUDE OIL PRODUCTIONCrude oil production averaged 583,428 bbl per day in 1995, a 28.5% riseover daily production of 454,020 bbl in 1994, says Ecopetrol.Production in December was below the annual average at 579,060. Foreignoil companies accounted for most of the output, producing an average of458,632 b/d last year, up from 328,155 b/d the year before.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ECOPETROL PLANS TO INVEST $4.7BNEcopetrol plans to invest $4.7bn over the next five years, says thecompany. Some $2.2bn of this will be invested in its associationcontracts with foreign companies, with $1.3bn allocated to the Cusianaand Cupiagua fields alone - $620m in 1996, reducing to $47.5m in 2000.A further $1bn will be invested in refining and petrochemicals, and$773.9m in exploration and production.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BP'S COLOMBIAN OIL AND GAS RESERVESGood news for BP in Colombia where oil and gas reserves are now muchlarger than originally estimated. BP will be producing 1m bbl of oilswithin 10 years, slightly less than what comes out of the UK sector ofthe North Sea. BP is staying mum but did acknowledge that output fromthe Cusiana-Cupiagua field was rising fast and that 500,000 b/d couldbe in production by end-1997. Last month's production would be 180,000b/d, up from 40,000 b/d in 1994. Guerrilla activity remains a threatand are estimated to have caused $45m in damage to pipeline and otherfacilities since 1986.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ECOPETROL TO ATTEMPT TO SELL ITS STAKE IN PROMIGASEcopetrol is to make a second attempt to sell its stake in natgasdistributor Promigas, with an offer of 38.87% of the company on January24 at Ps2,800 per share. The shares include 24.99% owned directly byEcopetrol and 13.88% owned by Explotaciones Condor. Ecopetrol firsttried to sell the stake locally to employees, pension funds and co-operatives at the end of 1995. In September 1994, it sold 3.29% of thecompany, whose other shareholders include the IFC (11.79%) andfinancier Corfivalle (9.82%). The sale is part of a wider divestment of$235m of Ecopetrol's non-operational assets in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CUBA HOPES TO PRODUCE MORE CRUDE THIS YEARCuba hopes to produce some 1.5mt, or about 11.3m bbl, of crude thisyear, fractionally up from last year's figure of 1.45mt and 1.28mt theprevious year. Granma, the Communist Party newspaper, said theincreased production was due to new technology and injection of capitaland resources through linkups with foreign companies. Currentproduction was less than one-fifth of the country's total needs ofabout 7.5mt a year. Cupet, the Cuban petroleum company, has been on aninvestment drive overseas in an attempt to line up more joint ventureswith foreign oil exploration groups.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GOVERNMENT NAMES PRESIDENT OF PETROECUADORThe government has named Patricio Lopez, an army general, as presidentof Petroecuador. Lopez is a former aide-de-camp to President SixtoDuran Bailen. He succeeds Federico Veintimilla, who stepped downrecently along with top managers after allegations of mismanagement.Petroecuador produces 330,000 b/d of the Andes nation's 380,000 b/d. Itis now undergoing a major restructuring as a result of the top-levelcleanout, which led to the resignation of all managers at Petroecuadorsubsidiaries, such as Petroproduccion, Petrocomercial andPetroindustrial.The alleged irregularities were in connection with the purchase of27.5m gallons of diesel from Hiperoil, a local company which hadimported it from Venezuela. Hiperoil is claimed to have added unduetaxes to the sale price for a profit of 30bn sucres ($10.2m), reportsReuters.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEXICAN ENERGY MINISTER TO PRESS AHEAD WITH MODERNISATIONPresident Ernesto Zedillo has called on Jesus Reyes Heroles, the newEnergy Minister, to press ahead with a modernisation of the sector. Hesaid Jesus Reyes' main responsibility "will be to promote a rapidexpansion of the energy sector" and stimulating a quicker modernisationof state-owned companies. Mexico is destined to sell a large part ofits petrochem industry this year. It has been under the control ofPetroleos Mexicanos. The country has already liberalised the naturalgas sector and expects billions of dollars in investment in natgastransportation as well as in new power plants.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PROPOSAL TO DEVELOP GAS FIELD IN NORTHERN MEXICOA consortium of US firm Conoco, Canada's Nova Corp and Canadian HunterExploration have presented a proposal to develop a potentially enormousnatural gas field in northern Mexico, according to a report in the WallStreet Journal. Under the terms of the proposal, made several monthsago, the group would agree a long-term service contract with PetroleosMexicanos (Pemex) to explore for and produce gas at Burgos Basin,bordering Texas. The companies, which would be equal partners in thedeal, would initially invest $100m in the project.If successful, the proposal, said to be in a very early stage ofdiscussion, would be taken as a signal that Mexico may relax itsrestrictions on foreign involvement in the energy sector. Mexican lawcurrently forbids foreign ownership of its energy resources.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PETROPERU PLANS TO CUT WORKFORCEPetroperu plans to cut its workforce before a stage-by-stageprivatisation later this year, the company says. "The programme . . .foresees the retirement of excess personnel, to whom an economicincentive will be given as well as legal benefits", it said. The ideawas to make the company's various divisions more efficient beforeprivatisation. Officials would not say how many of the company's 5,500workers were likely to go, but speculation is that numbers could be cutby 1,000 by July.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PERU'S OIL PRODUCTIONPeru's oil production fell 4.36% in 1995 from an average of 127,309 bpdto 121,762 bpd, according to a report from regulatory agency Perupetro.The fall was blamed on problems over the past few months with thedepletion of old wells before new wells came on-stream. Officialsexpect the situation to improve in 1996, following last year'ssignature of deals with foreign oil producers, and the start of a four-year privatisation programme for Petroperu.The country produced a total of 44.44m barrels in 1995 compared to46.47m in 1994, said the report, with some 95.1% produced by state oilfirm Petroperu (14.54m bbl), Petro-Tech (7.09m) and US firm OccidentalPetroleum (20.64m). Private contractors accounted for the remaining4.9%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PDVSA PLANS TO INCREASE CRUDE RESERVESPDVSA plans to increase crude reserves to 66bn bbl in 1996 from 64.4bnthis year, said PDVSA at its annual general meeting. It said it plansto invest Bol 1.7 trillion next year ($5.86bn at the new officialexchange rate of Bol 290 per dollar in effect since December 11), upfrom Bol 901.9m in 1995 ($3.1bn). Most investment will go intoproduction and exploration, said a company statement.PDVSA said the programme will allow it to meet production targets "andincrease in 1996 proven reserves of crude to about 66bn bbl, or 1.6bnmore than 1995". PDVSA gave no figures for projected crude outputcapacity or the budget that was approved. The company said recentlythat its average production was rising to 5.659m b/d by 2005 comparedto 3.157m b/d now.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PDVSA EXPECTS OIL OUTPUT BOOSTPDVSA expects oil output to be boosted further by the currentliberalisation programme. The company expects output from the tenblocks being auctioned to reach at least 500,000 bpd by 2005, accordingto president Luis Giusti. Some 60 companies in 20 consortia have bidfor the estimated $11bn of profit-sharing contracts. At the time ofgoing to press, two winners had been announced - a consortium of Mobil,Veba and Nippon with a bid of $104m for La Ceiba tract, and Conoco,bidding $21.2m for a second tract. The remaining concessions will beannounced by the end of January, with exploration beginning possibly bythe last quarter of1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VENEZUELA'S AMUAY REFINERY RECORDVenezuela's Amuay refinery, the country's largest, processed 471,000b/d last year, a 41,000 b/d rise over 1994, says Lagoven, a subsidiaryof PDVSA. It said that 100,000 b/d were heavy crude, which representeda new record for the refinery, located in Falcon state. Venezuelaprocessed an average 972,000 b/d in 1994, say the latest figures. Atthe same time, the Eastern Cyrogenic Complex, run by Corpoven, producedan average of 34m b/d of LNG in 1995, up 9% over 1994. The PDVSAsubsidiary exported an average of 11m b/d of its LNG output, theremaining 23m b/d sold domestically.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996STATOIL CONSIDERING JOINING MARAVEN TO UPGRADE CRUDEStatoil is considering joining forces with PDVSA's Maraven subsidiaryto upgrade crude in the Orinoco Tar Belt. President Harold Norvik ofStatoil was in Venezuela recently to undertake discussions. Theupgrading project is being carried out by Total and Itochu and Marubeniof Japan. The project calls for production of heavy crude from the TarBelt, which would be converted into crude with a 31 degree API for saleto Europe, Japan and North America.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-5IA059-000325-B007-338http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey21.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235146 text/html 85835HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:49:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:57 GMTContent-length: 85648Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey21.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER UK via NewsNet January 26, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LITTLECHILD REDIRECTS 1998 PLAN (3098 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW ESI WARNED OF "POLL TAX ON WIRES" (1397 words) ENRON APPLIES FOR SUPPLY LICENCE (218 words) NEWS SOUTHERN MOVES INTO GAS SUPPLY (55 words) BG/HE GO AHEAD WITH SEABANK (279 words) MISSION/EASTERN VIE FOR NP PLANT (445 words) PG BRINGS ON DISTA PRODUCTS CHP (117 words) NT ALARMED BY ABB INTENTIONS (334 words) CCGT GENERATION GROWTH SLOWS IN 1995 (337 words) WELLHEAD GAS GENERATOR SET TO TRADE BELOW GSP (177 words) COAL GENS TO FACE ONE RAIL COMPANY (84 words) NEW YEAR SEES PRICE TUMBLE (306 words) RIGG STEPS DOWN AS POOL CHAIR (96 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW MCILDOON CALLS FOR COMPETITION (717 words) DTI CLEARS CSW BID FOR SEEBOARD (212 words) NEWS HE FACES TOUGHER SUPPLY STANDARD (71 words) BANKS RESCUE COAL INVESTMENTS (38 words) UNDERGROUND STARTS TENDER PROCESS (137 words) NATPOWER TO CUT #60M FROM COSTS (156 words) SEI AND HANSON AGREE LICENCES (65 words) EASTERN ACQUIRES OVERSEAS ARM (81 words) CITY ANALYSTS RESHUFFLE (56 words) UKDCS WIN QUALITY AWARD (74 words) KING TAKES TOP JOB AT PG (138 words) MEE RETIRES FROM EASTERN BOARD (37 words) ROBERTS JOINS SWALEC (40 words) MAGNOX ELECTRIC SPLIT OUT (66 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW BE PRIVATISABLE ONLY AT TAXPAYERS' EXPENSE SAY MACKERRON AND SADNICKI (1376 words) PRICE SETTING GENSETS: DECEMBER 1995 (1679 words) CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996LITTLECHILD REDIRECTS 1998 PLANThe Regulator has told the Pool and the ESI that it must redirectefforts to finding a workable and economic arrangement for introducingfull competition in April 1998. He says that the estimated costs ofimplementing and running the Pool's proposed Operational Framework areneither reasonable nor necessary. Offer has proposed a number ofsimplifications that it believes will facilitate implementation andreduce costs. It believes that implementation costs should not exceed#50m, while subsequent operating costs should be around #15m. Thesecosts are about one fifth of the Pool's estimates.The difference in cost estimates reflects two factors:* a real cost saving arising from abandoning some of the more complexand expensive systems, most particularly the Pool's proposedregistration system;* the Regulator's judgement that some of the costs incurred by the PESsrelate to activities that would in any case have to be carried out byPESs in discharging their duties as distribution companies. Many ofthese costs have already been provided for or else the additional costsare not significant.In addition to slashing the implementation costs that the industry willbe allowed to cover, Offer has told the industry that customers shouldnot face any additional charges before 1998. It recommends thatimplementation costs should be recovered over five years from April1998, with all <100kW customers paying in relation to theirconsumption. The current non franchise sector would not have tocontribute to the implementation or running costs.In many ways Offer's recommendations echo the call by a number of RECsfor a major re-think on how best to implement the 1998 project. ThreeRECs, Southern Electric, Yorkshire Electricity and MidlandsElectricity, had in late December put forward an alternative framework,which was dubbed the SYM proposal. This group called for the ESI toabandon the implementation of the Pool's Operational Framework. Itargued that the industry should switch now, before it was too late, toa simpler and more manageable programme that could be implemented intime and yet would meet all the primary objectives.The SYM plan backers are uncompromising in their criticism of the ESI'scurrent 1998 plans. They argued that the "Operational Frameworkproposals are unlikely to be delivered on time. With a development costof #276m (+100%.-50%) and some #80m/yr to operate, it is so expensive,it makes it very difficult for companies to accept. It also underminesthe benefit available to customers from competition."They say that a simpler framework is needed in order to meet time-scales. This must use existing systems, procedures and practiceswherever possible. Not only would this make implementation of fullcompetition a more manageable task, it would also substantially reducecosts. They argue that there is no time to lose in pushing forward withthe alternative.Offer's proposalsStream-lined registrationOffer thinks that the Pool's registration system is unnecessarilycomplex and that it would be more appropriate for the PES to provide aregistration service to meet the requirements of suppliers and the Poolfor all consumers in its area. It is prepared to propose licenceamendments to ensure that the PES fulfil these activities.The Pool's proposed on-line registration system - the so-called TradingSystem Data Provision (TSDP) and its associated Gateway - is generallyregarded as one of the more complex systems the Pool has proposed. TheTSDP would be made up of regional satellite databases (one per REC)holding data necessary for trading. A common access path to the data(the so-called Gateway) would allow all suppliers to access the data.It is envisaged that eventually the system will provide on-line access.The Regulator proposes a much simpler system based on a uniqueidentifier for every metering site, which would be printed on allcustomers bills and would provide suppliers and others with necessaryinformation. PES would be responsible for assigning this meteringsystem identifier (MSID), which would give information on thedistribution exit point, profile, line loss factor and meter readingfrequency and perhaps other data. PESs would maintain databases of allcustomers in their area as well as provide a service to respond toenquiries from customers and suppliers. Suppliers would have anobligation to alert the PES to any change, and in particular toregister their responsibility for supply to any premises. The PESdatabases would also provide the Pool with standing data it requiresfor settlement.Regulatory safeguards, such as performance standards and penalties, arelikely to be required to ensure prompt and non discriminatory provisionof information.ProfilingOffer accepts the Pool's proposals for eight profiles for 100kWcustomers. And while its says that assignment of profiles has not beena contentious issue, customers and suppliers should have the right toseek independent determination where there is a dispute. The eightprofiles comprise two profiles each for domestic and smaller non-domestic customers (unrestricted and Economy 7) and four profiles(based on load factors) for larger non-domestic customers suppliedthrough conventional maximum demand metering.SettlementUnder the Pool's current arrangements metered half hour data andprofiled data for all second tier customers is provided to the Pool'sagents for settlement, while first tier consumption is evaluated on agrid supply point (GSP) basis as the difference between total secondtier use and total GSP take, suitably scaled for losses. The Pool's PTAis that the existing arrangements for second tier data will continuewhile PESs will be able to choose the basis by which they will submitfirst tier consumption data to settlements. The option of continuingthe existing "differencing" approach has not been allowed for, as itwas considered to place too great a risk on PESs, should large numbersof customers opt for second-tier suppliers.Instead, the PTA allows the PES to select one of three trading options:* Global: where the host PES submits customer data on an individualsite basis both for initial settlement and reconciliation, on the samebasis as second-tier suppliers;* Super customer: where the host PES submits aggregated data for one ormore profile groups to initial settlement and reconciliation;* Hybrid-difference: where the host PES submits individual customerdata on a global basis at initial settlement, but at the reconciliationstage only meter data from second-tier customers is used.The global approach is the most demanding in IT terms - if all RECsadopted this approach settlement systems would have to handle data on23m sites. The hybrid-difference approach is the most easiest, as mostof the aggregated data is not processed for Pool use. The supercustomer lies in between.As the amount of data provided for settlement increases so does thecost, but this must be offset against reduced differencing risk. ThePool's costings assume that all RECs adopt the global approach, inorder to avoid differencing risk.Offer says that this is unreasonable and given the balance betweencosts and risks there is no justification for adopting the globaloption. Indeed in the initial period, Offer proposes that PESs muststay with the existing differencing approach. It adds that PESspursuing the super customer or hybrid difference approach will not begiven an extra revenue allowance to meet the additional costs it andthe Pool incurs.PESs should be obliged to provide data aggregation services to allsuppliers operating in their area on a non-discriminatory basis.Suppliers could then decide whether to provide the data aggregationservice to the Pool themselves or through an independent accreditedagent or sub-contract their requirement to the host REC.Operating costs of 1998 PTA: #m/yrCost component             Direct     Indirect                           costs      costsSystem operation& maintenance               4         30Monitoring                  5          0Audit systems               7          0Management & support        3          0Other, includingprofile maintenance         1          0Total                      40         30Source: PoolHalf-hourly metering in reconciliationThe Pool's PTA allows for half hour metered data to be delivered tooutside settlement timescales. The Regulator endorses this as it allowscustomers to benefit from half hour metering without installing on-linecommunications. This will allow a wider range of tariffs than can beoffered to customers and will reduce the reliance on profilingtechniques for larger customers under 100kW.Competition in metering and data collectionOffer has re-affirmed its view that suppliers should takeresponsibility for metering and data collection in 1998. However in thenon half hourly metered sector of the market, the Offer has endorsedthe Pool's recommendation for a two-year transitional arrangement. Thiswill involve the supplier sub-contracting to the local PES (or itsagent), those data collection functions that are related toconventional meters, at least in so far as they are necessary fortrading system purposes. Offer envisages that PESs would enter intobilateral contracts with suppliers, which would set out the terms uponwhich the data collection service would be provided. Any dispute aboutterms would be subject to determination by the Regulator.Parallels with SYM lineIn essence the SYM proposal involves applying the existing tradingarrangements to all customers with half-hourly on-line meters, whileassigning responsibility for all other customers to the RECsdistribution businesses. Like Offer, the SYM scheme involves replacingthe Pool's centralised registration system with a simple one based onPES distribution businesses, while the existing settlement process,supplemented by a local aggregation and reconciliation system, will beretained. PESs would continue to trade on the basis of differencing, asOffer proposes for the initial period.The Pool would continue to clear on a daily basis. All half-hour meterdata will continue to be processed through the current centralsettlements system. This will include all the additional data frommandatory and non-mandatory half hour meters.For all non half-hour data, the REC distribution business would providea data aggregation and reconciliation service for all supply customersin its area. Distributors would provide initial estimates of annualconsumption that will be used for settlement purposes. These estimateswould be updated following receipt of physical meter reading, validatedcustomer own readings or estimates carried out by the RECs' existingestimating process.Aggregated data would be fed to the initial settlement. This would becarried out on a calender basis. In this way it would spread theprofile and line loss risk across all suppliers.The reconciliation process, carried out between the host PES and secondtier suppliers, would be synchronised with the meter reading data flowsthat feed it. The host PES would have to accept the difference risk,which applies to a small margin between the published and out-turn lineloss factors. These would be small.Unlike the Pool's proposal the SYM plan would not allow customers totrade on the basis of half hourly data unless it is provided on-linewithin settlement timescales. The SYM backers argue that since few>100kW customers have chosen to take supply on multi-rate terms, thegains from continuing to allow half hourly data to be processed outsidetimescales, would be outweighed by the savings due to the simplifiedsettlement task. They point out that it would not be possible to caterfor data delivered outside settlement timescales due to thedifferencing principle at reconciliation.They say that their proposals would enable new suppliers to givereliable quotations to prospective customers without direct involvementwith the existing supplier or distributor. Equally, the SYM backersacknowledge that the main disadvantage is the reliance of non host PESsuppliers on effective regulation of host PESs' systems and procedures.However these concerns can be addressed by appropriate licenceamendments and performance standards. SYM point out that supplierswould be able verify meter readings on Pool statements against thosecontained within DUoS (distribution use of system) statements.On competition in data collection and metering in the conventionalmetering segment, the SYM backers say that while the PES should retainresponsibility for this, there is no reason why actual data collectionand meter operation should not be carried out by third parties. Thiswould have to be subject to:* current meter data flow being preserved (in other words the datacollector will have to send data to host REC - the data is anywayrequired for billing suppliers' distribution use of system charge);* data collector and meter operator parties having proper accreditationand complying with codes of practice;* maintenance of a evenly loaded quarterly cycle of data processing(which might imply some data being stored prior to processing). This isnecessary in order that the reconciliation system is not overloaded.Costs and risksThe cost saving in IT systems of the Offer and SYM alternativeframeworks are huge. The largest savings stem from the removal of theneed to develop new data collection and delivery systems, and toprovide half-hour profile data to the Pool trading system. In addition,there would be savings in reduced programme management costs and trialcosts. While Offer puts the total implementation costs at under #50m,SYM's estimate is #89m, and for a system that is more trimmed down thanOffer's. Similarly, SYM's estimate of annual operating costs, c.#25m issubstantially above Offer's.Simplifying the operational framework will also ease the task ofimplementing it, in terms of making development of IT systems moremanageable and also in terms of reducing legal re-drafting of thePooling and Settlement Agreement and other arrangement.The SYM operational frameworkCustomer driven registration:* Customer provides new supplier with information from bill.* New supplier confirms supply to customer.* New supplier registers customer with host PES registration  service.* New supplier sets up billing record.* Host PES registration service registers change/Notifies previous  supplier.* Meter reading decided (actual, customer own, agreed estimate).* PES calculates DUoS bill.* PES sends termination DUoS account to previous supplier.* Previous supplier sends supply termination account to customer.Cyclical meter reading:* Host PES meter reading (actual, customer own, agreed estimate).* Host PES send meter reading to supplier.* Supplier calculates supply bill.* Supplier sends supply bill.* PES calculates DUoS bill.* PES sends DUoS bill to supplier.* PES settlement module derives reconciliation amounts and submits  to the Pool's agents Energy Pool Funds Administration Limited  (EPFAL).* EPFAL clears reconciliation amounts.Calendar-settlement timescales:* Existing settlement arrangements applied to half hour metered  customers.* SSA provides differences between GSP and line loss factor adjusted  half-hourly metered data to PES settlement module.* PES settlement module submits supplier aggregates by profile to  SSA.* SSA bills suppliers and pays generators for initial settlement via  EPFAL.Pool and SYM Operational framework implemention costs: #mProgramme                        Pool's  Proposal  SYM      OfferElement                          Direct  Indirect  Proposal Estimate                                 Pool    CostsTrading system data provisionsystems                           24      90        0         0Initial settlement & reconcil-iation systems                    17       0       17        17Data collection systems            3       0        0         3Pilot trails & audit              13       0        6       }Systems integration & testing     11      18       14       }Commercial arrangements            8       0        4       }19Programme/project management       9      15       12       }Data acquisition & load            6      27       16       }Other system developments,including modifications toexisting systems                   6       4        5         9System architecture & design       2       0        1         2Other                              2       0        0         0Total                            101     154       75        50Source: Pool, Offer and SYMIndustry and customer reactionThe industry has still to digest the Regulator's proposals, which havetaken many by surprise. Many are pleased that Offer is taking a moreproactive stance and that it has at last outlined the principles forcost recovery. But there is widespread feeling among the PES that Offerhas slashed too deeply into the PESs allowable implementation andoperating costs. Yorkshire's Bill Wilkinson, told Power UK that "Onfirst impressions, Offer's disallow any extra spend by distributionbusinesses, which could be significant, is harsh especially if itadopts an inflexible approach on ring fencing distribution and supplybusinesses".A number of PESs will certainly be unhappy that Offer will only meetthe costs of trading on a differencing basis, rather than meeting thecosts of alternative, more data-demanding, settlements arrangements.National Power, PowerGen and the aspiring independent suppliers arelikely to welcome the Offer proposals, if they believe that they willreduce the costs to customers of taking competitive supply. It does notmatter to them that PESs may find it difficult to keep costs to theallowed levels, as long as the PES can deliver the requiredregistration and data aggregation services. However they are concernedthat no key competition elements should be lost in the effort tosimplify. NP's commercial director, Graham Brown told Power UK, "NPwelcomes any proposal that leads to lower costs that will eventuallyfeed through to the customer, but the industry must be careful not toover simplify as this could jeopardise competition. We will be studyingthe proposals closely".Customers' representatives and buyers' groups are likely to support thetougher Offer stance if it reduces the costs of taking competitivesupply. Yvonne Constance, the chair of the Electricity ConsumersCommittee, backs the Regulator's decision to allow PESs to startrecovering implementation costs from 1998 rather than in advance.Larger >100kW customers will be pleased that Offer has proposed thatPESs will be able to recover the implementation costs for 1998 from the<100kW consumers. Also they will take some satisfaction that Offer hastold the PES that there should be no disruption in the tradingarrangements for the >100kW sector. The Utility Buyers Forum (UBF) onlylast week called for a two-year postponement of the 1998 project on thegrounds that there were too many unresolved issues and too little timeto implement the necessary changes. Alan Mitchell Rae, UBF's directorgeneral, said "that many of our members have sites which canpotentially benefit from competition but would rather have an orderlytransition and postpone these benefits than see more major upsetthroughout the market."UBF also say that neither the Regulator nor ESI had yet made a firmbusiness case for extending competition to residential customers. Therewas instead an ideological commitment. According to Bob Spears, UBF'selectricity technical adviser, "its rather like the governmentdeclaring that the UK will join the Single European Currency in 1998,whatever the costs and benefits and whatever the level ofpreparedness".Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ESI WARNED OF "POLL TAX ON WIRES"The ESI's current plans for introducing full competition in 1998 are sodeeply flawed that they could present a "poll tax on wires", accordingto a new report by Alex Henney. Henney warns that the systems the Pooland Offer have in mind are unnecessarily complex and costly, and thatthe gains to be had from competition do not justify building a hugecentralised settlement system. He adds that, as with complex ITsystems, there is a more than even chance that they will exceed budgetand will not be more than ready in time. The solution, according toHenney, is to ditch the current centralised system and develop adecentralised system based on PESs' distribution businesses.That this criticism should come Henney - a well known advocate of freemarkets, an astute independent thinker, and former Electricity Councileconomist, makes it all the more pertinent. That its conclusions arelargely endorsed by the breakaway RECs and now even Offer gives it aradical manifesto flavour.ESI's 1998 costs outweigh competition benefitsHenney contends that even if the Pool can contain the implementationand running costs to the targets set out in its Operational Framework,the costs may outweigh the benefits from competition. Adding theoperating costs (#80m) to the development costs (#250m, amortised overfour years on a 10% discount rate) and dividing by the number ofcustomers (23m), yields an annual cost per customer of #5.80. Thesecosts are about double the level implied by the Regulator, who hasstated that the costs are unlikely to exceed 1% of customers' bills,which average #300/yr.What riles Henney is the singular failure of the Regulator or industryto examine the benefits side of the equation. Henney points out that itis disengenuous to cite the reductions in prices that followed eitherthe  opening of the 1MW or 100kW markets as deriving from the effectsof head-to-head competition. The reductions owe more to the fact thatcustomers no longer had to subsidise British Coal through the REC'svesting or "coal deal" contracts; and in 1994 to the imposition ofOffer's Pool price cap.Henney argues that in order to see what the potential gains are it isnecessary to focus on the energy and supply business component ofbills. For a typical domestic customer these components amount to#157/yr. The great bulk of this is energy (generation costs) with just#27 accounted for by the supply business, including an average supplymargin of #7.40. This average does of course disguise a range of supplycosts, in the order of #10 for a customer on direct debit to #60 for apoorly paying credit customer. There is also some variation betweenRECs' franchise revenue allowances.In theory, competition in supply will force suppliers:* to reduce supply costs by improving efficiency in marketing andbilling through smarter IT systems or by sharing operations with otherutilities. Henney suggests that higher cost RECs could cut costs by 15%(#6) while lower cost companies might trim costs by 10% (#3).* to trim margins. The scope for trimming is extremely small given thesmall margins: margins on domestic customers are unlikely to be muchover #5.* to purchase energy more efficiently. With no data available on RECs'purchasing skills/luck, Henney suggests that perhaps #1-2 might beavailable. In addition, some RECs with expensive long-term IPPcontracts will no longer be able to pass the costs on customers, butwill be forced to take the above market cost on their supply businessbottom line. For a few RECs this could amount to #3.00 per typicaldomestic customer.Summing these potential benefits, gives a maximum potential reductionof #11/customer (where the customer is served by a high cost REC andpoor buying). Expressed as a percentage of the typical bill this savingis equivalent to 4% of the total bill (7% of energy costs). In anaverage REC, potential savings may be nearer #7 or 3% of the totalbill.These potential saving are not much greater than the costs, whichamount to near #6/customer. On this basis the potential net customerbenefit of competition is perhaps #2-3/customer. Henney questions,whether in practice even these gains will be realised. Competition willonly bring price reductions where customers are prepared to switch totake advantage of lower prices. The limited evidence that exists fromother commodity/utility markets and from other countries (most notablyNorway) suggests that the 3-4% savings on offer is unlikely to temptmany residential customers buying singly to move. Unless residentialbuyers are willing to delegate their purchasing to agencies purchasingfor many customers, it is difficult to see many domestic customersgaining from competition.Indeed, if the costs of the new systems come out nearer the top end ofthe Pool's contingency forecast range (at c.#500m) most domesticcustomers will pay for competition. Henney warns that residentialcustomers may not actually become aware of this situation, as theseincreases should be more than offset by reductions elsewhere. Thebiggest gain is likely to come with the ending of the RECs' coal backedfranchise contracts.Complex systems don't always workThe cost-benefit balance looks even worse if the risks of systemfailure are factored in. Henney warns that complex IT systems rarelycome in on time, to budget and without operational gliches. He citesone recent survey of IT programmes in 200 organisations which showedthat 90% of projects were over budget, 60% delivered late and 20%inappropriate for the task. In recent years there have been notable ITfailures including major system developed for the DHSS, Inland Revenue,the London Ambulance Service and the Stock Exchange. The Pool's ownexperience, albeit so far on a more modest scale, has hardly beenimpressive. The Transmission Service Scheme implemented last year tomanage Uplift overshot its target cost by 150%. The proposed settlementand registration systems are much more complex.Regulator is key to forcing progressLike many in the industry, Henney is also concerned about who, ifanyone, is taking responsibility for designing and implementing thesystems for full competition in 1998. He points out that the ESI has nolegal obligation nor financial allowance to design and develop thesystems for 1998. It is the Regulator who has the obligation to"promote competition in the supply of electricity" and who also haslegal power to propose the necessary commercial framework.Henney points out that a REC's primary duty is to its shareholders. Infact it has a duty not to commit funds until such time as licencesobligations require it to do so. And they certainly cannot spend theircustomers' money without Offer's authorisation, but as yet Offer hasmade no allowance. This is hardly taking a proactive stance, as theRegulator claims.Build systems on PES distributionHenney says that the Regulator should take control and reconstruct analternative streamlined programme based on existing distributionbusiness systems. He proposes an alternative systems that will:* allow anyone to have half-hourly meters, and allow data to beprocessed within or outside settlement timescales;* build the necessary registration systems on the current systemdeveloped for the current non-franchise market;* produce pseudo half-hour data with a handful of profiles in themanner currently proposed;* use PES distribution businesses to effect local settlement andreconciliation.Henney says that adopting such an approach is not a jump into theunknown, as Norway has already implemented such a system. And under thecurrent competitive market arrangements, RECs already know to whom eachmeter relates and who the suppliers are as they have to recover DUoS(distribution use of system) charges from suppliers.Daily settlement through GSP (grid supply points) which is required bythe Pooling and Settlement Agreement (PSA) could be done for profiledcustomers by RECs distribution businesses (for a fee) on behalf of allsuppliers in its area. The difference between profiled and meteredsupply and final metered use (scaled for losses) would be allocatedproportionally among suppliers.* Proposals for liberalising the electricity market in England & Walesin 1998: a poll tax on wires?, by Alex Henney, available from EEElimited, 0171 284 4217, Fax 0171 284 4331. Price #200.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ENRON APPLIES FOR SUPPLY LICENCEEnron has applied to the DTI for a second-tier supply licence forEngland and Wales. It lodged its application on January 12. If it isawarded a licence, which should be a formality, it will be able tooffer supply terms to any >100kW customer. The company is alreadyactive in the gas supply business and would be expected to operate ajoint gas and electricity marketing operation.Enron's application follows Norsk Hydro's successful application foran STS licence on January 10. NH is now setting up an electricitytrading and supply arm, Norsk Hydro Energi (UK), under the direction ofJamie Hamilton. Hamilton says he expects NHE to offer and trade CfDs(contracts for differences) including EFAs (electricity forwardagreements).NH has already has considerable experience as a supplier and trader inthe Nordic electricity market, which is of comparable size to the UKmarket.Hamilton joined NHE in December from National Power, where he was thefuel strategy manager. Prior to that he was at Shell.NH also has manufacturing interests in the UK, and around 2,000employees.Contact: Jamie Hamilton, Norsk Hydro Energi (UK), Tel. 0181 255 2510.* John Tarpey has taken over as manager of Energy Direct, NationalPower's electricity supply business. Tarpey was previously manager ofby-products.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SOUTHERN MOVES INTO GAS SUPPLYSouthern Electric is to begin marketing gas to around 40,000 of itscustomers in Somerset, who are in the first tranche of customers ableto choose their gas supplier from April 1996. The gas will be soldthrough its associated company, Southern and Phillips Gas. Southernalready has extensive experience in the commercial gas market.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996BG/HE GO AHEAD WITH SEABANKBritish Gas and Hydro-Electric announced on January 22 that they hadformed a 50:50 joint venture, Seabank Power Limited (SPL), which willconstruct and operate a 755MW CCGT plant at Avonmouth. The backers saythat the plant will be designed to operate profitably in the mid meritsegment of the market.The total capital cost of the project is expected to #315m, which willbe funded equally by HE and BG, through a mix of shareholder loans andequity in an 85:15 split.HE has signed a power purchase agreement under which it will buy allthe electricity produced by the plant for the first 10.5 years. Thecompany will  also be responsible for providing fuel to SPL from itsgas portfolio, which has been augmented by a new contract with BG. Thisadditional gas is understood to have been purchased under a contractthat links the delivered gas price to electricity prices (Pool andcontract). This suggests that HE will be transferring a significantpart of the electricity price risk through to BG.Siemens has been awarded the turnkey contract for design andconstruction, with commercial operation scheduled for late 1998. Theplant will be based on two Siemens V94.3a 250MW gas turbines and asingle 255MW steam turbine, which will give an overall efficiency ofover 55% (on an LHV ISO basis). Firing will be solely by natural gas,with no distillate backup.The design configuration does allow space for further units. However,the partners point out that the current 755MW represents the mostappropriate configuration, given the changing market circumstanceswhich have seen Seabank project scaled down from a >1.3GW baseloadscheme.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MISSION/EASTERN VIE FOR NP PLANTMission Energy is now the City's favourite to win control of the 4GW ofNational Power coal capacity following the company's winning bid forFirst Hydro. At more than #150m above the next highest bid, Mission'swinning bid is regarded as a strategic entry bid. Many in the Citybelieve that this acquisition is likely to feed Mission's hunger formore capacity and a broader portfolio of plant. Industry sources, incontrast still tend to put Eastern Group as favourite, as it too hasconsiderable financial muscle and strong ambitions to play a biggerrole in the UK generation sector.AES and Enron are considered to be outside runners in the contest,although both have significant interests in the UK generation sector.But these companies should not be ruled out. Enron has always presenteditself as a clean generation company, so it was something of a surprisewhen it declared an interest in the NP coal plant. While Enron have notconfirmed it, most observers (Power UK included) have assumed thatEnron interest in the plant on offer, is driven by the options forconverting or repowering the plant to run on gas.NP's conversion of two sets at Didcot (1,000MW) indicates that NP atleast thinks there is an economic case for dual firing capability.However, none of the three stations (West Burton, Ironbridge andRugeley) have connections to the gas network (as Didcot has), so theconversion cost is likely to be somewhat more than the c.#10m (#10/kW)for Didcot. But even if the cost were double or treble, a conversionmight pay, especially if low cost gas could be secured.The gas break-even price with coal bought on the spot market (asopposed to the headline "coal deal" price) is likely to be around 11-12p a therm. This is achievable at present, but it would be a braveinvestor who would count on prices remaining at current levels. Thissuggests that if the plants are to have a future burning gas they willhave to be upgraded, which implies a commitment to invest much biggersums than a simple conversion. By installing gas turbines and modifyingthe boilers and steam turbines, it would be possible to convert thestations into combined cycle stations. Operating in this mode thestations could achieve efficiencies of 45-48%, compared with about 38%running in single cycle mode. The extra efficiency points would give ahigher break-even gas price versus coal, but then it comes at asubstantial investment price, some #200m for West Burton.Switching to gas would, of course, bring considerable environmentalbenefits, most particularly in reducing sulphur dioxide emissions.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996PG BRINGS ON DISTA PRODUCTS CHPPowerGen CHP has commissioned its 10MWe/16MWt combined heat and powerat Dista Products' Merseyside site two months ahead of schedule andjust over 15 months after construction started. The plant will beoperated by PG CHP for 10 years under a total energy managementcontract. It comprises two 5MW Typhoon gas turbines provided byEuropean Gas Turbines and two waste heat boilers each supplying 11.5tonnes of steam an hour.PG CHP has also announced that it has won a contract to provide a #23mgas fired CHP plant at Conoco's oil refinery on the Humber estuary. Theplant's four gas turbines will be supplied with natural gas by a spurfrom the main Killingholme-Theddlethorpe line.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996NT ALARMED BY ABB INTENTIONSThe National Trust (NT) has reacted with alarm to an approach by ABBthat it develop a 720MW CCGT on NT land adjoining an Exeter substation.ABB argued that the plant could be appropriately designed andlandscaped to minimise visual impact. By siting the plant next to thesubstation, the project would also avoid the need for further intrusivetransmission lines. This didn't wash with NT, which said that large-scale power generation was incompatible with the NT's goal ofstewardship.ABB says that the Exeter project had been little more than plucked offthe map - and the approach to NT the land-owners was the first timethat ABB had revealed its intentions. While it may represent amisjudgment it certainly does not represent a setback for the company.More importantly, it does indicate that generators are actively lookingfor sites in the capacity-short zones of the Grid.US oil giant Amoco, is also considering entering the UK generationmarket. The company's electricity subsidiary, Amoco Power Resourcesposted an invitation to tender for turnkey for a 250MW CCGT. Amoco toldPower UK that the company has several potential sites in mind, not justin East Anglia as mentioned in the Official Journal, and that it neededprice quotes from equipment companies in order to carry out itseconomic assessments.Amoco's invitation to tender follows a series placed by Enron Europe inDecember 1995, for various CCGT components for an unspecified site inthe north west of England. The supply contracts includes a 240MW gasturbine, high pressure steam boilers and one or more back-pressure 75MWsteam turbines and one or more heat recovery steam generators.Enron would not comment on the site for the plant, but did confirm thatthe CCGT in question would be suitable for a combined heat and powerapplication.The rating of the plant and the northwest site suggest that Enron isbidding to provide CHP facilities at Brunner Mond or at ICI Runcorn.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996CCGT GENERATION GROWTH SLOWS IN 1995Current industry estimates are that total CCGT generation in Englandand Wales in 1995 reached just over 45TWh. This compares withprojections of over 50TWh made at the beginning of the year. CCGTgeneration in 1994 was 36TWh, indicating a 25% increase in 1995.The lower than expected growth in generation is largely due to thedelayed commissioning of several major new CCGT plants - (most notably,Little Barford (National Power), Keadby (Hydro-Electric/Norweb) andMedway (AES, Seeboard and Southern).Keadby has just this week completed handover (from John BrownEngineering, the construction contractor). Handover had been originallyscheduled for last summer, but vibration problems meant that thecommissioning programme was disrupted. It is the same story at theother two stations. Medway now reports, as do the others, that its twoturbines are running fine. However, it does not now expect to completehandover until late summer, almost a year behind the original scheduleddate. None of the companies would comment on who has borne the burdenof the delay costs, but industry rumours suggest that GE has covered asubstantial portion.With these three plants now running and with PowerGen's 1,400MWConnah's Quay expected on in the summer, and a full year's output fromBarking, CCGT generation should exceed 70TWh in 1996.Current CCGT developmentStation             MW      Commercial   Company/Partners                            operationCommissioningLittle Barford         680  early 1996   National PowerKeadby                 680    Jan 1996   Hydro-Electric/NorwebMedway                 660    Aug 1996   AES/SEEBOARD/SouthernSub-total            2,020Under constructionDidcot               1,350    mid 1997   National PowerConnah's Quay        1,400    mid 1996   PowerGenIndian Queens          160  early 1997   Turbine Power - DestecKing's Lynn            340    end 1996   Eastern GroupSouth Humber           750  early 1997   Humber Power - Midlands/IVOSalt Union              47        1996   Salt Union/Hydro-ElectricCitigen                 60        1996   CitigenAvonmouth              755        1998   Hydro-Electric/British GasSub-total            4,862Firm plannedRuncorn                700        1998   InterGen/Winnington             300        1999   Brunner MondEnfield                280   late 1998   IndeckTeeside                800        1999   Flotilla (Enron)Staythorpe           1,500        1999   National PowerSub-total            3,580Grand total         10,462Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996WELLHEAD GAS GENERATOR SET TO TRADE BELOW GSPIndependent Energy UK, a small West Midlands-based energy company isset to begin operations at its first on-shore wellhead gas power plantthat will export power onto the local distribution network. The firstplant, due on in April will only be rated at 1MW, but IEUK's commercialdirector John Sully, says that the company has licences for several on-shore sites. He expects to have 30-60MW of generation capacity acrossthe Midlands within a year.IEUK has been born from a merger of Ipsco, an oil industry servicingcompany, and EUKAN, a small gas company with several on-shore gasconcessions. By diversifying into generation, Sully, who recentlyjoined from Scottish Power's energy trading arm, says the company isable to exploit the added value of moving downstream. Sully adds thatthe vertical integration does not need to stop at generation and thatIEUK intends to be an active trader in electricity and gas. The companyis also likely to apply for a second-tier supply licence.For John Sully's contact details: call Power UK 0173 265095Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996COAL GENS TO FACE ONE RAIL COMPANYThe success of Wisconsin Central Transportation in winning all three ofthe rail-freight concerns means that the English coal generators willagain face a single railway carrier. Coal industry sources fear thatthe generators and coal suppliers will see their bargaining positionweakened, so railage costs could increase which would feed through tohigher fuel costs. National Power is best placed among the generatorsas it already has acquired several train sets and has options withsuppliers which would cover its full coal needs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996NEW YEAR SEES PRICE TUMBLEThe run up to Christmas saw a step gear change in the generators bidswhich as seen PPP (Pool Purchase Prices) over the last four weeks ofslightly over 2p/kWh, versus an average level from mid November to midDecember of over 6p/kWh. The capacity component of prices has in thelast three weeks (business days) has been just 0.3p/kWh, an order ofmagnitude less than the level seen prior to the pre-Christmas tumble.SMP (system marginal prices) have also come down) to around 2.2p/kWhversus 3.25p/kWh.The fall in prices to some extent reflects an increase in availablecapacity, especially this month as Nuclear Electric has brought all bartwo of it reactors back on line. As last year, however, the major partof the reduction reflects a marked change in genco bidding, as thecompanies endeavour to make a effort to stop both the time and demandweighted price caps being broken by a large margin.Financial year to date prices (PPPs) are still below the cap. As ofJanuary 18, the demand-weighted average is 2.65p/kWh versus a cap of2.694p/kWh. The time-weighted average is 2.34p/kWh, compared with2.535p/kWh.On present trend the time-weighted cap is likely to be under shot by asignificant margin, while it is touch and go as to whether the demand-weighted cap will be exceeded. The sense of deja vu is obvious, butthis time the generators know the extent to which they can attributethe failure to meet the cap to "unpredictable events". Some observershave suggested that this year the generators will be less concerned toerr on the side of caution.FY-to-date prices to January 18                        Time      Demand                        weighted  weightedSystem Marginal Price   1.94      2.09Pool Purchase Price     2.34      2.65Pool Selling Price      2.54      2.88Source: Energy SettlementsBack to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996RIGG STEPS DOWN AS POOL CHAIRRichard Rigg is to step down as chairman of the Electricity Pool inMarch at the AGM, after almost three years in the job. The Pool isseeking a replacement, this time on a renumerated basis (Rigg and histwo predecessors were not renumerated).Rigg is the managing director of Kings Lynn power station, which isoperated by Anglian Power Generators, a wholly-owned subsidiary ofEastern Group.* John Holden, the Pool's development director is also leaving in Marchto take up a position at Companies House. Holden joined the Pool inJune 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MCILDOON CALLS FOR COMPETITIONDouglas McIldoon, the Northern Ireland Regulator, has reaffirmed NIOffer's desire to see greater competition in the Province's generationand wholesale supply businesses*.In a report, his first since taking office in November last year,McIldoon reviews the predicament that NI faces in terms of the vestingstructure - particularly the long-term must-take generation contracts.McIldoon says that even "if NI can avoid to pay for new capacity duringthe next seven years, and particularly if the adverse effect of theBallylumford gas contract can be minimised, the prospects are forprices being broadly stable - subject to coal, oil and gas prices notmoving dramatically upwards." But as energy prices are already abovethose in the rest of the UK, prices need to be cut, if the Province isnot to miss the opportunities provided by the development of a morepeaceful society.McIldoon has proposed a number of possible steps that might be taken toextend competition, which he says are in line with the draft EuropeanDirective on liberalisation of the electricity market and thegovernment's tenet that customers should pay the full cost of theenergy they consume.* Ending of Northern Ireland Electricity (NIE)'s power procurementmonopoly. This requirement has already been relaxed for self-generationprojects, but it is possible that once the termination dates for gensetcontracts are reached the generators could be freed to sell tosuppliers and customers of their  choice. This could lead to a gradualexpansion of independently contracted generation from as early as thisyear if Offer exercises its termination rights on the generationcontracts. However, the earliest termination dates for the biggerstations, Kilroot and Ballylumford, are not until 2010 (Power UK10/17). On this basis Belfast West (240MW) could be brought fully intothe independent sector by 2000, with Coolkeeragh joining in 2004. Newindependent generators and self-generators would also be allowed totrade direct to customers and suppliers of their choice.In order that this could work effectively it would be a logical step toallow independent generators access to the grid. However, in order thatthere was not an excessive build of capacity that could leave NIE withconsiderable stranded capacity, the Regulator has suggested that theremight need to be  limits on independent generation. This could be onthe basis of MW ratings of independent and self-generation sites orrestrictions to CHP or renewable generators.* Allowing independent power lines. There may be scope for allowingindependent generators to construct direct power links to dedicatedcustomers, but this would have to be weighed against the environmentalimpact of such links.* Liberal interconnector trading. The North-South interconnector couldalso be available both for certain customers in NI to buy directly fromthe Electricity Supply Board (ESB) or for NI generators to selldirectly to ESB's power procurement business.* Stimulating the market for energy efficiency. This would includemeasures to improve availability and accessibility of energy efficientappliances, information and awareness campaigns, and soft financingpackages for energy efficiency schemes.* Renewable energy. New arrangements could be implemented to create amarket for renewable energy. This would take the initial cost ofsecuring further capacity out of the general tariffs.* CHP. It is important to ensure that CHP competes on equal terms withelectricity only plant. Removing some current distortions could lead tonew CHP schemes being developed. The Regulator says a paper on thiswill be published later.* Supply competition. While there is no protected franchise in NI,second-tier suppliers have made no impression in the market place. Thisalmost certainly reflects the dominant position of NIE as the solepower procurement body. Once that goes supply competition may blossom.McIldoon concedes that there is no head to head competition ingeneration at present and that the existence of the long-term contractsties the Regulator's hand on what can be proposed. He has indicatedthat he will want to discuss with the generators and NIE thepossibility of revisiting the vesting contracts. However, the chases ofunscrambling the vesting stitch are must be slim as the generators holdall the aces.* Consumer choice, competition and prices, available from OfferNorthern Ireland, Belfast. Tel 01232 311575.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996DTI CLEARS CSW BID FOR SEEBOARDThe DTI has decided not to refer Central and South West (CSW)'s #1.6bnbid for SEEBOARD to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. This is thefirst bid to be approved since trade secretary Ian Lang referred thebids of National Power and PowerGen to the MMC in November. Lang saidthat CSW had given assurances that it would provide the regulator withall the information he required and that the REC would retain itsfinancial independence.CSW's bid is the fifth REC takeover to be cleared. The five approvedbids also include Southern Electric International's for SWEB, Hanson'sfor Eastern Group, Scottish Power's for Manweb and North West Water'sfor Norweb.Ian Lang, industry minister, has also decided not to refer the proposedacquisition of South Wales Electricity (SWALEC) by Welsh Water plc tothe Monopolies & Merger Commission. In making this decision, Lang tookthe advice of Offer, the Office of Fair Trading and Ofwat (the waterindustry regulator), all of which saw no case for referral oncompetition grounds.Welsh Water has given the DTI assurances that if the proposedacquisition of SWALEC is successful it will agree to licenceamendments, on financial ring fencing, provision of adequate financialand management resources and regulatory access to information.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996HE FACES TOUGHER SUPPLY STANDARDOffer has set a tougher target for improvements in the quality ofsupply provided by Hydro-Electric over the next five years. The targetfor 1999/2000 is for 105 customer minutes for lost supply, arising fromfaults in the company's HV distribution network. This represents a 16%improvement on the 10-year average figure of 125 minutes. The toughertargets were recommended by the Monopolies & Mergers Commissionpublished in June last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996BANKS RESCUE COAL INVESTMENTSCity sources say that the banks will shore up wobbly Coal Investmentson the condition that the company goes ahead with a rights issue.Investment and output plans appear to be so far unaffected by thefinancial restructuring.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996UNDERGROUND STARTS TENDER PROCESSLondon Underground Limited (LUL) has formally started the tenderprocess for a 30-year supply contract to cover its power needs, byposting notice of the contract in the European Union's OfficialJournal.LUL says the contract would be expected to cover therefurbishment,operation and maintenance of the company's distributionnetwork and the provision of DC and AC supplies (either imported orgenerated). Presently, total annual electricity consumption amounts to900GWh. (PUK 17/3).The company says that a decision to award a contract, which will beperformance-based, is expected to be made by the end of 1996. Thedecision will depend on there being a sound business case forcontracting out. A short-list of companies is expected to be drawn upby end March. The contract is being pursued under the UK government'sPublic Finance Initiative.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996NATPOWER TO CUT #60M FROM COSTSNational Power has announced that it intends to cut it's annualoperating costs by around #60m following a major review of its nonpower station activities. The cost savings are expected to be phasedin, #40m in 1996/97 and #60m in 1997/98, both compared with currentcosts. As part of the cost cutting, the company expects to shed around400 jobs in non power station areas. Most of the job losses will be atthe company's Swindon offices, where around 1,400 staff are employed.NP says that its renewed cost drive is a response to increasingcompetition in the generation and supply businesses, and the expectedreduction in the company's generating capacity following disposal of4GW of coal fired plant.* NP's director of fuel management, Keith McNair is leaving thecompany. He is returning to the US where he will join CSX. One of thecountry's major railroad concerns, as a board-level troubleshooter.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SEI AND HANSON AGREE LICENCESSouthern Electric International and Hanson plc, the new owners of SWEBand Eastern Group respectively, have agreed modifications of the RECs'public electricity supply licences. The modifications deal withfinancial ring fencing of the electricity businesses, restrictions onactivities, availability of resources, disposal of assets and provisionof information to the Regulator.The modifications will be applied to other merged companies in duecourse.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996EASTERN ACQUIRES OVERSEAS ARMEastern Group has acquired the consultancy British Power International(BPI). BPI, is an offshoot of BEI Training Services a consultancyjointly owned by National Grid Company and British ElectricityInternational (a subsidiary of National Power). Eastern says that thisacquisition will help the group identify potential power projectsoverseas. BPI has contracts in many countries including Brazil, Poland,Thailand and Brunei. BPI currently has a four man team, all of whichwill be operating out of Eastern's Borehamwood office in Hertfordshire.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996CITY ANALYSTS RESHUFFLEThe new year has seen a number of movements within the stockbrokers'analysts community. Kleinwort Benson's top rated UK electricityanalyst, Simon Williams, has quit the company to join Deutsche MorganGrenfell, while Philip Green and Isabelle Haine have left LehmanBrothers to join Goldman Sachs International. Simon Taylor has movedfrom JP Morgan to BZW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996UKDCS WIN QUALITY AWARDUK Data Collection Services (UKDCS) has been awarded an ISO 9002accreditation for its services to the energy supply industry. Theaward, which was made by independent assessors Lloyds Register ofQuality Assurance, covers the entire scope of UKDCS's work frommetering, data retrieval and aggregation to processing anddistribution. UKDCS says that the information it handles from over24,000 customers accounts for around one quarter of energy traded inthe Pool (or #1.75bn).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996KING TAKES TOP JOB AT PGPowerGen has appointed Deryk King to the new post of managing director,where he will be responsible for day-to-day operations. King will takethese duties off Ed Wallis, the company's current chief executive, whowill retain responsibility for strategy and external relations. Walliswill move up to executive chairman in July when Colin Southgate stepsdown as non-executive chairman.King, who is currently MD of ICI's global polyester business, is PG'sfirst top level appointment from outside the ESI. National Power hasrecruited from outside the industry on several occasions.* Chris Boon, East Midland's corporate development director has beenappointed to the company's board. In addition to strategic planning,business development, investments and disposals, Boon is alsoresponsible for the company's electrical contracting business, itsinternational business and Lincoln Green Energy, EME's energy servicesbusiness.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MEE RETIRES FROM EASTERN BOARDDavid Mee, Eastern Group's engineering director is leaving the boardand taking voluntary retirement. Mee, who will step down at the end ofMarch, will be replaced by Edward Hyams, currently director ofengineering with Southern Electric.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ROBERTS JOINS SWALECWelsh Water, the new owner of SWALEC, has announced that it hasappointed John Roberts, the former chief executive of Manweb, as chiefexecutive at SWALEC. The appointment is conditional on the successfuloutcome of WW's current offer for SWALEC.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MAGNOX ELECTRIC SPLIT OUTNuclear Electric and Magnox Electric have been successfully separatedand are now shadow trading in preparation for formal separation inMarch. Magnox Electric has moved its permanent HQ at BerkeleyTechnology Centre, allowing NE to consolidate its own head officefunctions at Barnwood, Gloucester. Meanwhile, core staff and directorshave moved to British Energy's new HQ at Edinburgh Park on the westernoutskirts of the city.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996BE PRIVATISABLE ONLY AT TAXPAYERS' EXPENSE SAY MACKERRON AND SADNICKIOn the basis of a detailed station-by-station analysis a new study byGordon MacKerron and Mike Sadnicki concludes that the privatisation ofBritish Energy is unlikely to achieve anywhere near the government'starget of #2.6bn. MacKerron and Sadnicki (M&S)'s results show thattaking a prudent investor's view and applying conventional nuclearindustry discounting practice (whereby liabilities are discounted at alow (2%) rate), yields a net present value (NPV) of minus #2.6bn. Ifthe operational discount rate is applied to liabilities that will bedischarged over the operating life of stations, then the NPV is raisedto just over #0.8bn.The authors argue that investors are likely to take the latterapproach, as there is little commercial reason to treat cash outflowsto meet operational expenses any differently from cash spent ondischarging liabilities. On this basis, investors will see a positivevalue for BE.But M&S point out that this valuation adopts the nuclear industry'sestimates of liabilities and that there are reasons to believe thesecould be substantial under-estimates. They claim this is the case withAGR waste liabilities, where the industry estimates are #0.7bn (#0.3bndiscounted) compared with their own estimate of #6.6bn (#3.6bndiscounted) (- see below). If investors believe waste liabilities arenearer the M&S estimates than the industry's own estimates this wouldof course take the NPV well into negative values. And there are otherpotential downside risks, most notably on station performance andelectricity sales price.Just how the government has come up with its #2.6bn valuation isunclear as the DTI has provided no hints as to the cost and performanceassumptions nor the discounting approach. M&S suggest that there aretwo ways in which such a high value can be achieved, using their costand performance assumptions.* by applying a 6% discount rate to both operational and liability cashstreams, or;* by unloading liabilities related to pre-1996 operations.M&S point out that KPMG adopted a 6% discount rate when evaluatingliabilities management options in its report to the DTI as part of thegovernment's Nuclear Review in 1994. The 6% rate is the lowest publicsector test rate. But the authors argue that it is inappropriate to usesuch a low rate, and the government itself advocates a 10% hurdle ratewhere public sector concerns sells their output in a competitive marketplace. M&S use a 13% discount rate. They argue this is consistent withwhat National Power and others had advocated in nuclear reviewsubmissions, and is also the outcome of applying a capital assetpricing model.Waste liabilities likely to top #6bnM&S say that the nuclear industry's estimates of waste liabilitiescould be out by an order of magnitude. This conclusion is based on ananalysis of the components of waste costs. According to the authors,waste liabilities include:* packaging, storage and disposal of low level waste (LLW);* disposal at NIREX of intermediate level waste (ILW) produced byThorp;* packaging, storage and disposal at NIREX of ILW produced at stations.Using data on a US disposal site M&S estimate LLW costs to amount to#376m.M&S's assumptions on valuation* AGR load factors will on average be lower than achieved in the  last two years, at 69.6% (versus 75.8% and 71.6% in 1993/94 and  1994/95), but will be higher than the average over the last six  years, 64.7%.* Sizewell B load factor will be 70%.* Station life will be 30 years for Dungeness B, Heysham 1 and  Hartlepool and 35 for the other four AGRs, while Sizewell B's life  is 40 years.* Present capacities will be maintained.* Average sales price for electricity is 2.5p/kWh.* Station fuel costs are 0.45p/kWh.* Non-station operating and maintenance (ORM) costs will fall 5%/yr  until 2000, and then remain fixed, while station ORM costs are  assumed stable across the station life.* Marginal reprocessing costs are estimated to be #598,000 a tonne  of uranium.* AGR decommissioning costs amount to #560m per station based on the  industry's "reference strategy", rather than the "deferred  safestore" option.* Annual operating costs of Sizewell B are #90m.* AGR waste liabilities are estimated to be #0.7bn undiscounted,  based on estimates by the NUCG (Nuclear Utilities Chairmans'  Group) and Fred Pallant.* A 13% discount rate is applied to operational cash streams, while  a two alternative rates are applied to liabilities (2% and 13%) to  produce two base case valuations, which M&S call the conventional  and innovative.ILW disposal is costed on the basis of the fully built up costs of theNIREX repository which is assumed to be available by 2011. Using a 6%discount rate, capital cost of #1.88bn and an annual operating cost of#15m M&S estimate a disposal cost of #28,000 a cubic metre. This figureis a factor of three to four times higher than any industry estimate.Applying this figure to the rate of waste generation, making allowancefor stockpiled waste and adding on waste packaging and transport costsgives a total ILW disposal cost of #4.7bn.Plutonium storage costs are estimated on the basis that littleplutonium will be used in making mixed oxide fuels. Taking the AGRplutonium generation rates and applying US data on storage costs yieldsa storage cost which averages almost #50m annually in the period up to2030. M&S say that these costs are so high that they cut off theircalculation at 2030, on the assumption that the industry would find alower cost disposal route. Taking costs up to 2030 gave a totalundiscounted plutonium storage cost of #1.65bn.Summing these costs together gives a total waste storage and disposalcost of #6.737bn. When discounted the figure is reduced to #3.6bn.The City will undoubtedly look closely at the M&S report, as itprovides by far the best bottom up analysis of costs. Not everyone willagree with the approach adopted or the assumptions. Most analystsconcur with M&S that investors are likely to discount operational andliability cash flows at the same rate at least over the life ofstations, but several point out that the NPV of the assets is only justthe beginning of the valuation process. They argue that until thecapital structure, tax rules and any government guarantees on risks areknown it is very difficult to put a value on BE. There is also theissue of terminal value, which is particularly thorny issue for anuclear generator. Intuitively, many would say the terminal value mustbe negative, due to the high back-end liabilities. Not so, says JohnReynolds, of James Capel, who argue the value could be significantlypositive, if BE is able to generate new assets. Reynolds also says thatthe expected stable market share over the next decade gives BE anadvantage over the gencos, which could largely offset the nuclear riskpremium on the discount rate.Net present values of British Energy: #m                               Nuclear   Scottish  Sizewell  Total                               Electric  Nuclear   PWR                               AGRs      AGRsIncome stream*                 6,036     2,742     1,438     10,216Operational cost stream*       3,287     1,523       738      5,548Net operational income*        2,749     1,219       700      4,668Liabilities - reprocessingdiscounted at 2%               4,653     2,319       303      7,275Liabilities - reprocessingdiscounted at 13%              2,458     1,096       303      3,857Net present value:Conventional -reprocessing discounted at 2  (1,904)   (1,100)      397     (2,607)Innovativereprocessing discounted at 1     290       122       397        809* discounted at 13%Zero discount rate assumed beyond 2026Figures in brackets are negativeExpressed in October 1994 moneySource: MacKerron & SadnickiCapacities, assumed lifetimes and load factors of BE stations                    Capacity  Assumed  Closure  Plant load factor %                    MW        life     date     Assumed  6yr average                              yearsDungeness B         1,100     30       2015     50       40Hartlepool          1,210     30       2014     65       64Heysham 1           1,150     30       2104     70       69Heysham 2           1,250     35       2023     75       66Hinkley Point B     1,220     35       2011     75       77Hunterston B        1,150     35       2011     75       73Torness             1,250     35       2023     75       62Sum/average of AGRs 8,330     32.9              69.6     64.7Sizewell B PWR      1,188     40       2035     70Source: MacKerron & SadnickiBack to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996PRICE SETTING GENSETS: DECEMBER 1995Genset               No. of    Level of SMP #/MWh            Companyimport tranche       times     Minimum   Maximum   Averagedemand bidder        SMP setDidcot 1             80         9.04     39.62     24.34     NPWillington B 5       72        14.32     45.60     29.87     NPAberthaw B 8         65         8.95     33.19     28.23     NPIronbridge 2         58         9.02     34.00     22.58     NPEdF-Imp 4            49         6.03     30.01     15.78     EdFDidcot 2             39        20.05     40.63     33.60     NPDinorwic 6           37        19.13     46.55     31.77     NGCDrakelow C 9         33        27.35     53.85     49.31     PGFerrybridge 9        32         9.05     39.72     15.27     PGKingsnorth 1         32         9.07     48.40     31.18     PGKingsnorth 3         31         9.07     34.43     24.84     PGRatcliffe 2          31         9.05     21.88     16.98     PGWillington B 6       31        16.53     47.01     29.34     NPCottam 4             30         8.90     16.56     11.02     PGIronbridge 1         29        14.36     39.20     26.37     NPAberthaw B 9         28         8.95     34.06     19.55     NPSP-Imp 3             28         9.49      9.99      9.97     SPWest Burton 1        28         9.02     35.25     22.82     NPDinorwic 5           26        15.73     47.94     37.02     NGCTilbury 9            26         9.06     39.45     22.38     NPEdF-Imp 3            25        11.02     30.00     23.92     EdFHigh Marnham 1       24        30.90     39.24     36.89     PGBlyth B 7            22        12.87     27.01     17.27     NPWest Burton 4        22         8.95     31.89     13.60     NPDinorwic 2           21        40.62     48.00     42.91     NGCTilbury 7            21        12.47     36.89     23.63     NPTilbury 10           21         8.99     38.21     25.84     NPCottam 2             20         8.98     22.33     16.28     PGDinorwic 1           20        41.58     49.00     44.75     NGCAberthaw 7           19         8.94     32.10     15.17     NPFidlers Ferry 1      19         9.05     31.86     13.27     PGDinorwic 3           18        22.35     45.31     37.20     NGCDrax 3               16         8.90     13.55     12.10     NPEdF-Imp 2            16        11.01     20.01     17.32     EdFBlyth A 2            15        14.04     46.51     29.10     NPSP-Imp 2             15         9.48      9.98      9.85     SPDidcot 3             14        25.40     41.83     36.85     NPFidlers Ferry 2      14        11.99     34.57     15.02     PGBlyth A 1            13        20.51     39.13     26.70     NPFerrybridge 1        13         9.09      9.09      9.09     PGFfestiniog 4         13        30.11     51.23     47.25     NGCHigh Marnham 3       13        16.58     39.17     28.27     PGSMP = System Marginal PriceIPP = Independent generatorDSB = demand side bidderSource: Energy & Information ServicesPrice setting gensets: December 1995Genset               No. of    Level of SMP #/MWh            Companyimport tranche       times     Minimum   Maximum   Averagedemand bidder        SMP setDrakelow 10          12        35.55     56.40     52.52     PGHigh Marnham 5       12        20.90     45.40     33.92     PGLittlebrook 2        12        33.45     42.08     36.87     NPFfestiniog 1         11        32.48     35.95     34.15     NGCEdF-Imp 1            11        11.00     20.00     18.00     EdFRatcliffe 1          11         8.91     10.11      9.24     PGTilbury 8            11         9.04     31.98     16.77     NPDidcot 4             10         9.03     15.04     12.20     NPFidlers Ferry 4      10         8.89     14.26     10.64     PGEdF-Imp 5            10        14.00     30.00     23.70     EdFKingsnorth 2         10         9.02     36.95     17.07     PGPembroke 2           10        39.21     47.55     41.40     NPWest Burton 3        10        13.37     30.67     18.04     NPBlyth B 8             9         9.04     19.42     11.53     NPCottam 1              9         8.97     15.03     12.40     PGFerrybridge 2         9         9.10      9.10      9.10     PGDrax 4                8         8.93      8.93      8.93     NPKingsnorth 4          8        12.22     47.49     32.72     PGDrax 2                7         8.91      8.91      8.91     NPFawley 3              7        38.77     46.69     42.63     NPHigh Marnham 4        7        26.98     37.43     35.80     PGRatcliffe 3           7         8.95     14.01     11.68     PGBlyth A 4             6        15.30     44.30     33.96     NPEggborough 2          6         8.90      8.94      8.93     NPFerrybridge 3         6        11.92     47.62     21.60     PGFfestiniog 3          6        50.00     56.00     52.22     NGCGrain 1               6        77.98     82.70     81.12     PGHigh Marnham 2        6        34.60     42.80     41.43     PGRugeley B 6           6         8.91     14.50     12.64     NPCottam 3              5         8.12     33.42     23.46     PGRedditch 1            5        51.37     63.28     56.13     IPPRugeley B 7           5         8.89     13.73      9.87     NPSP-Imp 4              5         6.99      6.99      6.99     SPDrax 5                4         8.92      8.92      8.92     NPEdF-Imp 6             4        15.01     50.00     32.51     EdFHE-Imp 1              4        10.34     15.24     12.29     HEBlyth A 3             3         9.08     41.18     30.48     NPDSB-Hays Chem.        3        70.00     70.00     70.00     DSBDinorwic 4            3        50.00     52.69     50.90     NGCEdF-Imp 8             3        20.01     20.01     20.01     EdFRatcliffe 4           3         9.00      9.00      9.00     PGWest Burton 2         3        13.81     13.81     13.81     NPDSB-ASW               2        85.67     85.67     85.67     DSBFfestiniog 2          2        60.00     60.00     60.00     NGCDrax 1                1         8.86      8.86      8.86     NPEdF-Imp 7             1        20.00     20.00     20.00     EdFSMP = System Marginal PriceIPP = Independent generatorDSB = demand side bidderSource:  Energy Settlements & Information ServicesMonthly average genset Table A prices for November 1995Company     Genset          Average  Company Genset        Average            demand bidder   bid price        demand bidder bid price            import tranche  #/MWh            import tranch #/MWhBNFL        Calder Hall 1      0     PG      Ryehouse 1     2.95BNFL        CHAPX01Z           0     PG      Fidlers Fy 4   4.26NE          Bradwell 2-3       0     PG      Ferrybridge C  4.51NE          Dungeness A 1-4    0     NP      Killingholme   4.74NE          Heysham1 1-2       0     PG      Cottam 3       5.01NE          Heysham2 7-8       0     NP      Deeside 1      5.21NE          Hinkley B 7-8      0     PG      Ratcliffe 4    5.35NE          Oldbury 1-2        0     PG      Ferrybridge C  5.62NE          Sizewell B 1-2     0     PG      Ferrybridge C  5.80NE          Wylfa 3            0     PG      Cottam 4       5.87HE          HE-Imp 1           0     Derwent Derwent        6.62Lakeland    Rooscotte          0     Teeside Teeside 2      6.70Corby       Corby              0     Teeside Teeside 1      6.71Peterbrough Peterbrough        0     EdF     EdF-Imp 1      6.73Fellside    Fellside           0     EdF     EdF-Imp 2      6.74Keadby      Keadby             0     EdF     EdF-Imp 3      6.75NE          Hartlepool 1    0.01     EdF     EdF-Imp 4      6.76Medway      MEDP_01Z        0.02     NP      Little Barfor  7.00NE          Hinkley Pt A 3  0.03     NP      Eggborough 3   7.08NE          Hinkley Pt A 2  0.04     NP      Eggborough 4   7.10NE          Hinkley Pt A 1  0.05     NP      Rugeley 6      7.15NE          Bradwell 1      0.20     NP      Drax 1         7.17NE          Sizewell A 2    0.21     NP      Rugeley 7      7.17NE          Wylfa 4         0.22     PG      Ratcliffe 3    7.19NE          Sizewell A 1    0.23     NP      Eggborough 1   7.27NE          Hinkley A 4     0.25     NP      Drax 6         7.60NE          Hinkley A 5     0.26     PG      Ferrybridge 1  7.76NE          Dungeness B2 1  0.32     PG      Cottam 1       7.97NE          Hartlepool 2    0.43     PG      Richborough 3  8.00NE          Hinkley Pt A 6  0.47     PG      Richborough 2  8.01NE          Bradwell 4      0.50     PG      Ratcliffe 2    8.78NE          Wylfa 2         0.86     NP      Drax 5         8.86Barking     Barking 2       1.62     NP      Drax 4         8.87SP          SP-Imp 2        1.99     NP      Eggborough 2   9.28SP          SP-Imp 3        2.00     NP      Drax 3         9.41PG          Ince B 5        2.64     PG      Ratcliffe 1    9.47Barking     Barking 1       2.68     NP      Drax 2         9.89PG          Killingholme 1  2.82     EdF     EdF-Imp 5     10.07Settlements: provides a wide range of services to help youunderstand the working of the Pool:* Raw and processed data* Bespoke data analysis* Data Broadcast of day-ahead Pool prices and information* Settlements data analyser* Annual statistics year book - all the key statistics since April  1990* One day training courses on the Pool and its operation* One day training courses on the Pool and its operationContact: Settlements service desk Tel: 0115 945 6789Monthly average genset Table A prices for November 1995Company Genset         Average   Company     Genset        Average        demand bidder  bid price             demand bidder bid price        import tranche #/MWh                 import tranch #/MWhNP      West Burton 2  10.12     NP          Didcot 3       31.41PG      Cottam 2       11.56     NGC         Dinorwic 1     31.56NP      West Burton 4  13.07     PG          High Marnham   31.60NP      West Burton 3  15.20     PG          Kingsnorth 4   31.68NP      Blyth B 8      15.55     PG          High Marnham   31.71NP      Blyth A 4      16.29     OG          Drakelow 10    31.88NP      Aberthaw B 7   16.56     NP          Didcot 2       31.92     20 Brigg 1        17.12     PG          Kingsnorth 3   31.95NP      Blyth A 2      17.38              12 Redditch 1     34.63NP      Blyth A 3      18.17     NGC         Ffestiniog 4   34.79NP      Aberthaw B 8   18.25     NGC         Dinorwic 3     36.74NGC     Dinorwic       18.42     NGC         Dinorwic 2     39.63NP      Ironbridge B 2 18.53     NGC         Ffestiniog 3   44.00NP      Blyth A 1      18.82     NGC         Dinorwic 4     46.00NP      Aberthaw B 9   19.58     EdF         EdF-Imp 6      50.01NP      Blyth B 7      20.61     PG          Grain 1        51.64NP      West Burton 1  20.90     EdF         EdF-Imp 7      51.69NGC     Dinorwic 6     20.92     EdF         EdF-Imp 8      51.70PG      Fiddlers Fy 1  21.49     NP          Littlebrook 2  54.48NP      Tilbury B 8    24.72     NP          Pembroke 2     54.66NP      Tilbury B 9    24.87     NP          Fawley 3       54.69PG      Fiddlers Fy 2  26.23     PG          Grain 4        54.74NP      Ironbridge B 1 26.71     PG          Grain 3        54.79NP      Tilbury B 7    27.06     NGC         Ffestiniog 2   55.00NP      Tilbury B 10   28.46     Hays Chem.  DSB            70.00PG      Kingsnorth 1   28.56     Co-Steel    DSB            86.67NP      Willington B 6 29.29     ASW         DSB            82.67PG      Kingsnorth 2   29.93     ASW         DSB            82.79NP      Willington B 5 29.94     ASW         DSB            83.17PG      High Marnham 2 30.53     Alpha Steel DSB            90.58NP      Didcot 4       30.55     NP          Cowes 2       134.5NGC     Ffestiniog 1   30.56     NP          GTs           134.5PG      High Marnham 4 30.69     PG          Taylors Lane  147.32PG      High Marnham 1 30.75     PG          GTs           148.14NP      Didcot 1       30.91     DBCPL01Z    DSB           942.93PG      Drakelow 9     30.92Table A price averaged over days where genset is available.DSB = Demand side biddersPS  = Pumped storageIMP = importsASW = Allied Steel & WireSource: Energy Settlements & Information Services (Settlements)Electricity production to October 1995                       Total  Total  %       Jan-Oct Jan-Oct  %                       93     94     Change  94      95       ChangeElectricity generated  300.51 302.81  +0.8   245.54  249.23    +1.5Own use (in stations)   19.34  17.97  -7.0    14.72   14.81    +0.6Electricity supplied:Total                  281.17 284.84  +1.3   230.83  234.43    +1.6Conv. steam plant      178.31 167.29  -6.2   135.44  130.82    -3.4Coal                   144.03 137.80  -4.3   111.47  107.13    -3.9Oil                      8.30   6.21 -25.3     5.13    3.44   -32.9Other conv.steam        25.97  23.28 -10.4    18.84   20.25    +7.5CCGT                    22.61  36.82 +71.7    29.48   37.21   +26.2Nuclear                 76.84  76.41  -0.6    62.67   63.16    +0.8Hydro (incl net PS)      2.95   3.63 +22.9     2.71    2.69    -0.8Other (GT/diesels/wind)  0.46   0.69 +49.9     0.53    0.54    +3.3Net imports             16.72  16.89  +1.0    13.88   14.13    +1.8Other net purchases*     7.31   7.40  +1.2     6.09    5.14   -15.6Total elec. available  305.20 309.12  +1.3   250.79  253.10    +1.2* Purchases from UKAEA, BNFL and other generatorsSource: Energy TrendsBack to Headline List WT03-B36-6IA059-000325-B008-23http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey80.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235218 text/html 32025HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:50:20 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:20 GMTContent-length: 31838Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey80.html Sample Issue Copyright PUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ELECTRIC RESTRUCTURING: ELCON Releases Its Blueprint For The Future (346 words) GAS TRANSPORTATION: Bay State Gas To Offer New Programs (193 words) CREDIT RATINGS: Moody's: Northeastern Utilities Are Under Pressure (423 words) ELECTRIC RATES: S.Carolina E&G Pleased With Ruling (233 words) INTERNATIONAL ACQUISITIONS: Moody's Finds U.K. Deal Manageable (137 words) ELECTRIC FUTURES: NYMEX Looks Forward To Approval (90 words) DISCOUNT RATES: Vermont Customers to Get Break (149 words) NATURAL GAS PIPELINES: Nixed Sale Leads To New Deal (146 words) LEAST-COST PLANNING: Oregon PUC Finds Idaho Power Reasonable (78 words) TELEPHONE COMPETITION: Colorado Works On Local Rules (136 words) ELECTRIC COMPETITION: Tribal Choice Causes Lawsuit (154 words) INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATORS: FERC To Hold Technical Conference (115 words) Electricity -- Flexible Rates (497 words) Electric Industry Restructuring (150 words) Mergers -- Rate Increases (187 words) LECs -- Competition -- Interconnection tariffs (246 words) Trimble County Generating Plant -- Rate Disallowance (228 words) American Electric Power (41 words) DTE Energy Co. (42 words) SIGCORP, Inc. (31 words) Enova Corp. (30 words) New Century Energies (38 words) Constellation Energy Corp. (20 words) CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC RESTRUCTURING: ELCON Releases Its Blueprint For The FutureThe Electricity Consumers Resource Council (ELCON), a Washington,D.C.-based trade association representing large industrialcustomers, has released its "Blueprint for Customer Choice," whichit believes contains the economic and regulatory frameworks, aswell as legislative reforms needed for the emergence of realcompetition in the electric industry.ELCON advocates removal of federal and state impediments to marketentry by any entity that seeks to provide or purchase products orservices presently offered as a bundled service by utilities. ELCONbelieves that only a minimum of physical assets and services needbe regulated to ensure the reliable operation of the grid. It wantsall market segments to be unbundled. But while generation serviceshould not be regulated, the rates, terms, and conditions for useof transmission and distribution facilities that continue to beprovided as monopoly services should be regulated.Existing contractual relationships between native load customersand their utilities, and between utilities and their suppliers,should be honored. But ELCON advocates that utilities mitigatestranded costs by writing off or writing down those assets againstearnings, by the sale of those or other nongenerator assets, byrenegotiating purchased power or fuel supply contracts, and by costreductions. No utility should be allowed to seek recovery of anycosts associated with uneconomic assets that were incurredsubsequent to enactment of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPAct).ELCON desires creation of an independent system operator, splittingthe traditional distribution functions between a "wires" businessand the electric services merchant business, and creation of afederal-state joint board to recommend actions to statelegislatures.Cynthia Mansfield, a General Public Utilities Vice President, anda leader of the PURPA Reform Group, expressed dissatisfaction thatELCON would deny utilities recovery of prudently incurred costsassociated with uneconomic assets committed to after passage ofEPAct, yet require utilities to continue buying PURPA power for theindefinite future. Mansfield claimed that ELCON's proposal toextend PURPA benefits to all producers and consumers who hadachieved PURPA qualifying status by the beginning of the transitionperiod, would increase stranded costs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS TRANSPORTATION: Bay State Gas To Offer New ProgramsThe Massachusetts commission has approved a settlement authorizingBay State Gas Co. (BSG) to redesign its gas rates and launch aresidential unbundling pilot program, believed by BSG to be thefirst of its kind offered in New England.The pilot will allow participating residential customers to buynatural gas transportation service from BSG, while choosing gassuppliers. The program will be conducted in three phases ofdevelopment, pilot implementation (by heating season of 1996), andprogram assessment.The settlement will enable BSG to introduce new rates that moreclosely reflect the actual costs associated with serving differentcustomer classes. New rates became effective January 1, 1996.Other components of the utility's rate redesign will be aimed atmaking transportation service from BSG more attractive to a largergroup of commercial and industrial customers. (Presently only 100of BSG's largest customers buy unbundled transportation service).Specifically, BSG will offer supplemental gas supply service duringthe winter period to meet seasonal demand. Also, it will offer`needle peaking' service to help commercial and industrialcustomers guard against supply shortfalls during the coldest dayswhen marketers may be unable to guarantee deliveries.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CREDIT RATINGS: Moody's: Northeastern Utilities Are Under PressureMoody's Investors Service has released a report, "Northeast Break-Even Analysis," which foundsthat while wide variations exist in thecost structures of investor-owned, municipal, and state electricutilities in the Northeastern United States, that in a deregulated,price competitive market for electricity, a solid majority of theutilities would be at a significant disadvantage in relation totheir peers in contiguous regions. If full competition isintroduced, Moody's concluded that Northeastern utilities withabove average costs likely would experience deterioration in creditquality as some investments are unrecoverable from ratepayers.Moody's defines the Northeast competitive arena as all major ratedutilities within two transmission interconnects of ConsolidatedEdison Co. of New York. It includes 25 IOUs in nine states, as wellas two public power and two Canadian utilities. They represent over$153 billion in combined assets, $29.7 billion in combined equity,and over $48 billion in annual revenues.Moody's said that most of the utilities have the highest "break-even" prices in the nation. (Moody's defines break-even as theprice a utility must charge for each unit of capacity to cover itsfixed charges after applying all profits or margins from its energysales. Because Moody's generating cost model is a residualanalysis, differences in relative cost position are magnified,which allows for meaningful comparisons among utilities).Moody's estimated $43 billion in stranded costs in this regionalone, which accounts for about one quarter of all U.S. strandedcosts.Regulatory initiatives remain at the information gathering stage,with principles for guiding an orderly transition to competition inplace in New York, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island (see Weekly No.3234). They are in the process of being developed or endorsed inNew Hampshire, New Jersey, Vermont and Maine (see weekly Nos. 3228,3230, 3234). Moody's noted that Pennsylvania is leaning toward a"wait and see" approach, with a recent PUC staff recommendationsuggesting that it is not yet time for extreme change.Based on average price assumptions, Moody's found that only Hydro-Quebec would be able to cover all fixed costs and earn a profitthrough energy sales alone. Hydro-Quebec and the New York PowerAuthority fell at the low end of the scale, with negative break-even prices, reflecting much hydrogeneration. At the high end ofthe price scale are United Illuminating, Long Island Lighting Co.,and Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric Co-op. Moody's saidit expects downgrades to continue for utilities in the Northeast,especially due to negative transition cost decisions and definitivemoves toward open access.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC RATES: S.Carolina E&G Pleased With RulingThe South Carolina PSC has approved a $67.5 million (7.34%) retailelectric rate hike for South Carolina Electric & Gas Co. (SCEG), tobe phased-in over a two-year period. SCEG had requested a $76.7million (8.35%) increase.The approved rates are based on a 12% return on common equity,resulting in an overall return on rate base on 9.59%. The Phase 1increase of about $59.5 million (6.47%), will become effective uponcompletion and commercial operation of SCEG's new, 385-Mw, coal-fired Cope generating plant, expected January 15, 1996. The totalcapital cost of the plant is expected to be about $436 million(including AFDC), which is under the original budget of $537million. About one-half of the plant's total capital cost alreadyis included in base rates due to a June, 1993 order. The PSC nowapproved recovery of remaining capital costs and annual operatingexpenses associated with Cope.Also included in Phase 1 is a $4.3 million increase for a stormdamage reserve account, that will be capped at $50 million andcollected through rates over a ten-year period.The PSC granted SCEG's request to accelerate recovery of almost allits regulatory assets, and to shift about $257 million ofdepreciation reserves from its transmission and distribution assetsto nuclear production assets. The latter change will enhance itscompetitive position by reducing the cost of its nucleargeneration.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INTERNATIONAL ACQUISITIONS: Moody's Finds U.K. Deal ManageableMoody's Investors Service has lowered the commercial paper ratingfor Central and South West Corp. (CSW) from `P-1' to 'P-2' inresponse to significantly greater leverage assumed by CSW toacquire SEEBOARD, a regional electric distribution company locatedin Great Britain.The CSW bid valued SEEBOARD at $2.5 billion, and Moody's said itfinds the additional debt manageable given the good competitiveposition of CSW's U.S. utilities, and the generally stable businessoutlook for SEEBOARD. But Moody's expects the increased leverage toput some strain on CSW's cash flow, reducing overall financialflexibility.CSW plans to fund the acquisition 60% through nonrecourse bankdebts raised in the U.K., and 40% through an equity contributionfrom the U.S. parent corporation. It has negotiated an $850 millionunsecured bank facility to raise funds for the equity contribution.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC FUTURES: NYMEX Looks Forward To ApprovalThe New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) expects approval of itstwo West coast electric futures contracts by the Commodity FuturesTrading Commission (CFTC) this month, and anticipates launchingthem before the second half of 1996.The futures, the first ever for electricity, have the same deliveryterms but one has a delivery point at the California-Oregon border,while the other is at Palo Verde, Arizona.Meanwhile, the two proposed electric options contracts, which arebased on the futures contracts, are expected to receive CFTCapproval later in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DISCOUNT RATES: Vermont Customers to Get BreakGreen Mountain Power Corp. (GMP) has asked the Vermont commissionto approve a one-year pilot electric discount program, which wouldbe available to residential and small business customers who usemore electricity in 1996 than they did in 1995.The program is aimed at GMP's smaller customers and would providea 25% discount on electricity use that exceeds the amount acustomer used during the previous year. The discount would belimited to 15% of additional electricity use, and customers wouldnot have to sign up for the program but instead would automaticallyqualify."Qualifying customers can take advantage of the discount withoutincreasing the cost to other customers, said GMP President and CEODouglas G. Hyde. "That is because there is a surplus of electricityin new England, and we are giving out customers an opportunity totake advantage of this unusual energy situation," Hyde added.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NATURAL GAS PIPELINES: Nixed Sale Leads To New DealTenneco Energy (TE) has agreed to sell its 50% interest in the KernRiver natural gas pipeline system to the Williams Companies, Inc.for $205 million. The companies are joint venture partners in theWyoming to California pipeline.The plan came about after the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) ruledat the end of December that the sale by TE of its 50% interest toQuestar Pipeline could result in market power by Questar in theSalt Lake City area (see Weekly No. 3235). But the new sale planstill requires FTC approval."Based on discussions with our partner, Williams over the past fewdays, we concluded it was in Tenneco's best interest to avoid thetime and expense involved in restarting the bidding process, and goahead and finalize the terms of the transaction before year end,"said Steve Chesebro', TE Chairman and CEO.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996LEAST-COST PLANNING: Oregon PUC Finds Idaho Power ReasonableThe Oregon PUC on December 29 acknowledged Idaho Power Co.'s (IP)least-cost plan, which implements new conservation programs andsystem efficiency improvements, continues efforts to relicense itshydroelectric plants, and continues solar and windpowerdevelopment.PUC acknowledgement of a least-cost plan means that the plan seemsreasonable to the PUC at the time, but favorable ratemakingtreatment is not guaranteed. It gives considerable weight in theratemaking process to utility actions that are consistent withacknowledged plans.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TELEPHONE COMPETITION: Colorado Works On Local RulesThe Colorado PUC is beginning hearings this month on proposed rulesto open the local telephone market to competition beginning July 1.The proposed rules would implement state legislation passed lastyear instructing the PUC to open up local service to competition.For six months, various working groups have attempted to agree oninterconnection and number potability, resale, high cost funds, 911services, and certification. Each group drafted a set of proposedrules, and consensus was reached in the areas of 911 requirementsand certifications. More than one set of proposed rules weredrafted for the other areas, and the PUC need by law only givesubstantial deference to those rules where consensus was reached.The hearings run through March, with an initial decision expectedin early April, and a final decision by May 31.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC COMPETITION: Tribal Choice Causes LawsuitMadison Gas and Electric Co. (MGE) on January 3 filed a lawsuit incourt and a complaint at the Wisconsin PSC against Wisconsin Power& Light Co. (WPL), because WPL will provide electricity to a NativeAmerican tribe's bingo hall to be located in MGE territory (seeWeekly No. 3232).WPL on December 1, 1995 had won the bid to provide service to thetribe. Although present state law only allows provision of serviceby a certificated utility in its own service territory, the tribehas raised the argument that it is excluded from the law because itis a sovereign nation.In court, MGE has asked for treble actual damages -- lost marginson electric sales made by WPL. MGE also asked for punitive damagesand award of attorneys' fees. At the PSC, MGE asked it to requireWPL to remove any electric lines and related plant from  MGE'sservice territory.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATORS: FERC To Hold Technical ConferenceThe FERC on January 4 announced that as part of its electrictransmission open access NOPR, it would hold a technical conferenceon independent system operators (ISO) and reform of power poolsunder the federal power act. The conference will be held January 24at 9:30 A.M. at the FERC.The FERC said that at its December 5 and 6, 1995 conference oncomparability for power pools, that several speakers had describedproposals for developing ISOs as one method to address fullcompetition. It wants to (1) define the essential elements andoperational characteristics of an ISO; (2) explore principles to beused in reforming power pools; and (3) explore utility formation ofISOs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Electricity -- Flexible RatesThe Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities has approved a new"market-based" electric tariff for Fitchburg Gas & Electric Co., acombined electric and gas utility. The new Energy Bank Serviceoffers rates for new or expanding industrial customers that arepriced competitively with average industrial rates in the UnitedStates.  While the utility had supported the new rate offering asconsistent with the state's restructuring goals of greater customerchoice and access to wholesale market prices, the departmentrejected the utility's position that the new discount customersshould be exempted from any specific stranded cost charges in thefuture.According to the company, it currently has no excess capacity andintends to meet the power requirements for the new service offeringform wholesale markets through short-term contracts of one month orless.  The department said that utility's proposal deservedstricter scrutiny than other discount proposals recently approvedfor utilities who had extra power to sell. Nevertheless, it foundthat revenues would more than offset incremental power costs andseparate fuel procurement and accounting procedures devised by theutility would allow the department to determine whether the newservice offering affected costs for other ratepayer groups. Thedepartment also directed the company to include in the new tariffa statement that the structure and design of the new rate mightchange as a result of the implementation of a restructuring planfor the utility. Re Fitchburg Gas and Electric Co., D.P.U. 95-75,Nov. 30, 1995 (Mass.D.P.U.).The Missouri Public Service Commission has turned down a request byKansas City Power and Light Co., an electric utility, for approvalof a generic tariff for special contract offerings to its largeindustrial customers. The proposed service would have allowed theutility to "flex down" from rates in its established Primary LargeService tariff in order to meet a competitive threat. The utilityhad proposed to limit availability of the discount service tocustomers with demands of 1,000 kW or greater who are faced withcompetition from other energy suppliers. It would have provided theservice at a rate not less than the greater of 1.3 cents per kwh onan annual average basis or its annualized incremental cost per kwh.The commission rejected allegations that special rate contractswere unlawful and also ruled that the protection of confidentialbusiness information associated with the contracts was within itsauthority, but it concluded that a generic tariff for discountsshould be considered as part of an investigation of the utility'soverall rate design. Nevertheless, the commission found that thetype of competition currently facing the utility could require a"bundled service" offering of the type suggested by the utility. Italso said that an unbundled service offering with a price ceilingand price floor for each service component might also be necessaryin "preparation for the full range of competition" in the utility'sservice territory. Re Kansas City Power and Light Co., Case No. EO-95-181, Dec. 6, 1995 (Mo.P.S.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Electric Industry RestructuringThe Maine Public Utilities Commission has launched a formal inquiryinto the restructuring of the electric industry in the state. Thestate legislature had allotted the commission a one-year period,beginning on January 1, 1996, to develop at least two plans for thetransition to a competitive retail electric market including: (1)a plan to achieve full retail market competition by the year 2000and (2) a plan to achieve retail competition "wherever effectivecompetition is likely" while maintaining regulation wherenecessary. Under the legislative mandate the commission is requiredto provide a range of estimates of stranded investment associatedwith each restructuring proposal.  the commission seeks comments ona variety of issues including whether rate decreases can beexpected  and whether retail competition would provide benefits toconsumers that cannot be obtained through enhanced wholesalecompetition.  Re Electric Utility Industry Restructuring, DocketNo. 95-462, Dec. 12, 1995 (Me. P.U.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Mergers -- Rate IncreasesThe Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission has turnedback a pre-merger attempt by Puget Sound Power and Light Co. tomake permanent a $165.5 million rate increase allowed under itsperiodic rate adjustment mechanism (PRAM), a ratemaking clausedesigned to remove disincentives to utility conservation efforts by"decoupling" revenues from sales levels and instead relying on arevenue per customer approach to cost recovery. The utility hadearlier agreed to defer a scheduled base rate filing pending reviewby the commission of its proposed merger with Washington Energy Co.The commission said that it had approved the deferral subject tothe utility's agreement to file a rate case by April of 1996 if nomerger application was filed, but that any extension of the PRAMcollections beyond their scheduled expiration on October 1, 1996would be treated a temporary rates subject to refund. It added thatthe utility could choose to file a base rate case at any timeseeking permanent recovery of the PRAM collections. WashingtonUtilities and Transportation Commission v. Puget Sound Power andLight Co., Docket Nos. UE-901183-T et al., Nov. 7, 1995(Wash.U.T.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996LECs -- Competition -- Interconnection tariffsThe New York Public Service Commission has ordered New YorkTelephone Co., a telecommunications local exchange carrier (LEC),notify customers of the newly instituted opportunity to choose analternative carrier for intraLATA toll calling. Interexchangecarriers in the state had complained about the LEC's plans forimplementation of a recent order by the commission reqiring equalaccess for intraLATA toll services. (Prior to the "intraLATApresubscription" ruling, customers who desired their "local" tollcalls to be carried by an interexchange carrier such as AT&T, MCI,or Sprint were required to dial special code numbers in addition tothe telephone number.)  The LEC had proposed that in negotiatingnew services with customers its representatives would not informcustomers of the rule change or ask customers who they want astheir intraLATA toll carrier. It claimed that to do so would placeit at a competitive disadvantage and increase the cost ofprocessing new service orders. The commission disagreed with thecarrier finding that while the claims may have some merit, the LEChad ignored the advantages it possessed in controlling thetelephone order processing function and from beginning the equalaccess process with 100% of the presubscribed market. For acompetitive market to develop customers must be informed ofavailable choices, the commission said. It also noted that withoutspecific instructions from regulators "irresistible incentives"would develop to sell the LEC's service unfairly. Re New YorkTelephone Co., Case Nos. 28425 et al., Dec. 1, 1995 (N.Y.P.S.C.)Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Trimble County Generating Plant -- Rate DisallowanceThe Kentucky Public Service Commission has approved an agreementfinally concluding a long standing case governing rate treatment ofthe investment by Louisville Gas & Electric in the Trimble countygenerating facility. The matter had been before the commission inone form or another for well over a decade.  In 1989 the commissiondetermined that 25% of the 495 megawatt coal-fired plant wasdisallowed from rate base. Under the approved agreement the utilitywill refund current customers $22 million with $5.3 millionreserved to special contract customers and the rest refunded to allother customers through a per-kwh credit over a five year period.The utility also agreed to apply an additional $4.5 million to fundlow-income energy assistance programs over the same five-yearperiod. Commissioner Linda K. Breathitt expressed concern in aseparate concurring opinion over the length of time necessary forresidential customers to receive their refunds while certainindustrial customers would receive immediate payments. She alsonoted that the agreement was an example of a recent trends insettlement agreements presented to the commission where theutility, its large industrial customers, and low income customersare the obvious beneficiaries of ardent representation at thebargaining table while the vast majority of customers appear tohave a much smaller voice in the process. Re Louisville Gas andElectric Co., Case No. 10320, Dec. 8, 1995 (Ky.P.S.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996American Electric PowerThe seven operating companies of American Electric Power (AEP) haveadopted the AEP name. The seven -- Appalachian Power, ColumbusSouthern Power, Ohio Power, Indiana Michigan Power, Kentucky Power,Wheeling Power, and Kingsport Power -- all will be known as AEP.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DTE Energy Co.On January 1, DTE Energy Co. became the holding company for DetroitEdison, providing a structure to separate the regulated utilitybusiness from nonutility subsidiary companies. DTE Energy beginsits corporate life with a logo that features a person and asunburst.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SIGCORP, Inc.On January 1, SIGCORP, Inc. became the holding company for SouthernIndiana Gas and Electric Co. The utility customers will notaffected by the restructuring, and the service territory remainsintact.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Enova Corp.On January 1, the name change of San Diego Gas & Electric to EnovaCorp. resulted in replacement of the former ticker symbol, SDO,with the new ticker symbol, ENA.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996New Century EnergiesUpon completion of the pending merger between Public Service Co. ofColorado, and Southwestern Public Service Co., the new holdingcompany name will be New Century Energies. The two utilities willretain their names in their service territories.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Constellation Energy Corp.Potomac Electric Power Co. and Baltimore Gas and Electric Co., uponmerger completion, will be known as Constellation Energy Corp.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-7IA059-000325-B008-79http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey89.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235302 text/html 99532HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:51:03 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:26 GMTContent-length: 99345Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey89.html Sample Issue Copyright SOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE SOUTHEAST INJULY 1994 -- FROM REPORTS TO FERC (51 words) BIG RIVERS AND PACIFICORP ARE EXPECTED TO SIGN THEIR DEAL BY END OF JANUARY (536 words) ENRON POWER MARKETING, OGLETHORPE IN 4-MONTH SALES, PURCHASE DEAL (550 words) COLDEST WEATHER IN SIX YEARS CAUSES RECORD PEAKS THROUGHOUT FLORIDA (504 words) RESTRUCTURING REGIONAL STATE-BY-STATE SCORECARD OF ELECTRIC INDUSTRY RESTRUCTURING (921 words) AEP DROPS NAMES OF OPERATING UNITS; ALL CALLED AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER (396 words) VIRGINIA POWER TO CUT STAFF BY 30%; MAY PUT TWO 882-MW UNITS IN RESERVE (250 words) SOUTH CAROLINA ALLOWS SCE&G TO SHIFT DEPRECIATION FROM T&D TO NUCLEAR ASSETS (766 words) WEATHER `BLIZZARD OF '96', WHILE DUMPING MUCH SNOW, CAUSES RELATIVELY FEW OUTAGES (410 words) INDEPENDENT POWER ENERGY INITIATIVES WINS FIRST ROUND ON FIRM CAPACITY PAYMENTS IN FLORIDA (350 words) PANDA ENERGY, FLORIDA POWER CONTINUE FIGHT OVER PROJECT IN POLK COUNTY (372 words) POWER MARKETS NCEMPA-1 TO USE NEW METERING EQUIPMENT TO EASE ENTRY INTO WHOLESALE MARKET (764 words) LG&E POWER MARKETING SEEKS TO BROKER POWER SALES AND PURCHASES BY TVA (504 words) WTU TO SUPPLY CO-OP WITH 11.7 MW, INCLUDING NEW COTTON SPINNING PLANT (161 words) LG&E AND LG&E MARKETER MAKE DEAL WITH OHIO ED SWAPPING COAL FOR POWER (248 words) NYMEX LOOKS TO TVA, SOUTHERN COMPANY AS POSSIBLE FUTURES CONTRACT SITES (349 words) RATES GREENVILLE, N.C., MUNI USES COINCIDENT PEAK RATES TO CUT INDUSTRIAL COSTS (598 words) TECO ROE CAPPED AT 12.5% IN AGREEMENT TIED TO 260-MW COAL GASIFICATION PLANT (382 words) DSM NEW GEORGIA POWER RESIDENTIAL DSM PROGRAM SHIFTS CONTROL TO CUSTOMERS (247 words) FLA. COMMISSION APPROVES DSM GOALS AND PLAN FOR LAKELAND ELECTRIC & WATER (204 words) DOCKET WATCH ALABAMA (41 words) ARKANSAS (92 words) DELAWARE (34 words) FLORIDA (1165 words) GEORGIA (320 words) KENTUCKY (224 words) LOUISIANA (107 words) MARYLAND (119 words) MISSISSIPPI (50 words) NORTH CAROLINA (167 words) Oklahoma Corporation Commission (140 words) SOUTH CAROLINA (101 words) TEXAS (968 words) VIRGINIA (234 words) WEST VIRGINIA (157 words) Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (865 words) CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE SOUTHEAST INJULY 1994 -- FROM REPORTSTO FERCIllustration(s):Table: FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE SOUTHEAST IN JULY 1994 -- FROMREPORTS TO FERC (C-contract; CC-combined cycle; F-firm; GT-gas turbines; I-interruptible; IC-internal combustion engines; NC-new contract;OP-offpeak; S-spot)( This table is not availabl electronically. Pease seeJanuary 12, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   BIG RIVERS AND PACIFICORP ARE EXPECTED TO SIGN THEIR DEAL BY END OFJANUARYBy the end of January, Big Rivers Electric Corp. and PacifiCorp hope toannounce a ``letter of intent'' under which PacifiCorp would lease andmanage Big Rivers' coal-fired power plants in western Kentucky over thenext quarter century.   ``We're working on it diligently right nowhopefully we'll see somethingin the next two to three weeks,'' a PacifiCorp spokesman told SoutheastPower Report on Jan. 8. A spokeswoman for financially troubled Big Rivers,based in Henderson, Ky., echoed that sentiment.   Meanwhile, Big Rivers' two largest customers--Alcan Aluminum andSouthwire/NSA--were trying to insert themselves in the process to guaranteethat their desire for lower, more stable electric rates is addressed.Together, aluminum smelters operated by Alcan and Southwire/NSA at Sebreeand Hawesville, Ky., respectively, consume nearly 70% of the electricitygenerated by Big Rivers.   The late December announcement that Big Rivers was negotiating withPacifiCorp on a 25-year lease/operation agreement ended months ofspeculation over which of several suitors would meet with Big Rivers'approval.   Even with the ongoing Big Rivers/PacifiCorp talks, however, severalsuitors have not given up all hope. At least three--U.S. Generating, anindependent power producer, Cinergy Corp. and Louisville Gas &Electric--reportedly believe they still have a chance if the PacifiCorpdiscussions collapse.   While neither Big Rivers nor PacifiCorp, an aggressive Portland,Ore.-based investor-owned utility, apparently believes that will happen,the Big Rivers spokeswoman stressed, ``We're not going to close any doors.It wouldn't be wise considering the investment we've made in this processso far.''   Big Rivers has been trying to find a solution to its $1.2-billion debt,much of which is owed to the Rural Utilities Service for construction ofthe 440-MW D.B. Wilson coal-fired plant in the early 1980s. Some of theoffers submitted to Big Rivers were to buy the generation and transmissioncooperative and/or its generating assets.   PacifiCorp's, however, was different. The Oregon utility would create asubsidiary that would lease and operate Big Rivers' three plants: 480-MWGreen, 455-MW Coleman and Wilson, in addition to the 315-MW Station Twoplant that Big Rivers operates under a long-term contract with the owner,the city of Henderson.   The subsidiary would sell power to Big Rivers, which would resell it toits four distribution cooperatives, Henderson-Union Electric Cooperative,Jackson Purchase Rural Electric Cooperative, Meade County Rural ElectricCooperative and Green River Electric.   Perhaps as importantly, if not more so, the PacifiCorp subsidiary alsowould handle Big Rivers' coal-buying activities and sell surpluselectricity from the power plants to other utilities in the eastern U.S.   Big Rivers' past coal-buying practices have been the subject of stateand federal investigations. They have resulted so far in the conviction ofthree individuals on bribery/kickback charges involving former Big Riversgeneral manager William Thorpe. Thorpe, who has denied any wrongdoing, isexpected to stand trial next summer on related charges.   Most observers believe PacifiCorp, the largest wholesaler of bulk powerin the western U.S., would be more successful than Big Rivers has been inmarketing surplus power.   ``We have said we want to take our core skills in that area and use itin markets outside the West,'' said the PacifiCorp spokesman. ``We want todo that in Kentucky.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENRON POWER MARKETING, OGLETHORPE IN 4-MONTH SALES, PURCHASE DEALOglethorpe Power Corp. announced Jan. 5 that it began a major four-monthenergy sales-and-purchase deal with Enron Power Marketing Inc. Under thearrangement, Enron will have the first option to buy energy fromOglethorpe's 5,000-MW system, while covering energy requirements ofOglethorpe's 39 member cooperatives through April 30 (SPR, 29 Dec. 95, 1).   Oglethorpe customers can expect to save ``several millions of dollars''as a result of the arrangement because Enron will meet their needs at aprice lower than the current Oglethorpe energy charge. Enron expects tomake a profit on sales of energy which some Oglethorpe members cannot use.   The two sides have not released details of the deal. However, Oglethorpeofficials acknowledged that a major selling point of the arrangement wasEnron's first option to all energy available from Oglethorpe plantentitlements and contracts. Oglethorpe estimates that Enron will buy morethan 5.2-million MWh of energy over the four months.   Oglethorpe resources include 1,185 MW of must-run nuclear capacity and1,500 MW of dispatchable baseload fossil capacity in Georgia at WansleyUnits 1 and 2 and Scherer Units 1 and 2. It also has 636 MW of dispatchablepumped hydro capacity at the new Rocky Mountain plant and contracts forbaseload and peaking power with Georgia Power and a 300-MW independentpower project at Hartwell, owned jointly by American National Power andDestec.   Under the arrangement, Enron essentially will take over the marketing inthe region of Oglethorpe's excess, bearing the risks of a flat market aswell as the potential gains from a strong market. Its strategy provedprofitable in the early part of January when the Southeast was hit withseveral days of subfreezing weather.   Oglethorpe will continue to operate its system and control area andcarry out dispatching. But Enron will also be present in the Oglethorpecontrol center and will have a say in decisions affecting energy based onprovisions in the contract.   Oglethorpe officials said the Enron contract contains no provisions fora follow-up deal after April 30.    But the company sees the arrangement as one possible model for futureoperations. A second alternative would be an energy pool operated byOglethorpe itself, which was proposed in late 1995 and is now inpreparation.   Officials at Cooperative Power Inc., made up of six large Oglethorpemembers, said they are still on track to contract with a marketerthemselves to handle their power trading and procurement after April 30.   Because of the Enron arrangement and other developments at Ogelthorpe,including December's restructuring announcement, Georgia Power is delayinga request for proposals for power purchases in 2000. The RFPs had beenscheduled to go out in early January.   Georgia Power had told the state Public Service Commission in Octoberthat it planned to seek bids for up to 600 MW of peaking and intermediatesupplies using both traditional and options contracts.   But since the company currently has contracts to sell 750 MW of power toOglethorpe, which could be canceled over the next three years, it hasdecided to review its future needs because of the Oglethorperestructuring.   Oglethorpe itself is still holding in suspension a 1993 RFP for 600 MWof 1999 peaking power while it works out its future plans and power needsunder the restructuring.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   COLDEST WEATHER IN SIX YEARS CAUSES RECORD PEAKS THROUGHOUT FLORIDAWhile snow blanketed much of the East Coast of the U.S., Florida felt thecoldest weather in more than six years, as high demand set new winter andall-time peak records throughout the state.   The state's three largest utilities all set new all-time record peaks,as temperatures dropped nearly to 20F in much of the state on Jan. 9. Theprimary source of heating in Florida is electric, which puts an additionalstress on the system. Still, state-wide reserve capacity was about 3,800 MWon Jan. 9, according to Tom Hallam, staff engineer of the Florida ElectricUtility Coordinating Group.   Tampa Electric, which is normally the chief supplier of purchase power,hit a new all-time peak of 3,526 MW about 7:11 a.m. on Jan. 9. A spokesmansaid TECO had no reserve capacity and had to crank up its rarely usedcombustion turbine units in order to meet demand. TECO had expected a lowof about 31 degrees and a demand of about 3,400 MW, which would haveexceeded the previous all-time peak of 3,339 MW set on Feb. 9, 1995.   Florida Power broke records on both Jan. 8, when it hit 8,086 MW, andagain on Jan. 9, when demand soared to about 8,500 MW, a spokesman said. Tomeet demand, Florida Power exercised about 600 MW of residential loadcontrol and cranked up all but one of its small combustion turbine units.It did not resort to interrupting its large industrial and commercialcustomers, which would have given it another 700 MW, a spokesman said.   Florida Power & Light hit a new all-time demand record of about 17,300MW on the morning of Jan. 9, which easily exceeded the previous record of16,563 MW set on Feb. 9, 1995, a spokesman said. At the time, about 34,000or 1% of its customers were out of service due to scattered distributionproblems. To meet demand, FP&L used about 300 MW of commercial loadcontrol, but was not forced to use the 500 MW of residential load controlit had available.   The Orlando Utilities Commission broke all-time peak records on bothJan. 8, when demand reached 893 MW at about 7:30 am., and Jan. 9, when thepeak was 917 MW at about 7 a.m. OUC operates a power pool for itself, theFlorida Municipal Power Agency, the Lakeland Electric & Water Dept.,Kissimmee Utility Authority and the city of St. Cloud. An OUC spokesmansaid the pool set a record of 2,272 MW on Jan. 8, then broke that record onJan. 9 at 2,410 MW.   In North Florida, the Jacksonville Electric Authority broke its previousall-time peak of 2,247 MW, which was also set on Feb. 9, 1995, on Jan. 8,when demand hit 2,339 MW. On Jan. 9, JEA came within 5 MW of breaking thatrecord, a spokesman said. Gulf Power set a new winter peak of 1,821 MW onJan. 8, beating its previous winter peak of 1,821 MW on Dec. 23, 1989.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   REGIONAL STATE-BY-STATE SCORECARD OF ELECTRIC INDUSTRY RESTRUCTURING    Over the last three months, restructuring debates have heated up inmost parts of the country, with 30 states now reporting some sort ofactivity. The California Public Utilities Commission came out with a majorcompromise plan in late December, several New England states are askingtheir utilities to file restructuring plans in the coming six months, andregulators have issued initial restructuring guidelines in severalMidwestern states. Restructuring debates have even begun in a few Southernstates, even though lower power prices in the region kept activity at aminimum. The following is a state-by-state survey of restructuring activityin the Southeast. All dates are 1995 unless otherwise noted.ARKANSASIn early 1995, a bill was introduced in the state Legislature that wouldallow large industrial users to switch retail suppliers under certainconditions. But the bill was quickly withdrawn without a major debate.State regulators say they expect to start a restructuring proceeding in1996, but so far the Public Service Commission has issued no initialnotice.FLORIDAThe state Legislature has created a special subcommittee to investigatecompetition in the electric industry. The panel will gather information andcould make legislative proposals in 1996.GEORGIAThe Public Service Commission said it will hold an investigation in 1996on whether the state's current territorial franchise system needs to beadapted to the more competitive electric industry environment. The currentsystem lets large users choose among supply options when adding new loadbut gives no freedom of choice to smaller customers.In December, a bill was introduced in the state Legislature that wouldforce utilities to provide retail wheeling services to all customers andgive customers wide rights to switch retail suppliers without penalty. Thebill contains no stranded investment provisions and is strongly opposed byutilities.LOUISIANAA group of industrial users proposed in May that the city of New Orleansconsider an open-access approach, with several suppliers competing forretail users using the existing New Orleans Public Service distributionsystem. But the plan got a cold reception from the City Council, andplanned hearings on competition issues have been postponed indefinitely.MARYLANDThe Public Service Commission is carrying out a proceeding on competition(Case No. 8678). In comments filed in January, industrial users havefavored full retail competition, while utilities have backed somederegulation of generation and limited retail competition tied to strandedinvestment. The PSC final report issued Aug. 18 rejected the use of retailwheeling, saying that the relatively low power rates in the state meantMaryland did not need ``dramatic fixes'' at this time.NORTH CAROLINAIn February, industrials asked the Utilities Commission to begin aninvestigation into retail competition. After receiving generally negativecomments from utilities, the commission decided on July 21 not to implementretail wheeling at this time (Doc. No. E-100, Sub. 77). It said wheelingpresented too many legal uncertainties and that it preferred to wait andsee what other states did. It asked parties to offer further comments onthe issue.   In October, large industrials warned that the go-slow approach would putthe state at a competitive disadvantage and called on the commission tosponsor a new round of public meetings on retail competition in early1996.OKLAHOMAIn June, the Legislature set up a 14-member task force to review allaspects of the electric industry in the state. It is not clear how much thegroup will deal with competition issues.SOUTH CAROLINAIn July, the Public Service Commission turned down a request fromindustrials to initiate a formal review of retail wheeling. Instead, thePSC staff will carry out a low-key study of the issue.TEXASA major bill passed by the Texas Legislature in late May ordered variouschanges in the operation of the state's wholesale market. But due to apolitical stand-off, the bill did not change the status quo on retailwheeling issues. A proposal for a retail wheeling pilot was dropped fromthe bill, as were various anti-retail wheeling provisions. Instead, theLegislature asked state regulators to conduct studies on key issues. Sincethen, industrials have begun to organize a wider coalition in support ofretail competition and hope to apply greater political pressure in the 1997legislative session.   The Texas Public Utility Commission in October opened a generalrestructuring proceeding (Docket No. 15000) to make recommendations to theLegislature by 1997 on competition and stranded investment issues. Partieswere asked to comment on specific unbundling and stranded cost conceptsfloated by commission members.   The PUC also is asking for comment by January 1996 on a separatetransmission rule. It would set up a regional postage stamp pricing systemfor use of the state grid and also bring in an independent system operatorto manage the system.VIRGINIAIn September, the Virginia State Corporation Commission announced it wasopening a formal review of electric industry competition and restructuringissues. It said its staff would issue a report on March 31, 1996, makingpolicy recommendations. After a 60-day public comment period, the SCC willmake final decisions.  In its notice, the commission said its staff had already held informaltalks with key parties and that even though Virginia already had lowelectric prices, there could be improvement through increased competition.In comments submitted to the SCC in December, Virginia Power urged ago-slow approach to retail competition and said the commission shouldconcentrate first on alternative ratemaking for utilities.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   AEP DROPS NAMES OF OPERATING UNITS; ALL CALLED AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWERAfter decades of operation, Kentucky Power, Appalachian Power, WheelingPower and Kingsport Power are no more. In early January, the four utilitiesadopted the name of their parent company, American Electric Power.   The change--AEP's three other subsidiaries outside the Southeast wereaffected as well--is part of AEP's ``New Directions Next Steps'' program toprepare for competition and deregulation in the utility industry by tradingon its ``brand name'' recognition. AEP's other units are Columbus SouthernPower, Indiana Michigan Power and Ohio Power.   All seven operating companies are now known as one company: AmericanElectric Power. From now on, the AEP logo will be emblazoned on companyfacilities, vehicles and communications with customers. For the first time,AEP's corporate headquarters in Columbus, Ohio, will bear a large ``AEP''logo atop the building.   Also this month, individual company publications are being consolidatedinto one publication that will have a tabloid newspaper format.   ``We've always been AEP, a world-class energy company dedicated tohometown service, and our employees have worked under a variety of companynames in the past,'' said AEP chairman Linn Draper. ``Using AEP as our namethroughout the company is a sign that all of these individuals have joineda single team to find ways to serve our customers even better.   ``We do not need to change legal, financial, rate or regulatoryrelationships as the result of the new one-company strategy,'' continuedDraper, ``but we expect our customers will see many benefits andefficiencies from this change in days to come.''   Not everyone within AEP was an enthusiastic supporter of the name changelast summer when Draper first disclosed plans to phase out operatingcompany identities. Over the years, fierce loyalties and friendlycompetitions had developed within the seven subsidiaries.   In the end, change won out as it is doing more frequently these days inthe utility industry.   In keeping with its one-company philosophy, AEP has named new AEPpresidents as top statewide contacts for customer groups, legislators andregulators. Effective Jan. 1, new state presidents include Timothy Moser,Kentucky; Dana Waldo, West Virginia; and Daniel Carson, Virginia andTennessee.   The state presidents will discuss what AEP believes are the benefits ofcompetition in the electric power industry with the company's customers,regulators and legislators. They are expected to ``work diligently to builda consensus on industry restructuring,'' Draper said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   VIRGINIA POWER TO CUT STAFF BY 30%; MAY PUT TWO 882-MW UNITS IN RESERVEVirginia Power said Jan. 8 that its fossil and hydro business unit is inthe final stages of a far-reaching restructuring and downsizing effortaimed at optimizing the cost-competitiveness of the utility's hydroelectricfacilities and plants fired by coal, oil and gas.   Among other things, Virginia Power said, the fossil and hydro unit plansto reduce by about 30% the number of salaried and hourly employees and to``remission'' two large oil-fired plants from regular to emergency-onlyuse. These and other moves, it said, should save the utility $55 million to$65 million a year and help maintain the utility's position as one of thelowest-cost generators in its region.   In a series of announcements over the past several months, the mostrecent of which was Jan. 8, the fossil and hydro unit has said it will trimits salaried and hourly payroll by a total of 537 positions by early March.That will leave the unit with 1,254 employees.   The utility said reductions are part of a ``comprehensive redesigneffort'' that grew out of the utility's Vision 2000 strategic planningprocess.   Last year, teams composed of fossil and hydro unit employees examinedpotential efficiency and cost-cutting measures. In addition to recommendingthe staffing reductions, the teams had urged that two 882-MW oil-firedplants that have been providing intermediate and peaking capacity since themid-1970s--Possum Point Unit 5 and Yorktown Unit--should be placed inemergency reserve, and be run four weeks each peak season.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH CAROLINA ALLOWS SCE&G TO SHIFT DEPRECIATION FROM T&D TO NUCLEARASSETSThe South Carolina Public Service Commission has decided to allow SouthCarolina Electric & Gas to transfer nearly $257 million in depreciationreserves from its transmission and distribution assets to its nucleargeneration assets as part of a rate case (Docket No. 95-1000-E).   The move has angered non-utility generators, industrials, and thestate's Dept. of Consumer Affairs, who claimed that the ruling will giveSCE&G--already one of the lowest-cost generators in the Southeast--anunfair competitive advantage over other generators after deregulation, andwill increase the cost of accessing SCE&G's T&D system.   The PSC also granted a 7.34%, $67.5-million rate hike for the utility.   Nancy Vaughn Coombs, deputy consumer advocate at the state Dept. ofConsumer Affairs (DCA), explained that the depreciation-reserve shift willresult in a lower ``book value'' for SCE&G's two-thirds stake in the 900-MWV.C. Summer nuclear plant, and a higher book value for the utility's T&Dassets.   That, Coombs continued, will have the effect of shifting SCE&G's costsaway from its generation sector, which is likely to face increasingcompetition as deregulation takes hold, to its T&D sector, which is likelyto remain a monopoly.   In the increasingly competitive generation market, she said, othergenerators and power marketers will be forced to compete with theartificially lower generation costs SCE&G will be able to offer thanks tothe depreciation-reserve shift. Generators and marketers also will beforced to pay artificially higher costs to wheel power across SCE&G linesbecause those costs are based in part on the book value of its T&D assets.   An irony in the matter, Coombs said, is that SCE&G already was unusuallywell-positioned for generation competition even before it secured the PSC'sapproval for the depreciation-reserve shift. ``Its rates are the lowest ofany investor-owned utility in South Carolina,'' she said, ``and are amongthe lowest in the Southeast, which as a whole has the second-lowest ratesof any region in the country.''   Coombs said the DCA will ask the PSC to reconsider its ruling, and addedthat if the commission fails to do so, her agency is likely to file a legalchallenge in state court, asserting the depreciation reserve transferviolates South Carolina law.   The DCA's concerns were echoed by Craig Roach, a principal with BostonPacific Co. Inc. of Washington, D.C., who represents the CarolinaCompetitive Energy Producers, a NUG group. ``The whole point ofunbundling,'' he said, ``is to reveal the true cost of generation,'' andany effort to artificially lower the cost of generation is ``clearlyanti-competitive.''   Roach added, however, that while he wishes the DCA well in its effort toreverse the PSC's ruling, the group he represents cannot commit thefinancial resources that would be involved in joining the fray. ``There aretoo many battles to fight,'' he said.   Also expressing concern about the depreciation-reserve shift was ArthurFusco, a Columbia, S.C., attorney who represents the South Carolina EnergyUsers Committee (SCEUC), a 57-member industrial group that was beenpressing state regulators to accelerate deregulation and retail wheeling.   Fusco said the depreciation reserve transfer would increase the wheelingcosts industrials would pay if, once retail competition arrives, they wereto buy their electricity requirements from a utility other than SCE&G.   He said SCEUC also will urge the PSC to reconsider the magnitude of therate increase itself, which he said was ``way too high,'' in part becausethe commission will allow SCE&G to earn a 12% rate of return on commonequity--a full percentage point higher than it had been earning.   SCE&G general counsel Belton Ziegler defended the PSC's ruling, however,and dismissed assertions that the transfer is anti-competitive. He said theruling will help his utility ``prepare for competition.''   Among other things, Ziegler said the reserve shift is a necessarypreemptive step to ensure that any large retail customers that leave theutility for other suppliers help pay for assets SCE&G had developed toserve them. Without the shift, he said, residential and small-commercialcustomers would likely end up paying for ``100%'' of the utility's strandedinvestment, ``and we don't think that would be fair.''   He continued, ``If you look at the natural gas industry, the benefits ofderegulation went for the most part to large customers who could move offthe system'' and avoid, as much as possible, the responsibility for payingoff the investments their old gas companies had made to serve them.   ``We are telling industrials that if they leave as generation customersthey still will have to pay [for the nuclear assets SCE&G developed forthem] as transmission and distribution customers.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   `BLIZZARD OF '96', WHILE DUMPING MUCH SNOW, CAUSES RELATIVELY FEW OUTAGESGiven the magnitude of the snowstorm that swept through the northern tierof the Southeast on Jan. 6 and 7, utilities in the region fared relativelywell, reporting customer outages that--taken together--ran only into thetens of thousands.   American Electric Power, which serves portions of Virginia and WestVirginia under what used to be called Appalachian Power Co. (see story onits name changes this issue), said four of its smaller transmission linesin the Virginias--one 138-kV line and three 69-kV lines--lost serviceduring the storm, but no customers were affected because power wasautomatically rerouted through other lines.   A total of about 15,000 customers elsewhere on the AEP system inVirginia, West Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky lost power for a timebecause of downed distribution lines, a spokesman said. Power was restoredto most within hours.   Virginia Power, meanwhile, said as many as 30,000 customers lost powerduring the storm, including 2,400 mostly commercial customers in downtownNorfolk midday Sunday, Jan. 7, due to a conduit fault in an underground11-kV circuit.   A spokesman said the utility quickly replaced some 3,000 linear feet ofconduit so it could restore service to all but a few customers by earlyMonday. The cause of the fault is still under investigation.   The bulk of the outages on the Virginia Power system, however, were inthe Northern Neck and Gloucester area south of Washington, D.C., and on thewestern shore of the Chesapeake Bay.   Duke Power, in turn, said that as many as 34,000--or about 2%--of its1.7 million North and South Carolina customers were without power at thesame time during the storm, mostly because of ice-related distribution-lineproblems in and near Charlotte, N.C., and Greenville and Clemson, S.C.   About 8,000 customers remained cut off Monday morning, a spokesman said,but service was restored to most of them later that day.   Carolina Power & Light, whose North and South Carolina serviceterritories experienced a mix of snow, sleet and rain, said it experiencedonly one significant outage--affecting about 5,000 customers in theSanford, N.C., area, south of Raleigh.   And Monongahela Power, whose West Virginia service territory wasblanketed with two feet of snow, said only a few dozen customers lost powerduring the storm. A spokeswoman noted that while cold temperaturesincreased residential demand over the weekend and on Monday, demand fromindustrial and commercial customers was off sharply as businesses closedbecause of the snow.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENERGY INITIATIVES WINS FIRST ROUND ON FIRM CAPACITY PAYMENTS IN FLORIDALake Cogen, a 112-MW project developed by Energy Initiatives, won a partialsummary judgment Jan. 4 in a case filed against Florida Power in statecircuit court in Lake County (No. 94354 CA-01, Division 8).   The case revolves around whether firm capacity payments should be madebased on a model used by Florida Power, or a separate method the developersof the gas-fired cogeneration facility said was specified in the contract.Florida Power pays NUGs both capacity and energy payments when thetheoretically avoided generating unit would operate, but only as-availableor energy payments if the avoided unit would have been off-line.   Florida Power claimed the theoretically avoided 500-MW pulverized coalplant equipped with a scrubber, which was used to determine capacity andenergy payments, would be used by the utility based on four criteria todetermine when the plant would be dispatched on an economic basis. The fourparameters were the cost of variable operations and maintenance, the priceof coal, the heat rate of the unit, and a fuel multiplier of 1.   In its motion, Lake Cogen contended other factors, such as environmentalcompliance, should be used in determining economic dispatchability of agenerating unit. It said an actual, operating plant should be used forcomparison, namely Florida Power's coal-fired Crystal River units Nos.1-2.   Judge Don Briggs ruled the parameters for dispatchability should bebased on a real unit and not only the four Florida Power was using. Heordered that a more accurate model be developed to determine how much LakeCogen should be paid. That cost information will be compared to actualpayments, which could be used to determine an award at a later date,assuming the model shows Lake Cogen was underpaid. A schedule for furtherproceedings had not be set.   Fama confirmed that two other NUGs, Pasco Cogen and Orlando Cogen, havesimilar court actions pending.   Lake Cogen is located in Umatilla, Fla., and sells steam to Golden GemGrowers. Partners in the project along with Energy Initiatives are LakeInvestment Holdings and NCP Lake Power Inc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PANDA ENERGY, FLORIDA POWER CONTINUE FIGHT OVER PROJECT IN POLK COUNTYPanda Energy and Florida Power have traded lawsuits in a dispute overPanda's proposed project in Polk County.   Panda was allowed to voluntarily withdraw without prejudice a$345-million federal suit it had filed against Florida Power (SPR, 1l Aug'95, 1), but Florida Power has since filed suit against Panda. In addition,the state Public Service Commission denied two requests made by Panda in arelated action.   The anti-trust suit Panda withdrew in U.S. District Court for the MiddleDistrict of Florida, Tampa Division (Case No. 95-992-CIV-T-24 C), allegedFlorida Power unfairly interfered with its construction of a cogenerationplant which was to have supplied Florida Power with 74.9 MW of firm powerunder a standard offer contract.   Panda's general counsel Bill Nordlund said the withdrawal was astrategic move, ``and we still plan to prosecute this matter and moveforward on it.'' He would not specify when or in what venue.   The countersuit filed by Florida Power at the end of December soughtdeclaratory judgments answering the allegations included in Panda's suit,in case Panda refiled the case, according to Florida Power attorney JimFama (95-2145-CIV-T-25-B).   Florida Power asked the court to rule that:Panda did not have a superior legal right to negotiate for a natural gastransmission contract with the city of Lakeland, and that the utility didnot interfere with Panda's rights with the city;  -- Panda is not entitled to a standard-offer contract if it builds a unitlarger than 75 MW;  -- Panda is not entitled to payments under a standard-offer contractbeyond December 2016; and  -- Panda has breached its contract by failing to begin construction onthe unit.   The suit also sought relief from the court.   On Jan. 3, the PSC refused to reconsider a decision the PSC made on Dec.5, which said the PSC did have jurisdiction over standard-offer contractsand the Florida Power/Panda dispute. It also refused to grant Panda a90-day extension beyond Jan. 5 to file testimony in that case (Docket No.950110-EI). As a result, a hearing at the PSC was scheduled for Feb. 19, astaff recommendation was due April 18, and the commission was scheduled tovote on April 30.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NCEMPA-1 TO USE NEW METERING EQUIPMENT TO EASE ENTRY INTO WHOLESALE MARKETNorth Carolina Municipal Power Agency No. 1 said it is gearing up to enterthe Southeast wholesale power market over the next few months, and isinstalling new wholesale delivery point metering equipment that will enableit to predict with considerable accuracy how much surplus non-firm energyit has to sell.   NCMPA-1, part of Raleigh-based ElectriCities of North Carolina Inc.,arranges wholesale power for 19 municipal utilities in the western part ofthe state, including larger munis like those in High Point and Gastonia andsmaller ones like those in Lincolnton, Cherryville and Pineville.   Through plant co-ownership and exchange agreements it signed with DukePower more than a decade ago, the agency is entitled to 850 MW from Duke's2,200-MW Catawba nuclear power station in Clover, S.C. The investor-ownedutility agreed to buy back a significant portion of NCMPA-1's entitlementinitially, then decreasing amounts until the buy-back period ends aroundthe turn of the century.   In part because Duke also agreed to buy back--at a relatively lowprice--any surplus energy NCMPA-1 may have, and because of afirst-right-of-refusal clause that enabled Duke to match any offer anotherpotential buyer might make for that surplus, the agency made no real effortin the 1980s and first half of the 1990s to market its surplus to others.   Recently, however, NCMPA-1 and Duke reached an agreement that resolvesthe first-right-of-refusal issue, and the agency decided to install specialmetering equipment at key wholesale delivery points to its member munis toprovide it with real-time information about muni demand.   That data also will enable NCMPA-1 to predict how much surplus energy itwill have available for sale, said Woody Adams, NCMPA-1's power-supplymanager.   Adams told Southeast Power Report that while his agency always has hadthe right to sell surplus energy, ``we didn't havethe ability to know on atimely basis how much surplus energy we had'' available for sale.   He predicted that in 1996 NCMPA-1 will have at least 500 GWh andpossibly as much as 600 GWh of surplus energy for sale either through theAutomated Interchange Matching System (AIMS) or through bilateral deals,and that that amount would grow to at least 1,000 GWh by 2000.   ``The surplus will be available primarily in the off-peak hours,'' Adamssaid, with more--including, perhaps, some peak-hour energy--available innon-summer months, but at least some available at night and on weekends all12 months of the year. He said summer-peaking NCMPA-1 sees particularpromise in ``seasonal diversity'' deals with winter-peaking entities to itsnorth and west, as well as daily or even seasonal ``energy swaps.''   The cost of producing the energy in question, he noted, is``characteristic of typical generation costs for a well-run nuclear unit,''but he declined to provide specifics. Duke is generally considered to beone of the nation's premier operators of nuclear facilities.   ``What we intend to do initially,'' Adams said, ``is to market thesurplus energy on AIMS'' beginning later this winter, ``as well as to enterinto exchange agreements with power marketers and with utilities that areeither directly connected to Duke or that have ready access'' to theinvestor-owned utility.   Duke would have ``as much right as anyone'' to buy power through AIMS,he said, adding that NCMPA-1 already has signed exchange agreements withseveral marketers, including Citizens Lehman Power, Enron Power Marketing,and LG&E Power Marketing.   The major advantages of participating in the market, Adams said, ``willbe to give us the contacts and experience we'll need to be active in thosemarkets as they evolve.''   The impact of surplus energy sales on NCMPA-1's balance sheet, ``whilesignificant, will not be a make-or-break thing for us. We see it more as aninitial step toward becoming competitive in deregulated power markets,'' hesaid.   Meanwhile, NCMPA-1 also is installing equipment to monitor the loads of``well over 50'' of its munis' largest retail customers. That equipment,said Mark Otersen, the agency's supervisor of demand-side operations, willlet NCMPA-1 gather information on customer demand and chart customer load``shapes''--or patterns of demand.   That load-shape data, in turn, should help NCMPA-1 design newdemand-side management-related rates for industries with common loadshapes, and help its member munis convince large energy users of thebenefits of using such rates, Otersen said.   He noted that relatively few of the large retail customers served bymunis in western North Carolina currently participate in load-managementprograms that provide incentives to those who agree to let their utilitycurtail or interrupt power during peak periods, or who agree to runpeak-shaving standby generators.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LG&E POWER MARKETING SEEKS TO BROKER POWER SALES AND PURCHASES BY TVALG&E Power Marketing Inc. (LPM) has asked the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission to approve changes in its accounting practices to cover acontract under which the marketer will broker power sales and purchases bythe Tennessee Valley Authority and assign all gains and losses to itsaffiliate Louisville Gas & Electric.   In a Dec. 15 filing to FERC, LPM said that it was about to enter into aninterchange agreement with TVA under which it would sell energy to TVA andbuy energy for resale to third parties (Doc. No. ER94-1188-000).   While it will take title to energy received from TVA, it will pass allbenefits from the transactions on to LG&E, thereby maintaining its brokerstatus in the deals.   LPM officials said they already perform this non-exclusive brokeringfunction for LG&E with other energy sellers based on existing generalarrangements with LG&E on file at FERC.   In the TVA case, however, the two parties will change a system underwhich the marketer pays a fee to LG&E for dispatching and transmissionservices. Instead of a straight fee, LPM will use the dispatching fee as a``true up'' mechanism to insure that LG&E receives the full benefit of anydeal involving TVA energy.   It asked FERC to approve this new arrangement now so that questionsabout accounting procedures will not arise later which might hinder LPM'smarketer status and ability to use market-based pricing under FERCregulations.   In its filing, LPM also asserted that it was entitled to enter aninterchange agreement with TVA despite a Congressional ban on TVA salesoutside its own territory, because its affiliated franchise, LG&E, wasgrandfathered under the 1957 TVA ``fence'' law.   It also noted that its arrangement with LG&E was not exclusive since anyof its competitors with similar rights could carry out the same servicesfor LG&E. It said the deal did not in any way increase its market power orresult in undue discrimination or preference and would not be detrimentalto LG&E ratepayers.   FERC asked for comment by Jan. 12. It appears likely that some utilitiesin the region may raise questions about the ``fence issue.''   Already, in September, when the issue of an interchange between LPM andTVA first arose, members of Congress asked for an explanation of its legalaspects. At that time, TVA sent a letter to Sen. Lauch Faircloth (R-NC)assuring him that the arrangement could be done under current fence rules(SPR, 22 Sept '95, 1).   At the same time, industry sources said it is possible TVA will attemptto attach a last-minute amendment to the current budget bill to create amore explicit permission to allow such interchanges with affiliates of the14 grandfathered utilities.   Last summer, TVA publicly pulled back from a plan to introducelegislation to bring down the fence, and it remains to be seen if it nowwill take a piecemeal approach, starting with energy sales to marketers andenergy pools which have immediate applications in the region.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WTU TO SUPPLY CO-OP WITH 11.7 MW, INCLUDING NEW COTTON SPINNING PLANTCentral and South West unit West Texas Utilities has signed a 10-year dealto supply a total of 11.7-MW to Midwest Electric Cooperative of Roby,Texas.   The pact takes effect in two stages. On Sept. 1, 1997, WTU will beginsupplying 5 MW to Midwest to serve the Lortex Industries cotton spinningplant in Snyder, Texas. The plant represents new load and the entry of anew industry to that part of Texas.   On June 1, 1998, it will begin supplying another 6.7 MW. That capacityhas been supplied by TU Electric.   The contract also has an extended terms provision, meaning that WTU alsowill supply any load growth that Midwest experiences at the Lortexfacility.   WTU said the pact would have a non-fuel revenue impact of $1.4 millionannually when fully implemented. To supply Midwest, WTU will build 39 milesof 69-kV line and two substations.   Midwest serves 5,640 members in 10 Texas counties.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LG&E AND LG&E MARKETER MAKE DEALWITH OHIO ED SWAPPING COAL FOR POWERAn unusual agreement is in the works among Louisville Gas & Electric, LG&EPower Marketing and Ohio Edison under which LG&E would supply high-sulfurcoal to Ohio Ed and LPM would receive 300 MW of electricity for one yearfrom Ohio Ed's Burger power plant.   An Ohio Ed spokesman confirmed that negotiations are under way but saida final agreement has not been reached. An LPM spokeswoman said she couldnot comment on the proposed arrangement until it is finalized.   A source familiar with the pending deal said the talks are beinggoverned by ``very strict confidentiality agreements.'' Apparently, here ishow the transaction would work: LG&E would supply up to 1 million tons ofhigh-sulfur coal, reportedly from West Virginia, this year to the Burgerplant, located at Shadyside, Ohio.   In return, LPM would have access to 300 MW of electricity from Burger tosupply its own customers.   Another Ohio Ed spokesman said he could not comment on the proposed bulkpower agreement because of the ``increasingly competitive'' bulk powermarket and electric utility industry.   The source told The McGraw-Hill Companies' Power Markets Week that sucharrangements may become more commonplace as competition and deregulationcome to the utility industry. ``With a dramatically changing industry suchas the power production industry, you're going to see unusual agreementsmore and more,'' she said.   LPM has been very aggressive since its formation last August. It andLG&E are subsidiaries of LG&E Energy Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NYMEX LOOKS TO TVA, SOUTHERN COMPANYAS POSSIBLE FUTURES CONTRACT SITESWith its two proposed electricity futures contracts on track to beeffective this spring, the New York Mercantile Exchange is consideringdelivery points in the East to launch further contracts. Among the systemsunder consideration in the Southeast are the Tennessee Valley Authority andthe Southern Company system.   Patrick Thompson, president of the New York Mercantile Exchange, lastweek predicted the Commodity Futures Trading Commission will act on theexchange's two proposed electricity futures contracts before the end of themonth, which could allow trading to begin by the end of March or early inthe second quarter of this year.   NYMEX filed supplemental information on its proposed futures contractswith the CFTC late last month. The material, responding to commissioninquiries concerning the deliverability of the commodity and potentialregulation of electricity futures by the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission, was filed under a claim of confidentiality and was not madepublicly available.   The confidential filing cleared the way for CFTC staff to beginpreparing a memorandum for consideration by the commission. The foursitting commissioners likely will begin considering whether to approve thecontracts later this month, according to a CFTC source.   Assuming the supplemental filing from NYMEX answers all the questionsraised by the CFTC staff, the memorandum now being drafted could be sent tothe commission within two weeks, the CFTC source said.   ``I'm really confident now that the CFTC has had all of its questionsanswered--both technical and regulatory,'' NYMEX's Thompson said in atelephone interview last week. ``I expect the approval process to concludevery quickly.''   NYMEX is expected to launch both contracts at the same time. The twocontracts are virtually identical, except for the physical delivery pointsat the Palo Verde nuclear station switchyard and the California/Oregonborder intertie. The exchange plans to let the markets decide whether oneor both futures contracts will be sustained in the long term.   NYMEX's advisory group is also considering the Pennsylvania-NewJersey-Maryland Interconnection and American Electric Power's grid aspotential delivery points for further futures contracts in the East.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   GREENVILLE, N.C., MUNI USES COINCIDENTPEAK RATES TO CUT INDUSTRIAL COSTSOfficials of the Greenville Utilities Commission in North Carolina saidthat coincident-peak-based rates have not only allowed the muni's existingindustrial customers to cut electric bills, but are helping the muni tolure new business to the city.   John Chaffee, executive director of the Pitt County DevelopmentCommission, said industrials that are taking full advantage of the CP ratespay no more--and sometimes less--than they would for power from neighboringinvestor-owned utilities and electric cooperatives that serve areas aroundGreenville.   GUC buys all its wholesale power from the North Carolina EasternMunicipal Power Agency, which in turn buys most of its power from CarolinaPower & Light.   Because a significant portion of NCEMPA's and the muni's wholesale powercosts is based on their demand during CP&L's highest systemwide demand houreach month, the muni agency and Greenville have been working hard tominimize their monthly peaks through, among other things, aggressiveresidential load control programs, and programs to help industrials installpeak-shaving generation.   GUC general manager Roger Jones said the Greenville muni also inmid-1994 replaced its traditional industrial rate schedule with a new menuof CP-only rates that all customers with a demand of 750 kW or more mustchoose from.   The GUC typically notifies its industrial customers by automated signalwhen it expects a potential coincident-peak period to be approaching; atthat point, the rate agreement says, the customer ``may utilize any meansdeemed suitable to reduce its coincident peak demand,'' including, forinstance, temporary production cuts and/or the use of muni-approvedpeak-shaving generators.   Jones said that the muni's 750-kW-plus customers, who also include somelarge commercial and institutional accounts, together comprise aboutone-quarter of Greenville's total energy use. The CP rates have encouragedthem to reduce their peak-period demand by 15 to 20% from what it typicallywould have been without the coincident-peak rates.   The magnitude of reductions in coincident-peak demand varies widely fromcustomer to customer, the muni manager said. Some are able only to trimtheir demand slightly, while others have been ``very aggressive'' and haveslashed peak-period demand by more than 50%.   For example, a large Proctor & Gamble manufacturing plant in Greenvillethat typically demands about 8 MW reduces its demand to between 1 and 1.5MW during coincident peaks, Jones noted, saving both P&G and the munithousands of dollars in monthly power costs.   Chaffee said P&G ``basically shuts down production [during forecasted CPhours] to achieve the maximum possible savings.'' To make the best use ofits down time, he noted, the manufacturer performs required maintenance onits production and other equipment.   Chaffee gave as an example the new automobile parts plant that Japan'sASMO Co. Ltd. in 1994 developed--and in 1995 expanded--in Greenville. Thecombined $50-million facility demands about 2.5 MW.   ``An important issue for ASMO in deciding where to site the [initial]plant was power costs,'' he said. ``We were able to demonstrate that byutilizing Greenville's CP rate and installing [a 1-MW peak-shavinggenerator to further reduce CP demand] that they would be paying ratescompetitive with'' industrial rates offered by Duke Power and otherlow-cost, investor-owned utilities in the Southeast.   Chaffee added, finally, that in his view the CP has been a significantfactor in enabling Greenville to draw increasing numbers of new industries.He noted that while industrial firms announced $20 million in newinvestments in the city in 1992 and $33 million the year after that,industrial investment jumped to $43 million in 1994 and $55 million in1995--the first two years the CP rates were mandated.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TECO ROE CAPPED AT 12.5% IN AGREEMENTTIED TO 260-MW COAL GASIFICATION PLANTThe Florida Public Service Commission voted Jan. 3 to cap the 1996 rate ofreturn on equity for Tampa Electric at 12.5% and to determine at a futuretime how over-earnings might be distributed (Docket No. 950379-EI).   The action, coming after TECO earned about $45 million more than itsallowed ROE in 1995, will forestall a rate case that would have been filedin 1996 to pay for a new generating unit.   In an earlier stipulation with staff, TECO's 1995 earnings were cappedat 12.75% and about $45 million of over-earnings will be deferred until1997, after TECO's new $550-million, 260-MW integrated coal gasificationcombined cycle plant which is in Polk County goes on-line in late 1996(SPR, 19 May '95, 16). TECO's actual ROE for 1995 was expected to be about16%.   The deal between staff and TECO effectively replaced negotiations theutility was conducting with the Office of the Public Counsel, whichrepresents ratepayers at the Florida Public Service Commission, accordingto OPC attorney Roger Howe (SPR, 31 Dec '95, 11).   The PSC's action, which was the result of last-minute negotiationsbetween staff and TECO on 1996 earnings, could mean that any excessrevenues could be used for the plant, a refund, to offset regulatoryassets, or for depreciation in 1997 or later. The PSC will likely make adecision on disposition of 1996 excesses sometime in early 1997, accordingto Tim Devlin of the PSC's Auditing and Finance Division.   Under the arrangement for 1996, TECO will have an ROE range of 11.5% to13.5%. However, all of the earnings over 11.5% will be split, whicheffectively caps earnings at 12.5%. TECO estimated it will earn about13.27% in 1996.   The Polk unit will go into rate base in late 1996 and based on TECO'searnings projections, which are considered conservative, it will still earnin excess of its allowed ROE. The 1995 excess carried forward was alsoexpected to cover the additional cost of the new unit through 1997 and,possibly, beyond.   Howe said that, because interest rates were expected to further declineduring the next few years, it was likely the PSC would reduce TECO'sallowed ROE for 1997, which could mean additional excess earnings in thatyear, despite the new unit.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NEW GEORGIA POWER RESIDENTIAL DSMPROGRAM SHIFTS CONTROL TO CUSTOMERSGeorgia Power has proposed to state regulators a new residential loadcontrol program which it says will create 156 MW of savings over 10 years.   Under the plan, customers would buy the control equipment from GeorgiaPower at discounted prices. While this approach is expected to limitparticipation to about 10% of all homes, it will only cost the utility a$20.1-million investment during the 10-year period, meeting the new statepolicy limiting DSM spending.   Under the proposal, submitted to the Georgia Public Service Commissionin December, Georgia Power will give its residential users a choice ofthree approaches to carry out load control.   The most sophisticated will be a home control system based on ScientificAtlanta's ``SuperStat'' thermostat, which will adjust home power use inresponse to a ``critical price signal'' from the utility.   The second approach would use the SuperStat equipment to cycle airconditioners and other appliances at different times of day based onprearranged peak and off-peak demand periods. And the third approach willbe to simply offer time-of-use rates to customers with conventionalthermostat control equipment and encourage them to take advantage of pricedifferentials by voluntarily setting controls.   Georgia Power said it expects 11,000 customers to actively participatein this third approach over ten years with a potential savings of 33 MW.The three programs together would involve about 81,000 homes after 10years, representing about an 11.2% penetration of the Georgia Powercustomer base.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FLA. COMMISSION APPROVES DSM GOALSAND PLAN FOR LAKELAND ELECTRIC & WATERThe Florida Public Service Commission approved on Dec. 19 conservationgoals and plans for the Lakeland Electric & Water Dept., after themunicipal utility reached agreement with the state's Dept. of CommunityAffairs.   The conservation plan says that by the end of 2005 Lakeland mustguarantee 26.9 MW in winter and 33.5 MW in summer of savings fromresidential customers (Docket Nos. 930556-EG and 950445-EG). That sameyear, Lakeland plans to guarantee 3.2 MW in winter and 11.6 MW in summer ofsavings from commercial/industrial customers.   The PSC, however, rejected the muni's request to use demand and energysavings from one customer class to make up shortfalls in another customerclass. The PSC said a ruling on that issue was premature and that Lakelandshould not ask unless the situation occurred.   Plans for nine other of the state's largest muni's and cooperatives wereapproved by the PSC in late November, while plans for the state's fourlargest investor-owned utilities received commission approval in May (SPR,1 Dec., 11; 2 May, 11). Only two utilities required to submit plans remain:Tallahassee Electric Dept. (Docket No. 930559-EG) and Florida PublicUtilities (Docket No. 930552-EG), which is a small investor-owned utility.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ALABAMAPublic Service CommissionRobert Duxbury, supervisor--electricity(205) 242-586822943; Proceeding on Section 111 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, whichdeals with integrated resource planning; meetings expected sometime towardthe end of the yearCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ARKANSASPublic Service CommissionDavid Rhodes(501) 682-5661  95-396-U; Application by Entergy Power Inc. for waiver of requirement forapproval of individual power sales agreements within Arkansas  95-326-U; The Carroll Electric Cooperative asks the PSC for permission tooffer a 5% reduction in wholesale rate charges to its 16 membercooperatives; approved by PSC  94-387-P; Interruptible power contract offered by Arkansas Power & Lightto Arkansas Steel Associates; approved by PSC  94-346-P; Discount rate for Eastman Chemical Co. proposed by ArkansasPower & Light; approved by PSCCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   DELAWAREPublic Service CommissionMelinda Carl, public information officer(302) 739-4333  92-103; Request by Delmarva Power & Light to approve contracts with twonon-utility generators totaling nearly 200 MWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FLORIDAPublic Service Commission(904) 488-8501  951273-EI; Petition by City of Tampa, Hillsborough County and CitizensCoalition for Responsible Power to block Florida Power's proposed 115-kVHiggins-Griffin line because of concerns over EMFs; PSC staff finds utilityis not required to seek a determination of need certificate  951255-EM; Request by Fort Pierce Utilities Authority for permission tonegotiate individual deals with industrial customers without PSC approval;approved by PSC  951161-EI; Request by Gulf Power for permission to negotiate individualrate deals with industrials without PSC approval  951002-EI; Request by Tampa Electric for permission to negotiateindividual rate deals with industrials without PSC approval  951001-EI; Request by Florida Power & Light for confidentiality of powersales data  950532-EU; Territorial dispute between City of Quincy and the TalquinElectric Cooperative  950379-EI; Investigation of earnings of Tampa Electric for 1995 and 1996;PSC on Jan. 3, 1996 caps TECO 1996 rate of return at 12.5% with futuredetermination of how over-earnings might be distributed  950307-EU; Dispute between Florida P&L and Jacksonville ElectricAuthority  950270-EI; Plan by Florida Power to improve reliability of transmissionsystem in Pinellas County by reactivating th e114-kV Higgins-Griffin line  950110-EI; Dispute between Florida Power and Panda Energy over length ofpower-purchase contract for Lakeland project; legal staff asserts PSC hasjurisdiction; litigants trade lawsuits  950007-EI; Environmental compliance cost recovery for investor-ownedutilities  950001-EI; FP&L general fuel proceeding; utility asks that powertransaction data be kept confidential  950002-EG; Assessment of investor-owned utility expenditures on DSM  94354 CA-01, Division 8; Energy Initiatives wins partial judgment againstFlorida Power in case to decide whether firm capacity payments should bemade using Florida Power model  941232-EG; The PSC is scheduled to vote on on a request by Florida Powerto eliminate or reduce credits for participation in the utility's loadcontrol program  941170-EG, 941171-EG and 941173-EG; PSC staff recommends eightcommercial/industrial programs submitted by Florida Power & Light,Florida Power and Tampa Electric could be used to compete with natural gasutilities with money that could be recovered from ratepayers; the PSCapproved Florida Power program to curtail or interrupt power to industrialcustomers during peak periods  941165-PU; Complaint by Peoples Gas that Tampa Electric is marketingelectric heaters in its territory in an effort to cut into its gas salesbusiness  941155-EQ; Request to modify a standard offer contract between Ark Energyand Tampa Electric  941101-EQ; Florida Power plan for curtailment of purchases from NUGsduring minimimum load emergencies; agreement reached between Fla. Power andAir Products's Orlando Cogen Ltd. project; PSC approves Aug. 16  940797-EQ; Florida Power asks to obtain modifications of NUG contracts;PSC issues order in late April delineating which changes must be submittedfor PSC approval  940771-EQ; Florida Power request for declaratory statement that iteliminate some capacity payments for some non-utility generators  940759-EQ; Request by Gulf Power to reduce capacity payments made tonon-utility generators because of projected 19.2% decline in costs ofbuilding a combustion turbine; staff recommends in favor of Gulf Power  940656-EU; The PSC approves a new territorial agreement between FloridaPower and the Orlando Utilities Commission  940569-EQ; Change in Florida Power & Light standard-offer contractsrequested by U.S. Generating/Flo-Sun to take advantage of purchase ofportion of KES Dade project output; PSC staff recommended approval  940565-EU; Request by Orlando Utilities Commission for enforcement ofterritorial agreement with Florida Power as resolution of dispute over whoshould serve growing section of Orange County, Fla.  940546-EU; Territorial dispute between Florida Power & Light and SouthFlorida Cogeneration Associates over who shall serve Metropolitan DadeCounty office buildings  940423-EQ; Florida Power & LIght real-time pricing proposal forindustrialcustomers; staff recommends approval, PSC complies  940357-EQ; Power purchase contract between Florida Power and 120-MWOrlando CoGen project developed by Air Products and Chemicals; disputeongoing over requirement for back-up fuels, with utility trying to get outof contract; an interim agreement on payments is in place until the case isresolved  940378-EQ; Request by Mission Energy to transfer capacity totaling 17 MWfrom two standard-offer contracts between wood-waste generating units andFlorida Power to Mission's Auburndale and U.S. Generating/Flo-Energy'sOsceoloa projects; PSC approved both transfers  940001-EI; Request by Florida Power & Light for fuel cost recovery  931230-EG; Request by Florida Power & Light to increase by 50% the amountof time the utility can control residential heating and air conditioning  931219-EG/940423-EG; Florida Power & Light plan to launch ``real-time''pricing for its large industrial customers; Utility requests hearings inadvance of staff review  931218-EG; Tampa Electric request to suspend its standard offer contractfor firm power purchase from NUGs; New standard offer submitted Jan. 26(Doc. 94-0094-EQ); Staff recommended TECO request be granted  931186-EQ; Commission attempt to coordinate rules governing cogenerationwith competitive bidding regime; staff recommends standard offers ofunlimited size be offered to cogeneration projects deemed sociallybeneficial; rulemaking procedure underway  931011-EI; Proceeding to consider incentives to encourage supply-sideenergy efficiency by investor-owned utilities  930929-EI; FP&L request to stop offering interruptible standby andsupplemental service to some QFs and NUGs that sell it power; PSC agreed toconsider the request  93-0655-EU; Service territory dispute between Clay Electric Cooperativeand City of Alachua; Legal and technical PSC staffs issue conflictingrecommendations; input from Gainesville Regional Utilities and FloridaPower required  930613-EI; Gulf Power request to recover $8.6-million cost for Clean AirAct compliance; Pending  930553-EG, -554, -555, -556, -557, -558, -560, -561, -562, -563, -564,-828, -922; Demand-side management goals of public utilities GainesvilleRegional Utilities, Jacksonville Electric Dept., Kissimmee UtilityAuthority, Lakeland Electric & Water Dept., Ocala Electric Dept., OrlandoUtilities Commission, Clay Electric Cooperative, Lee County Electric Co-op,Sumter Electric Copop, Talquin Electric Co-op, Withlacoochee River ElectricCo-op, Vero Beach Electric Dept., and Florida Keys Electric Cooperative;PSC approves on Dec. 19, 1995 DSM plans for Lakeland Electric & WaterDept..  93-0490-EQ; Dispute between Dade County and South Florida CogenerationAssociates over what constitutes illegal retail power sales and what is apublic utility; developer partnership forms municipal utility along withMetropolitan Dade County to serve Downtown Government Center in Miami;settlement objected to by FP&L  93-0444-EI; Florida Power revenue decoupling plan for DSM cost recovery;PSC approves but staff is instructed to hold utility to higher standardthan usual for judging DSM results  93-0424-EI; Florida Power shareholder incentive proposal for DSM costrecovery; Technical and legal staffs issue split recommendations  930405; Florida Public Service Commission increases Florida Power &Light's annual contribution to its storm fund from $7.1 million to $10.1million  93-0165-EU; Florida PSC approves plan which will allow state utilities torecover funds spent on economic development  93-0055-EU; Investigation into how much stockholders should share inprofits earned from off-system sales; PSC decided against acting on staffobjections to bulk profit-sharing by stockholders  92-0420-EU/92-0421-EU/92-0731-EU; Service territorial disputes betweenFlorida Power & Light, Jacksonville Electric Authority and Okefenokee RuralElectric Cooperative; FP&L withdrew request for approvals when itdiscovered preexisting and contradictory agreements between Okefenokee andJEA; parties to meet to attempt resolutionCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   GEORGIAPublic Service CommissionHarriet Van Norte, director, Consumer Affairs Division, (404) 656-4501  6501-U; Proposal by the Office of Consumer Counsel and industrials to endGeorgia Power demand-side management programs that are subsidized by rates;approved by commission  5602-U; Savannah Electric & Power integrated resource plan  5601-U; Georgia Power integrated resource plan, calling forshort-term-only RFP; PSC staff recommends that Ga. Power be made to signcontract with Energy Initiatives by Sept. 1 or buy from anotherindependent  5090-U; City of Calhoun complaint of violations of the GeorgiaTerritorial Electric Service Act; Assigned to hearing officer 5/17/94  4911-U; Georgia Power real time pricing tariff RTP-DA-1; commissionapproved tariff, awaiting compliance filing from the utility  4900-U; Power purchase agreement between Energy Iniatives and GeorgiaPower for output of a 200-MW cogeneration facility in Kathleen, Ga.,selling steam to a Frito-Lay factory  4895-U; Georgia Power/Florida Power application for certification ofsupply-side addition; PSC approves deals July 19  4822-U; Generic PSC investigation into avoided costs for capacity andenergy for Georgia Power and Savannah Electric & Power; PSC orders that theutilities must pay QFs avoided capacity costs and raise avoided energy costpayments  4821-U; IRP rules amendment regarding solicitation of purchased power  4697-U; Re economic development incentive policy; Established to developuniform state policy for economic development incentives for all utilitiesunder PSC jurisdiction  4311-U; Georgia Power construction of two 80-MW combustion turbines atRobbins Air Force Base near Macon, Ga.; Staff is monitoring construction,last site visit was 6/94, found construction ahead of schedule, underbudget  4229-U; Investigation into decoupling of electric sales and profits andthe treatment of lost revenues resulting from DSM; Staff report expected6/15/94  4133 & 4136-U; Georgia Power and Savannah Electric & Power request forcertification of McIntosh combustion turbines; Approved 12/15/92; Staff ismonitoring construction, next site visit was 6/94, found construction onschedule, under budget. SEPCO customers being retargetedCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   KENTUCKYPublic Service CommissionMatt Rhody(502) 564-3940  95-427; Plan by American Electric Power's Kentucky Power unit forapproval of its DSM plan; approval gra ted  94-078; Kentucky Public Service Commission denies the request of EastKentucky Power Cooperative and Big Rivers Electric Corp. to construct a32.4- mile, 161-kV transmission line to interconnect their systems; thusfar the two utilities have been using a third party to wheel backup powerto each other  94-341; Big Rivers Electric integrated resource plan  04-336; East Kentucky Electric Co-op rate case, including proposal to cutwholesale rates 10%, retail rates 7%; state attorney general calls for$25-million wholesale rate reduction  94-105; Application by East Kentucky Power Cooperative for approval ofthe use of a bond-based financing in the amount of $20.5 million formodifications to its Spurlock Power station in Mason County, related toInland Container facility  94-032; Big Rivers Electric notice of intent to file plan for Clean AirAct compliance and to impose an environmental surcharge in connection withamendments of contracts between Big Rivers and the City of Henderson, Ky.  93-347; Kentucky Power interest in the review of integrated resource planof Big Rivers Electric  93-163; Big Rivers Electric contract to sell 170 MW to Hoosier Energy;Suspended until impacts of the sale of Big Rivers can be determinedCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LOUISIANAPublic Service CommissionRoy Edwards(504) 342-1405  U-20925; Intervenors filed a request with FERC to reject the SouthernCompnay's plan for a two-zone transmission tariff  U-20805; Application of Louisiana Power & Light for authority to acquirenatural gas storage cavern owned by Pontchartrain Natural Gas System,subject to conditions; last hearing scheduled 6/22  U-20178; Louisiana Power & Light integrated resource plan; commissionallows LP&L to withdraw IRP and develop new DSM programs by end of 194  U-17735; Investigation of decision of Cajun Electric Power Cooperative tobuy 30% interest in the River Bend nuclear generating facility owned byGulf States UtilitiesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MARYLANDPublic Service CommissionFrank Fulton, director of office of consumer assistance(410) 767-8022  Case 8678; Commission initiative on new electric industry regulation;industrial advocate rull retail competition  Case 8520K, Part 2; Maryland Office of Peoples Counsel asks PSC to denyBaltimore Gas & Electric's $400-million refund for replacement powerpurchases  Case 8489; Delmarva Power & Light request to construct 300 MW ofcoal-fired generation  Case 8488; Panda Energy application for CPCN for 230-MW plantCase 8452; PEPCO request to collect its costs under CAA, relying onconservation, fuel changes and co-firing  Case 8413; Request by PEPCO to purchase 315 MW from Destec Energy and 230MW from Panda Energy; Reconsideration sought by PatowmackCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MISSISSIPPIPublic Service CommissionWilliam Wilkerson, executive director of PSC staff(601) 961-5493  94-N-0228; Proceeding initiated by Mississippi Power and light to recovercosts incurred by the utility to restore electric service after Februarystorm  94-UA-0115; Review of promotional practices of electric and gasutilitiesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NORTH CAROLINAUtilities Commission(919) 733-3969  E-100 Sub 77; Industrial custoemr group's request that North CarolinaUtilities Commission initiate investigation into retail wheeling; rejected  E-100, Sub 74; Proceeding on cost of power from non-utility generators;Carolina Power & LIght, Duke Power and North Carolina Power advocatecutting payments to small projects  E-100, Sub 73; Investigation into mechanisms to retain industrial loadfor native utilities; Duke Power favors tariff approach, while CarolinaPower & Light wants to negotiate with individual customers  E-100, Sub 69; Consideration of certain standards for electric utilitiesrelating to integrated resource planning  E-100-Sub 64A, and E-100, Sub 71; Investigation of the effect of DukePower integrated resource planning and DSM programs on competition betweenelectric and gas utilities; hearing scheduled 9/20/94  E-22 Sub 350; Agreement between North Carolina Power and Weyerhaeuser Co.to defer cogeneration; Commission staff criticized a proposal by theutility to provide a self-generation deferral rate on incremental load at aWeyerhaeuser Co. pulp and paper millCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   Oklahoma Corporation CommissionOklahoma Corporation Commission  (405) 521-3593  RM 95000004; Proceeding to set new standards for utility response tounplanned outages  RM 950000003; Proceeding on rules covering cogenerators and small powerproducers  PUD 940000473, 940000474; Discount rate deals between Oklahoma Gas &Electric and Tyson Foods and J.P. Emco; ALJ rules allowingconfidentiality; rural electric co-ops, state representative vow to appeal  PUD 940000466; Initiative by the commission to streamline regulation ofutilities; utilities request right to negotiate deal with large customerswho might otherwise seek other supplies  PUD 940000456; PS Oklahoma proposal to offer customers contract rates;OCC allows, but on more limited scale than utility requested  PUD 940000306; Expedited generic investigation into economic developmentrates  PUD 940000301; Public Service Oklahoma industrial real time pricing pilotprogram; Commenced May 1 with 20 industrials under Order No. 382997Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH CAROLINAPublic Service CommissionCharles Ballentine, executive director(803) 737-5115  95-1000-E, Order No. 96-15; Request by South Carolina Electric & Gas totransfer $257 million in depreciation reserves from the utility'stransmission and distribution assets to its nuclear generation assets;approved by commission  94-469-E; Consideration of third party power purchases by electricutilities; South Carolina Electric & Gas requests additional time in orderto comply with the various components of the workshop  93-748-E; Encouragement of investments in conservation and energyefficiency by electric utilities (Energy Policy Act of 1992 section 111);stipulation reached for commission's considerationCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TEXASPublic Utility CommissionStacy Hernandez(512) 458-0141  14584; Request by power marketers that utilities in the ElectricReliability Council of Texas be requrired to provide wheeling services toall market players on the same terms that they provide service to oneanother; granted Sept. 1  14570; TU Electric notices of intent to build new facilities  14045; Rulemaking proceeding to address transmission and wheeling issuesin the Electric Reliability Council of Texas; commission adopts hybrid ofpostage stamp and distance-sensitive pricing  13943; Application from Power Connect to allow self-generation to bewheeled between Exxon sites; withdrawn  13896; Southwestern Public Service files a settlement agreement with thePUC in which all intervenors agree to support its acquisition of propertiesowned by Texas-New Mexico Power   13932; Application from Power Connect to allow power line to connect twoAmoco sites  13827; Permission given to Southwestern Public Service to build a 203-MWcogeneration plant at a Phillips Petroleum facility near Borger, Texas, anda 103-MW gas combustion turbine. RFP for bids to compare to utility-buildoption forthcoming.  13820; Response by TU Electric to commission order in last general ratecase; utility objects to use of coincident peaks as DSM incentives  13749; Cost recovery of demand-side programs implemented by TU Electric  13587; Demand-side management program of TU Electric; approved by PUC inJanuary with proviso that utility would make amendments by Sept. 1; TexasROSE and the Environmental Defense Fund call for PUC to impose $5,000/dayfines for alleged failure to comply  13575; Procedures governing notice of intent to build new facilities byTU Electric; utility told to issue all-source solicitation  13444; Golden Spread Electric Cooperative notice of intent to build a400-MW gas-fired power plant on line in 1998; approved by PUC  13139; Application for certification of cogeneration agreement betweenBrazos Electric Power Co-op and Tenaska Power  11319-P; Report on Southwestern Electric Power plan to rebuild to 138-kVspecifications its Rock Hill-to-Blocker ``tap'' 69-kV transmission line  13126; Investigation of operation and management of South Texas NuclearProject; City of Austin wins intervenor status; HL&P role settled, CL&Prole still to be reviewed  13118-P; Report on Southwestern Electric Power plan to add a secondconductor to existing North Mineola-to-Perdue 138-kV transmission line; noCPCN necessary  13106-P; Report on Houston Lighting and Power plan to relocate a 138-kVtransmission line for construction of First Colony Mall; no CPCN necessary  13102; Request by Cap Rock Electric for approval of 140-mile 138-kVtransmission line connecting it to new wholesale supplier, SouthwesternPublic Service  13100; Package of strategic rates filed by Texas Utilities Electric toforestall departure of customers in favor of cheaper alternative powersupplies; TU withdraws entire rate package 1/6/95, claiming PUC hasweakened it beyond usefulness  12957; HL&P rate case; utility wants to negotiate special rates withindustrial customers, but commission judge recommends it be allowed to doso only if it offers open access to its transmission system  12852; The PUC ordered a $37-million or 6% rate cut for Gulf StateUtilities Texas customers, revising an order that called for a $57-millionrate reduction  12820; Central Power & Light plan to refund customers $65 million in fuelcosts connected to outages at South Texas Project  12793; PUC seeks comments on whether its rules should be modified toencourage utilities to develop plants using renewable fuels  12700; Assessment of impacts of proposed merger of El Paso Electric withCentral and South West; CSW says merger as it now stands would not bring itsufficienct revenue to be worthwhile  12592; Application by Cap Rock Electric Cooperative for certificate ofconvenience and necessity to build a transmission line within Midland,Glasscock, Reagan, Upton, Howard and Mitchell Counties; At issue is whetherthe proceeding should be expanded to include evidence on the underlyingeconomic basis for an offer by Texas Utilities for a proposed rate ofwholesale service; Hearing examiner allowed 6/14/94 presentation ofevidence relating to TU Electric's proposed rate application (13020) and acomparison of Cap rock's power supply costs based on the proposed rate  12456; Application by East Texas Electric Cooperative for approval of a138-kV line connecting Tex-La Electric Cooperative to Southwestern ElectricPower's system in Louisiana; approved by Texas PUC  12362; Complaint against Texas Utilities Electric involving allegedoverbillings occuring since 1/93 and the availability of 27.6 MW of demandcredits brought by Tex-La Electric Cooperative; similar complaint byRayburn County Electric Cooperative; Parties close to agreement as Tex-Lahas settled with TU and has withdrawn PUC complaint; Rayburn reportssettlement pact is near; Hearing scheduled for October 4  12298; Request by Destec Enegy ro fource Houston Lighting & Power tonegotiate a new contract for purchased power; PUC rejects, favoring utilityclaim that power is not needed  12065; PUC directive that Houston Lighting & Power prove its rates arejust and reasonable; HL&P and City of Houston reach an agreement to cutcity's rates by $367 million; also, utility will give city $145-millionone-time refund, and freeze rates at settlement level through 1997;settlement reached with most parties Feb. 6; PUC finalizes agreements Aug.30  11892; Purchased power issues investigation required by National EnergyPolicy Act of 1992; Pending, procedural change requested by CompetitiveEnergy Options  11735; Texas Utilities rate case to put Comanche Peak No. 2 in rate base,with plant costs proposed to go to demand charge and risk adjustment factoron purchased power included; TU granted a 8.7% increase, with more than$100-million in disallowances  11365; Proposal to institute integrated resource planning amonginvestor-owned utilities; After refusal by PUC to publish proposed rulesfor public comment, action is exptected in next session of Legislature,beginning in January 1995  11259; Farmers Electric Cooperative and City of Garland application toamend certificated service area boundaries and an application for sale,transfer or merger; In prehearingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   VIRGINIAState Corporation CommissionAndrea Leeman, information resources specialist(804) 371-9141  PUE950089; Investigation into industry restructuring  PUE950017; Planned municipalization of city of Falls Church; commissionrules that city must win approval before condeming Virginia Power property  PUE950015; Settlement between Appalachian Power and Bedford MunicipalElectric Dept. over power supply for Georgia-Pacific Corp.  PUE940080; Virginia Power real-time pricing experiment; endorsed bycommission  PUE940059; Virginia Power request for $25 million fuel factor increase tocover outages and refueling at nuclear power plants; SCC ruled Octo. 28that the utility should get only $9.9 million  PU940057; Virginia Power standby generation control system under whichthe utility would control customer generators during peak periods; SCCapproves for up to 15 customers  PUE940051; Virginia Power dispute with DRI over management of utility;consultant advocates continues independence of Virginia Power from DRI  PUE940022; Application by Central Virginia Electric Co-op for certificateto build 138-kV transmission line  PUE930066; Application by Potomac Edison to revise cogeneration tariff  PUE930046; Virginia Power's request to develop 10 non-rate-basecogeneration facilities at industrial sites; denied by SCC  PUE930024; Virginia Power application to establish rates and charges forcogeneration and small power producers  PUE910081; Siemens Power Ventures proposal to build a 185-MW gas-firedmerchant plant in northern Virginia; SCC finds there is no public need forthe project, denies permit  PUE910050; Interim order on improving service area in Appalachian Power2-state areaCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WEST VIRGINIAPublic Service Commission  (304) 3400392  94-0040; Dispute between Dominion Resources Inc. and Virginia Power overcontrol of Va. Power operations  93-1152-E-T; PSC investigation as to whether Wheeling Power should modifyits contract with Ohio Power; Ongoing  93-1016-E-C; Energy America complaint against Wheeling Power for refusingto negotiate a contract for a 40-MW unit in Moundsville; PSC rulesdeveloper should be paid what utility pays its primary supplier, OhioPower  92-0636-E-CN; Application from Appalachian Power to build 765-kVtransmission line  91-987-E-C; Petition by Barbour County L.P. to force Monongahela Powerand Potomac Edison to purchase NUG power; PSC said Mon Power should wheelunneeded power to Potomac Ed and denied utility request for rehearing  89-783-E-C; Petition by MidAtlantic Energy Group and Destec Energy toforce Potomac Edison to purchase electricity from a 230-MWcoal-gasification project; PSC said Mon Power should wheel unneeded powerto Potomac Ed and denied utility request for rehearingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   Federal Energy Regulatory CommissionFederal Energy Regulatory Commission  EC94-7-000, 94-898-000; Proceeding considering proposed merger of Centraland South West and El Paso Electric; judge finds that merger would savecustomers at least $202 million and is in the public interest  EF94-3021-000; Request by Southeastern Power Administration for approvalof preference rates offered to TVA for power from SEPA's Cumberland dams;objections of unfairness raised by Municipal Energy Agency of Mississippi  EL96-31; Request by Santee Cooper of Monck's Corner, S.C., for approvalof an open-access transmission tariff  EL95-33-000; Louisiana regulators file complaint to FERC asking thecommission to amend the Entergy system agreement to reallocate theinterruptible and time-of-use charges from Louisiana Power & Light to otherEntergy affiliates  EL95-31-000; Eight municipal utilities--from Concord, Dallas, Forest Cityand Kings Mountain in North Carolina, and from Due West, Greenwood,Propserity and Seneca in South Carolina--file complaint asking FERC tolower the wholesale rates they pay Duke Power  EL95-17-000; New transmission tariffs for network and point-to-pointservice proposed by Entergy; hearings expected in coming months; FERCrejected tariff which would have charged users the cost of transmissionplus redispatch and new facilities costs  EL94-5-000; Southern Company transmission tariff filing; staff disputesutility claim for a 14% return on equity  EL93-498-000, EL93-33-0000; Application by St. Martinville, La., forapproval of power contract with Central Louisiana Electric; LouisianaElectric and Power Authority has complained that CLECO used "predatorypricing" to win RFP; FERC staff favors approval of pact  ER96-108, ER96-109, ER96-110; Power marketing licenses for Duke EnergyMarketing and Duke/Louis Dreyfus; approved  ER96-85-000; New Florida Power ``cost-based'' wholesale rates  ER95-1042; Request by Entergy for $65.5 million rate increase to Entergyaffiliates for power from the Grand Gulf plant  ER95-1020; Sale by Louisville Gas & Electric to Enron Power Marketing ofbetween 7 MW and 19 MW on April 26 for $16.68/MWh  ER95-1011; Entergy Power, and NorAm Energy Services reached a purchaseand sale agreement which will cover short-term capacity and/or energysales  ER95-976; Open access tariff filed by Southern Company to help winfederal approval for its subsidiary, Southern Energy Marketing, to sellpower at market-based rates; rejected by FERC June 27  ER95-969; Zoned transmission tariff filed by Southern Company to offernetwork and point-to-point service in a) Georgia, and b)Alabama/Florida/Mississippi; rejected by FERC June 27; withdrawm in favorof a new single system filing  ER95-933; Notice of membership in Western Systems Power Pool byAssociated Power Services  ER95-927; Power sales agreement between Southwestern Electric Power andthe City of Minden, La.  ER95-887; Power sales agreement between Old Dominion Electric Cooperativeand Delmarva Power & Light for sale of portion of ODEC committment toPublic Service Electric & Gas  ER95-852; Wholesale power agreement between Tampa Electric and ReedyCreek Improvement District; Florida Power requests FERC investigation  ER95-768; Southern Company power sales agreement with InterCoast PowerMarketing  ER95-767; Southern Company power sales agreement with NorAm EnergyServices  ER95-760; Duke Power files application to establish a comparable-accesstransmission tariff, and to sell up to 2,500 MW of capacity and energy fromits generating system at negotiated market-based rates  ER95-756; Duke Energy Marketing Inc., a subsidiary of the utility's DukeEnergy Corp., files an application for power marketer status  ER95-694; Louisville Gas & Electric power sales agreement with NorAmEnergy  ER95-610; Virginia Power filed service agreement between it and RainbowEnergy Marketing Corp.  ER95-609; Florida Power and Enron file a contract for ``interchangeservice'' under which both parties will exchange capacity or energy witheach other  ER95-581; Former AES Power Marketing executive files application to winmarketer status for Tennessee Power  ER95-277; Louisville Gas & Electric power sales agreement with CNG PowerServices for 15 MW per hour of non-displacement energy from Jan. 1 throughJan. 31  ER95-112; Entergy transmission tariff; attacked as discriminatory againstpower marketers by AES Power and Noram Energy  ER94-1348; Request by AES Power for Section 211 wheeling order that TVAmove 200 MW of power across its system to consummate brokered sale  ER94-1188-008; Request by LGE Power Marketing for approval of changes inits accounting practices involving sales of energy purchased from TennesseeValley Authority  ER94-1022; Filing of Virginia Power's rate schedule with Wholesale PowerServices, which will market excess power the utility buys from HoosierEnergy's Merom generating plant; Pending  ER94-898-000 and EC94-7-000; Central and South West plan to take over ElPaso Electric; CSW challenges FERC authority in ordering system-widetransmission rates, then tells EPE it must renegotiate merger price; Texasregulators, other utilities in the region complain that merger tariff isnot comparable  Doc. No. 93465, 93922; FERC consolidates consideration of FP&L petitionson rates, terms and conditions for transmission and sale of wholesale andpartial power sales  Proj. Nos. 11499-000 and 11500-000; Application by Armstrong EnergyResources for permission to conduct feasibility study to build a 2,500-MWtwo-unit pumped storage power complex in Dunlap, Tenn.; permission granted  RM94-7-000; Call for comments on stranded investment by electricutilities in transmission facilities  TX95-5-000; Southeastern Power Administration asks FERC to order theSouthern Company to give it single-system network transmission service;Southern Company asks FERC to dismiss a demand by Southeastern Power for330 MW of Southern transmission capacity on a single-system networkingbasisCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B36-8IA059-000325-B008-108http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey13.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235414 text/html 64791HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:51:56 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:53 GMTContent-length: 64604Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey13.html Sample Issue Copyright UK GAS REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DTI RAISES POSSIBILITY OF SHIPPERS' LEVY FOR TAKE-OR-PAY COSTS (1616 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW BG RANKED SIXTH IN SURVEY OF OVERALL GAS COMPANY PROFITABILITY (635 words) NEWS SOME GAS PRICES LINKED TO PRICE OF ELECTRICITY (122 words) KINETICA PURCHASES BRISTOL AND WEST GAS (33 words) UK ENERGY PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION (176 words) BRITISH GAS TO DRILL OFF THE LANCASHIRE COAST (138 words) CONFERENCE REPORT OFGAS SEMINAR ON PREPAYMENT METERS (173 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW BG TRANSCO PROPOSES HIGHER RANGE FOR COST OF CAPITAL ESTIMATES (351 words) DECEMBER 1995 FIRM GAS PRICES NEARLY 30% LOWER THAN YEAR BEFORE (419 words) IRISH INTERCONNECTORS FACE FLAK ON SAFETY AND ECONOMIC GROUNDS (756 words) BG FACES CLAIMS FROM SERVICE CONTRACT CUSTOMERS LEFT IN COLD (350 words) REGULATORS GIVEN DISCLOSURE GUIDELINES AS REVIEWS CONTINUE (522 words) CONTRACTING ACTIVITY IN DECEMBER STIRS UP JHA MARKET SHARE FIGURES (377 words) EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPTS ENERGY POLICY WHITE PAPER (429 words) ONSET OF WINTER SEES N.SEA GAS OUTPUT SURGE IN NOVEMBER 1995 (253 words) ROUND TABLE CALLS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ENERGY LIBERALISATION (189 words) EUROGAS SLAMS COMMISSION DIRECTIVE ON INTEGRATED RESOURCE PLANNING (385 words) NEWS NIE LOOKING FOR GENERATING OPPORTUNITIES IN SOUTHERN IRELAND (54 words) POWERGEN CHP CONTRACT TO SUPPLY CONOCO'S HUMBER REFINERY (158 words) STATOIL CONSIDERING SELLING ESTUARY FUELS (158 words) NESTE TO SELL ITS 50% SHARE IN SOVEREIGN (154 words) IRISH BOTTLED GAS COMPANY TRADING PROFITABLY (152 words) TAKEOVER OF SEEBOARD CLEARED BY IAN LANG (108 words) CEDRIC BROWN UNDER FIRE AGAIN (80 words) BRISTOL CITY COUNCIL TENANTS TO BENEFIT FROM NEW CHP SYSTEM (180 words) CAMPAIGN TO WIN SUPPORT FOR DISPOSAL OF OFFSHORE INSTALLATIONS (221 words) WYBREW LEADING CONTENDER FOR APPOINTMENT TO BRITISH GAS (85 words) BRITISH GAS ANNOUNCES APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR (115 words) NEW CHAIRMAN OF NATIONAL CONSUMER COUNCIL (75 words) NEW SENSOR FOR DETECTION OF FLAMMABLE HYDROCARBONS (71 words) BORD GAIS OFFERING GRANT TO SWITCH TO NATURAL GAS (130 words) HOUSEHOLD BILLS COULD RISE BY ONE THIRD (107 words) CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DTI RAISES POSSIBILITY OF SHIPPERS' LEVY FOR TAKE-OR-PAY COSTSThe take or pay liabilities faced by British Gas continue to tax mindsand stir emotions in the industry.  While BG has taken on a chiefnegotiator to "lead and direct the renegotiation of gas purchasecontracts", the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) has dropped apotential timebomb in the shape of a possible levy on shippers to coverthe extra cost of high-priced take-or-pay gas.  In addition, delays inthe drafting of licences for shippers and public gas transporters andthe associated transfer documents and special licence conditions havemeant the Appointed Day has slipped from 1 February to 1 March.  Thishas raised concerns over a potential delay to the domestic competitionpilot scheme, due to start in the south-west on 1 April.At a high-level panel meeting between shippers, BG TransCo and Ofgaslast Saturday (6 January), DTI head of oil and gas John Michelloutlined verbally a new Condition 12 for the shippers' licence,currently being redrafted for release "very soon".  This would allowthe Secretary of State to impose a levy on shippers, via thetransportation charge, to financially benefit suppliers with long-termtake-or-pay obligations.  The size of this levy is not certain,although 1p or 2p a therm has been mooted.  It is uncertain also quitehow this levy would be passed from TransCo to the appropriate supplierand whether the recipient will be just British Gas Supply.While everyone in the industry is waiting to see a written version ofthe proposal before giving a considered response, this "Top Gas" typescheme, similar to that used in Canada, raised initial alarm with bothshippers, who questioned why they should pay for BG's problems, andwith the Gas Consumers Council which feared customers would pick up thetab.  The last minute nature of the addition of condition 12 meansthere will be little time to consider its full implications.  BG saidit remained keen to reach agreement with producers over renegotiatedcontracts, but it considered the levy proposal to be a usefulcontingency plan.British Gas has indicated that the first producers to agree torenegotiate contracts with BG will get best terms.  So far North Seaproducers have shown no inclination to revamp long term take-or-paycontracts to supply BG at prices well above current competitive marketlevels.  The job of BG's new chief negotiator Kenneth Gardener, adirector of Charterhouse Bank, is to persuade producers to come to thetable.  Gardener, who took on his new post on 1 January, has given upexecutive duties at Charterhouse but remains a director.On his appointment last month he acknowledged producers would bereluctant to re-open legally binding contracts but said he believed a"win win" position could emerge from negotiations.  He has agreed togive at least two years to the problem.  BG also underlined theincreased significance of legal issues in its affairs with theappointment of William Friedrich, formerly with international law firmShearman & Sterling, as its general counsel.Levy proposalThe DTI is maintaining that its levy proposal is still underconsideration and would be included in the licence on a contingencybasis only.  No decision has been made as to whether the conditionwould be invoked.  The government may be using it as a threat toproducers to encourage them to sit down with BG to renegotiatecontracts.  However, this could backfire if producers feel they riskbeing hit with a "double whammy" whereby they accept a lower price forgas from BG and are then hit by a levy because other producers havebeen unwilling to renegotiate.  Thus the messages coming from the DTIappear somewhat confusing.The Gas Consumers Council is concerned that a levy will keep prices fordomestic customers higher than a free market would otherwise deliver.Council director Ian Powe said: "Contingency provision for a levy onall shippers would, if implemented, be passed on to consumers in priceshigher than they would otherwise pay.  It must not be seen as anythingmore than an insurance policy against British Gas' failure to sort outits own problems.  Customers can accept no blame for this predicament.We would need to have very different information than we have now inorder to concede that any of British Gas' contractual liabilitiesshould be passed on to its own and other suppliers' customers".  TheCouncil has asked for full disclosure of all facts before any levy isimposed and on 12 December proposed that the House of Commons Trade andIndustry Committee should conduct an enquiry into public interestissues arising from BG's take-or-pay commitments.BG is now working on the transferal of its supply contracts (and therelated take-or-pay obligations) to a new subsidiary.  Under the newGas Act the same company is not allowed to act as a public gastransporter and gas supplier.  This restructuring will take place onthe Appointed Day.  During debate of the Gas Bill, producers expressedconcern that BG would be able to offload its take-or-pay liabilitiesinto a number of subsidiaries without proper guarantees.  Amendments tothe Act mean there will be a single trading subsidiary, but somequestions still remain over the fact that this subsidiary will have noparent guarantee.  How will the DTI ensure the long-term funding andsolvency of the subsidiary to make sure it is not allowed to fall intobankruptcy to avoid take-or-pay commitments?Appointed DayAnother important issue discussed at the panel meeting was the timingof the Appointed Day for licences and introduction of the Network Code. DTI confirmed that while a final draft of the suppliers' licence hadbeen issued, the shippers' licence still needed completion of thecontroversial condition 12.  Michell said the public gas transporters'licence, the transfer scheme and special licence conditions had slippedbadly in the drafting timetable, due to the time required to turnpolicy into legal drafting, as opposed to policy difficulties.Slaughter and May was working on the special conditions, but he was notentirely confident that all the licence documentation would be in placeby 1 February, the proposed Appointed Day.  Accordingly it was agreedthat the Appointed Day should be moved to 1 March, with a panel meetingon 2 February to confirm this date.  Energy balancing will beintroduced from 1 September.The big question is how this delay will affect the proposed 1 Aprildate for the introduction of the domestic competition pilot scheme.While it is the job of the Domestic Competition Steering Group, chairedby Clare Spottiswoode, to discuss this issue, it was agreed at thepanel meeting that TransCo should continue with its current timetablefor systems implementation and testing.  SPA is already under trial,and nomination and confirmation of all sites by shippers will utilisethe SPA system from 1 February.  The Gti system would not be used for astart date of supply beyond 1 February, but would be retained forinvoicing purposes.  While some shippers were still concerned over theaccuracy of their sites and meters portfolios, most felt they wereworkable and were not a reason for delay, as long as a suitablereconciliation process for disputes was established.  Dual billing ofsites was being tackled among the shippers themselves, but some sitesremained without any nomination.The running and testing of SPA is seen by many shippers as one of themost important systems steps for the domestic trial, and suppliers suchas Amerada Hess and Total, who are committed to participating in thefirst trial, remain optimistic that the 1 April date can be maintained. However, TransCo itself has been giving conflicting messages over itsattitude to the timing of the pilot.  Having originally requested sixmonths between the implementation of the Network Code and the domesticcompetition pilot, in order to test systems thoroughly, TransCo hadreluctantly agreed to first a four-month and then a two-month gap.  Theshift from 1 February to 1 March for Network Code implementation meansthe gap will narrow to one month, although systems testing will beunderway before the official start date.Systems failureWhile some in TransCo appear to have indicated a willingness toconsider this option, managing director Harry Moulson came out verystrongly in favour of delaying the pilot in a Times interview thisweek.  He suggested the introduction of domestic competition should bedelayed until June because the computer system is untried and couldfail.  He said it would be "ludicrous" to press ahead with the trial inApril, as there were significant risks, including the worst outcomewhere a breakdown left TransCo unable to maintain pipeline pressure.  Amore likely risk, he suggested, would be an inability for TransCo toconfirm meter readings if too many customers wished to switch supplier. He also admitted that TransCo's service to its customers had been"bloody awful" last year, and although it was improving he felt therewas a way to go.Ofgas has indicated there should be "a searching review to determinewhy the 1 April date cannot be retained for the introduction of thedomestic market".  Chris Rees from Touche Ross has been taken on as a"troubleshooter" reporting to Ofgas, to examine whether the 1 Aprildeadline is feasible or whether the start-up date should be delayed bya month or two.  He is currently visiting interested parties and isexpected to make his recommendation in late February.  It is likely theintroduction will be on a quota or rationed basis, with say a maximumof 1,000 confirmations per day in the early days to minimise systemstrain.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BG RANKED SIXTH IN SURVEY OF OVERALL GAS COMPANY PROFITABILITYBritish Gas ranks sixth in terms of overall composite profitability incomparison with 159 gas companies surveyed worldwide in 1994, accordingto a survey* compiled by the Sheffield Energy & Resources InformationServices (SERIS).  Based on 1992-1994 information, the survey usesoperating and financial data to rank the upstream and downstreamactivities of gas companies in 48 countries, according to 25competition and performance indicators.  The information is also usedto compile a profitability index, headed in 1994 by Statoil as the topperforming company, against which the remaining companies are measured(see table).  In the index the company's absolute profit, profit marginand rate of return on assets are combined and given equal weight.However, SERIS points out that the accuracy of the information isdependent on the operations of each company and on its willingness todisclose such data.In compiling the survey, SERIS considered each company's upstreamoperations and downstream gas pipeline and marketing segments, and usedthe information to rank the following companies:* top five gas production companies in 1994: Russia's Gazprom with20,150.7 billion cubic feet (Bcf), Algeria's Sonatrach (4,569.8 Bcf),Indonesia's Pertamina (2,661.0 Bcf), the UK's Royal Dutch/Shell Group(2,574.0 Bcf) and Saudi Arabia's Saudi Aramco (2,479.1 Bcf);* top five companies for gas pipeline sales in 1994: Dutch companyNederlandse Gasunie with 2,899.4 Bcf, Germany's Ruhrgas (2,006.1 Bcf),Italy's ENI subsidiary SNAM (1,707.9 Bcf), France's Gaz de France(1,329.5 Bcf) and the US's Tenneco (870.5 Bcf).  British Gas, in secondplace in SERIS's 1993 ranking, declined to disclose a figure for gassales because of "the commercial sensitivity of the data in the run upto competition in the gas market".  Similarly, British Gas's marketrivals were equally unwilling to disclose figures to SERIS;* top five companies for total gas pipeline throughput volume in 1994(gas pipeline sales plus gas transported for third parties): Canada'sNova Corp with 4,089.0 Bcf, the US's Tenneco (3,328.0 Bcf), NederlandseGasunie (3,164.2 Bcf), Slovakia's Slovak Gas Industry (SPP) (2,765.0Bcf) and the US's Panhandle Eastern Corporation (2,498.0 Bcf).  BritishGas's figures for throughput volume (2,197 Bcf) put the company intoeighth place in 1994 compared with fifth place in 1993;* top five companies for gas marketing sales in 1994 (sales of bought-in third party gas by marketing subsidiaries): US company Enron Corpwith 2,489.6 Bcf, the US's Natural Gas Clearinghouse (1,286.0 Bcf),Canada's Transcanada Pipelines Ltd (1,171.3 Bcf), the US's PanhandleEastern Corp (1,134.6 Bcf) and the US's Coastal Corp (989.0 Bcf);* top five most profitable gas companies in absolute terms in 1994:Italy's SNAM, with an operating profit of US$1,920m, British Gas with$1,356m, Gaz de France with $872.8m, Transcanada Pipelines with $733.9mand Norway's Statoil with $603.4m.* Natural Gas Companies Worldwide, is available on diskette from:SERIS, 103 Carter Knowle Road, Sheffield S7 2DY, tel/fax: 0114 2580448.1994 Composite Profitability Index: Top 20                                                         Composite                                            Country      Index (%)Statoil                                     Norway       100*Slovak Gas Industry (SPP)                   Slovakia      96.4ENI                                         Italy         88.5Transportadora de Gas del Sur               Argentina     81.9Pipeline Authority                          Australia     71.7British Gas plc                             UK            59.5Transportadora de Gas del Norte             Argentina     58.2Neste Oy                                    Finland       56.3Nova Corp                                   Canada        52.8Transcanada Pipelines Ltd                   Canada        51.6Gas & Fuel Corp of Victoria                 Australia     50.6Gas Natural SDG                             Spain         42.9Bord Gais Eireann                           Ireland       42.6Williams Companies                          US            42.6Dansk Olie og Naturgas AS                   Denmark       40.6Gaz de France                               France        40.5Tenneco Inc                                 US            40.4El Paso Natural Gas Company                 US            40.2Noverco Inc (Gaz Metropolitain)             Canada        39.3Pipelines Authority of S.Australia          Australia     38.6* The top performing company is designated as 100 with theprofitability of all other companies expressed as a percentage ofthe performance of the top company.Source: SERISBack to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SOME GAS PRICES LINKED TO PRICE OF ELECTRICITYIt appears some companies supplying gas to power plants have beenoffering contracts where the gas price is linked to the price ofelectricity in the pool, thus protecting generators from a pricesqueeze following changes in the electricity price.This is seen as a marketing tool to secure sales in a market underpressure from falling gas prices and surplus supplies.  It carriesrisks of large losses for the gas supplier and such deals may beoffered at a premium.Scottish Hydro is one generator that is believed to have agreed a gascontract with around 40% linked to the electricity pool price.Gas prices are more usually linked to an indicator such as the retailprice index.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996KINETICA PURCHASES BRISTOL AND WEST GASKinetica is believed to have purchased Bristol and West Gas.Based in Bristol, this small marketing company has a few hundred siteswhich offer Kinetica a useful addition to its existing portfolio.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996UK ENERGY PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTIONProvisional statistics showing energy production and consumption in thethree months September to November 1995, published by the Department ofTrade and Industry, show that production of indigenous primary fuels,at 67.9 million tonnes of oil equivalent (mtoe) was 5.4% higher than inthe corresponding period a year ago.Production of coal, natural gas, primary electricity and petroleum roseby 12.0%, 7.8%, 4.3% and 3.2% respectively.  Deep-mined coal was 21.0%higher than in the same period a year ago as the newly privatisedcompanies increased production.Total inland consumption of primary fuels, which includes deliveriesinto consumption, during the three months September to November 1995,at 52.9 mtoe was 0.6% less than in the same period a year ago.Consumption of natural gas increased by 9.0% largely due to lowconsumption in November 1994 because of exceptionally mild weather, anda significant increase in use for electricity generation in Septemberto November 1995, compared with the same period a year earlier.Consumption of petroleum and coal fell by 3.7% and 9.7% respectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BRITISH GAS TO DRILL OFF THE LANCASHIRE COASTBritish Gas Exploration and Production (E&P) is to drill an explorationwell some 11 kilometres southwest of Formby Point on the LancashireCoast.  This will be the fifth well it has drilled in exploration block110/14.A jack-up drilling rig, the Global Adriatic XI, will be towed tolocation and will drill to a depth of approximately 1,350 metresbeneath the seabed.  Drilling will last about two weeks.The target reservoir is the same as the Morecambe fields, alreadydeveloped by British Gas.  An extensive survey of the area wasundertaken before the decision was made to drill, said BGE&P.British Gas is the main acreage holder in the Irish Sea, currentlyoperating 19 blocks in the East Irish Sea, North Channel and CaernarvonBay, and participating in four others in the East Irish Sea.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996OFGAS SEMINAR ON PREPAYMENT METERSOfgas held another seminar last month at the Church House ConferenceCentre, this time to discuss and seek views on the thorny issue ofaccess by future domestic gas suppliers to prepayment meters.Suppliers need access to prepayment technology to be able to meet theirlicence obligations. The current Quantum System is viewed as the onlyrealistic technology for the competitive market, however it is a systemfirmly stamped with the BG logo.The aim of the seminar was to discuss and get agreement on what hasbeen called a short term solution to allow prepayment  supply from thestart of a competitive gas market, but which is not necessarily thelong term solution.The main thrust appears to suggest suppliers will need to agree amongthemselves a series of prices for gas supplied through a prepaymentmeter.Data constraints in the Quantum System, which was originally designedfor an integrated supplier, mean that it would be difficult and costlyfor each supplier to have its own individual price.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BG TRANSCO PROPOSES HIGHER RANGE FOR COST OF CAPITAL ESTIMATESBG TransCo has published a paper on its cost of capital, the first in aseries that will consider specific elements of the current pricecontrol formula review.  The paper has been made public to stimulatedebate and add transparency to the process, said TransCo.  It concludesthat the range for TransCo's cost of capital, or allowed rate ofreturn, is now 7.4%-8.9%, with the actual cost towards the upper end ofthis range.  This compares with the Monopolies and Mergers Commission1993 enquiry which estimated the range for TransCo's cost of capitalwas 6.5%-7.5% pre-tax.In a letter to Ofgas director general Clare Spottiswoode, TransComanaging director Harry Moulson said the change in estimate is partlydue to factors exogenous to TransCo including the MMC's revised figuresfor the equity risk premium and changes to the advance corporation tax. However, he suggests a more specific reason is a change in theriskiness of TransCo relative to the stock market as a whole.  He saidthe beta coefficient had become more volatile and had risen to a valuein the range 0.83-0.93, compared with the MMC beta estimate of 0.86.Moulson suggests this increase reflects changing market and regulatoryconditions and is likely to continue over the next few years.Separation of transportation and trading and the introduction ofcompetition have increased the market-related risk of transportation.The report suggests "the systematic risk that TransCo faces iscomparatively high in relation to other utilities.  On a qualitativeassessment of the market risk facing utility companies, TransCo rankshigher than the water and electricity companies, but lower thantelecommunications".  TransCo argues that the company should thereforehave a higher cost of capital, towards the upper end of the range of7.4%-8.9%.  It suggests "failure to provide this will be to thedetriment of the financial viability of the business and will undermineincentives to invest".TransCo is organising a seminar early this year, to which it willinvite Ofgas, shippers and academics to discuss its analysis.  Itintends to publish a second paper on the asset base for consideration.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DECEMBER 1995 FIRM GAS PRICES NEARLY 30% LOWER THAN YEAR BEFOREA sample of prices from clients of energy specialists John HallAssociates showed that for customers using more than 25,000 therms peryear, the volume weighted average firm gas price in December 1995 of18.72 pence per therm was down 3.01 ppt on the previous month (21.73ppt) and 3.25 ppt below October's average price.  This December pricewas down 7.81 ppt (29.4%) compared with the same month the year before(December 1994, 26.53 ppt).  However, JHA points out that prices forcurrently renewable firm gas contracts are significantly lower ataround 11.5 to 12.0 ppt for customers with good volume and load factor,a little below the levels in November.The December 1995 volume weighted price of firm gas in the marketsbelow 25,000 therms was 23.97 ppt, according to Hall sample figures.This is 7.95 ppt (24.9%) below the price in the same month the yearbefore (December 1994, 31.92 ppt), and 1.45 ppt lower than the previousmonth's figure (November 1995, 25.42 ppt).  New contracts are beingquoted as low as 15 ppt, or even lower if attached to above 25,000therm volumes, according to JHA.At 15.11 pence per therm (ppt), the volume weighted average price ofinterruptible gas in December 1995 was down 0.36 ppt on the price themonth before (15.47 ppt) and 0.43 ppt less than the average price inOctober (15.54 ppt).  This average December 1995 price is 4.40 pptbelow the average price in the same month in 1994 (19.51 ppt) - areduction of 22.6%.   As with firm gas prices, the best interruptibleprices for new contract business are considerably lower at between 10and 11 ppt, with prices having stabilised over the last few months of1995.Having remained steady at around 9.05 to 9.10 ppt during late Octoberand early November, spot gas prices rose sharply in the last half ofNovember to break through the 10.00 ppt barrier, based on Bactonprices.  Prices have since stabilised around 9.95 to 10.15 ppt, withsome increases seen during the period of cold weather.The discount for supplies from St Fergus compared with Bacton wasaround 0.20 to 0.25 ppt until around mid November, when it increased toover 0.30 ppt.  During December, the discount tended to be around 0.2ppt.  Prices for the first quarter of 1996, based on Bacton, werearound 10.2 ppt in late December, with the differential between StFergus and Bacton ranging between 0.45 and 0.65 ppt during the month.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996IRISH INTERCONNECTORS FACE FLAK ON SAFETY AND ECONOMIC GROUNDSFollowing a demand from George Foulkes MP for a public enquiry intosafety aspects of the construction by British Gas of the Scotland-Northern Ireland gas pipeline, the Scottish Office has released resultsof its preliminary underwater survey.  Concern had been expressed thatrecent pipelaying work had disturbed Second World War explosives dumpedin and around Beaufort's Dyke in the Irish Sea.Phosphorus flares have been washed up along the south-west Scottishcoast, and the British Geological Survey reported underwater explosionsin this area of the Irish Sea.  The Scottish Office report shows thatmunitions were strewn in and around Beaufort's Dyke, sometimes inrelatively shallow water, but concluded there was no risk to the publicor marine life.Offshore pipelaying work by Premier Transco, a wholly-owned subsidiaryof British Gas, was halted briefly in late October, but the prohibitionorder was lifted by the Health and Safety Executive after five days (UKGas Report, issue 47, 3 November 1995, page 4), allowing the company tofinish laying, trenching and pressure testing of the complete offshoresection of the pipe.A Premier Transco spokesman told UK Gas Report 42 kms of 24 inch pipehad been laid and some work had been completed on the onshore sectionin Scotland.  This work had been suspended during the winter forenvironmental reasons, to reduce land damage, and would resume in thespring, together with work on the 3km onshore link to the Ballylumfordpower plant in Northern Ireland.He said the project was on schedule for completion in October thisyear.  Planning permission had also been given for a pipeline toCarrickfergus to allow the development of a downstream gas market inNorthern Ireland (UK Gas Report, issue 47, 3 November 1995, page 12).He anticipated the first customers could be supplied with natural gasby the end of the year.  It is believed that competition in supply forindustrial and commercial customers will be introduced three yearsafter the start of operations, with full competition after eight years.Premier Transco has always claimed its offshore pipelaying work posedno threat to safety or health and had been carried out in accordancewith government safety procedures.  The Scottish Office suggested moreresearch was needed to see if there was a conclusive link between workon the pipeline and the emergence of up to 4,000 incendiary bombs onlocal beaches.  Commissioning and operation of the pipeline will bediscussed by Premier Transco, the Scottish Office and the Health andSafety Executive, and Transco says it will continue to act inaccordance with procedures agreed with the DTI, HSE and Ministry ofDefence.  Foulkes and environmental groups have condemned the survey asbeing held too late and in the wrong place.Meanwhile, Ireland's Department of Energy (DoE) has been criticised forits role in the completed Scotland-Southern Ireland gas interconnectorpipeline, with claims by the country's Comptroller and Auditor Generalthat the department got its figures wrong in its estimates for the$373.5m line.  The comptroller, in a report to the government on thepipeline, says the DoE made serious blunders in its calculations at theplanning stage of the interconnector.  Administration and design cost$41.2m, some 45% more than budgeted for, while entire costs overran by$16.5m.  This the comptroller says, was reasonable.  "The $16.5mrepresents a reasonable overrun because the scale and complexity of theproject made cost estimation particularly difficult and also becauseextra work above that envisaged had to be undertaken."However, the DoE is blamed for faulty estimates on its rate of returnto the Irish economy, initially estimated at between 23% and 39% buteventually found to be only around 15% by the EU which assessed theproject for grant aid.  The comptroller found the rate of return to theeconomy to be even lower at only 11%.  The department based its rate ofreturn calculations on costs of $300m at 1990 prices but soughtgovernment approval for the project based on costs of $360m.  Inaddition, no provision was made in estimates of project returns for theforeseeable costs of developing and upgrading existing natural gasinfrastructure, estimated at $240m.Controversy continues in Ireland over this interconnector, with criticsclaiming it is unnecessary and that had Southern Ireland been patientit could have taken an overland spur from the British Gasinterconnector at a modest cost of around $45m or less.  However,others argue that the separate pipeline provides valuable security inalternative supply options.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BG FACES CLAIMS FROM SERVICE CONTRACT CUSTOMERS LEFT IN COLDBritish Gas has confirmed that it will compensate domestic customerscovered under its Three Star Service contracts, after repair serviceswere severely disrupted by freezing weather conditions over theChristmas period.  The company faced widespread criticism after anestimated 150,000 of the 3m customers covered by the #104 contract -the most expensive and popular of four service agreements offered byBritish Gas - were left without heating for up to four days.  Under theterms of the agreement, British Gas pledges to send an engineer torepair a faulty system within 24 hours if the fault is reported before7.30am and depending on demand.According to a spokesman, British Gas plans to "consider each case onits individual merit" but will award #10 for each day after the 24 hourcall-out period that a contract customer awaited an engineer.  Thecompany added that it will consider paying costs incurred by customerscovered by the service who were forced to use another company to carryout repairs.The Gas Consumers Council criticised British Gas for the delays whichit said were due to the company's redundancy and restructuringprogramme.  The Council added that British Gas had failed to makecontingency plans to cope with the cold period after the Council hadwarned the company in early December of potential disruption toservices due to staff shortages.  Ian Powe, director of the Council,said the problem was "fundamental" rather than seasonal, withcomplaints about British Gas service contracts trebling in the yearending November 1995.  He suggested BG should amend the terms of itsthree-star contracts or take on more engineers to provide a betterservice to justify the high cost.Responding to the criticism, British Gas said the number of engineersoperating in 1995 (7,500) was the same as in 1993, and that allbusinesses had been affected by the extreme weather conditions.  A BGspokesman added that during the disruptions, priority had been given to"customers most in need, particularly the elderly and families withyoung children and households suffering from a complete central heatingbreakdown".Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996REGULATORS GIVEN DISCLOSURE GUIDELINES AS REVIEWS CONTINUEUtility regulation is under the spotlight once again as the LondonStock Exchange issues guidelines for regulators releasing sensitiveinformation and the Labour Party sets up its policy review of energyregulation.  In addition, it appears the Committee on Standards inPublic Life, chaired by Lord Nolan, may include utility regulation inits wide-ranging remit.The London Stock Exchange guidelines conclude a review of the controlof information which could affect the share prices of companies underthe supervision of privatised utility regulators.  Last summer, a rowerupted when information on price controls provided by electricitydirector general Professor Stephen Littlechild to regional electricitycompanies was leaked, causing a crash in electricity share prices.  Thenew guidelines have been drawn up with the agreement of regulators inthe fields of gas, electricity, water, telecommunications, rail,aviation, environment, television, gaming, and the Lottery.  The Officeof Fair Trading, although not an industry regulator in the same sense,has agreed to the same guidelines.The guidelines include:* a minimum period - not normally more than 24 hours - between givingsensitive information to a company and its advisers and releasing itpublicly;* limitation of access to information on a need-to-know basis;* advice to be given to other parties on the confidential nature ofinformation;* lists to be kept of people to whom information has been shown inadvance;* notification to the Stock Exchange and companies simultaneously;* consultation with the exchange in the case of a leak, and ifappropriate, immediate release of information.However, the voluntary guidelines have a get-out clause in that theexchange recognises that regulators may not always be able to stick "tothe strict letter of these guidelines".  Critics have also suggestedthat the guidelines would not have stopped the electricity pricecontrol leak last year, as Offer officials claim they were already pre-releasing sensitive information no more than 24 hours beforepublication.  Some suggest that only simultaneous release ofinformation to companies and to the exchange could really guard againstthat kind of price manipulation.Richard Kilsby, director of market services at the exchange, said thenew guidelines would "help to prevent disorderly markets and potentialinsider dealing in shares of regulated companies before the officialrelease of sensitive information by the regulators".Meanwhile, the Labour Party has begun work on its review of energyregulation, headed by shadow energy minister John Battle.  He believesthe current structure of regulation has failed the customer in terms ofservice and prices and is lacking in transparency and consistency.Labour is thought to favour a single energy regulator served by a panelof advisers.  A group of industry specialists is being recruited by theParty to draft a new regulatory framework.  The subject may also comeunder further scrutiny by the current government if Lord Nolan decidesto include utility regulation in this year's programme for thestandards in public life committee.  The recent row over the behaviourof the Lottery watchdog chief has raised again questions ofaccountability and standards for regulators.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CONTRACTING ACTIVITY IN DECEMBER STIRS UP JHA MARKET SHARE FIGURESFigures provided during December to John Hall Associates (JHA) by firmgas clients using more than 25,000 therms/yr show some significantchanges in market share, reflecting an increase in activity in Decemberwhen many of the contracts on the database were due for renewal.Mobil remains the market leader in this sector, although it lost 1% tohold a 22% share.  Kinetica gained 1% to 16%, taking over second placein the sample from Alliance which dropped 6% to 13%.  Eastern Gas(eGas) saw its recent aggressive marketing pay dividends with a 6% risein share to 11%.  AGAS and Quadrant each gained 1% to 8% and 5%respectively, while Amerada Hess lost 2% to reach 7% of this market inDecember.  The "others" category also fell back 1% on the database.Similarly, within the sub-25,000 therm sector, there was some movementin market share figures during December.  Alliance remains the majorplayer, although its share fell 4% to 30% of the non-BG market in theJHA sample.  Quadrant (including Gas Direct) maintained its overall 22%on the database, while eGas gained 1% to 10%.  The "others" categoryrose 3% to 10%.A breakdown of figures provided to JHA by interruptible customersduring December shows a sharp increase in eGas' market share, gaining4% to reach 17% of the total in the sample database.  Using the JHAdatabase that now excludes single sites of over 100m therms per yearconsumption, Business Gas' (BG Supply's) share of the interruptiblemarket stayed at 25% in December, while Amerada Hess increased by 1%.Alliance Gas remains a dominant force in this sector, although it lost4% to register a 24% share in the December JHA sample.  Alliance showedfalls in all market sectors on the database, reflecting JHA'sperception that the company had been much less prominent during thelatest contracting round.  Alliance told UK Gas Report it had beenconsidering each renewal carefully in the light of tightening margins,but it had not changed its policy and was not withdrawing from anymarkets.  Other significant players in the interruptible gas marketinclude United Gas (7%), Accord (6%) and Quadrant (5%).  AGAS, Mobiland Amerada Hess each have a 4% share on the JHA interruptibledatabase.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPTS ENERGY POLICY WHITE PAPERAt a meeting on 19 December, the European Commission adopted energycommissioner Christos Papoustis' proposal for a white paper, entitled"An energy policy for the European Union", which lays down guidelinesfor EU energy policy into the next decade.  However, Papoustis raisedthe question of whether it will be possible to achieve the whitepaper's objectives without the addition of an Energy Chapter to theEuropean Treaty - currently the subject of ongoing discussions.The white paper is the outcome of detailed discussions andconsultations held on the EC's green paper, which was published inJanuary 1995.  It sets out three strategic objectives for EU energypolicy: overall competitiveness; security of energy supply; andenvironmental protection.  To achieve its objectives, the white paperhas established a number of policy guidelines, the first of which isintegration of energy markets.  Liberalisation of the internal marketfor electricity and for natural gas is considered to be the key factorin market integration.The second policy guideline deals with concerns over the increasingenergy dependency of the EU.  However, the Commission feels thatdespite the political risks in some important supplier countries andgrowing world energy consumption, security of supply does not atpresent warrant crisis measures.  Instead, the Commission will aim toencourage fuel diversification, energy efficiency and renewable energysources as a means of helping to preserve security of supply.The Commission sees no inherent conflict between improvingcompetitiveness and protecting the environment and recognises that theinternalisation of environmental costs and benefits offers a way tointegrate environmental concerns by working with the market rather thanagainst it.  The need to promote sustainable development means theCommission will seek to encourage energy efficiency and the use ofrenewables via a range of policy instruments.  The Commission alsoagreed that the role of local authorities should be given morerecognition in national and Community energy policies, as many aspectsof energy policy affect local communities.Speaking at the meeting where the white paper was adopted, CommissionerPapoustis said: "A sound and sustainable energy policy is critical forour future economic development.  This white paper will be our blue-print for action into the 21st century".  Papoustis outlined theimportance of the paper's objectives to achieve environmentalprotection, secure energy supplies, job creation, industrialcompetitiveness and balanced regional development.  However, he said:"If we are to achieve all these objectives, the Commission must raisethe question of whether a modification of the Treaty is necessary, asCommunity action is now limited by the absence of clear provisions".Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ONSET OF WINTER SEES N.SEA GAS OUTPUT SURGE IN NOVEMBER 1995British gas production was up 51% in November over the month before,and 25% higher than in November 1994, according to the latest RoyalBank of Scotland Oil and Gas Index.  Production reached 8,551 millioncubic feet per day (MMcfd), taking the bank's gas index to 251.6.  Gassales were helped not only by the colder weather but also increasingdemand for electricity generation, said the bank.  Gas revenues wereestimated to have risen by #5.17 million a day to #15.86 million a dayduring November last year, about 28% higher than in the same month in1994.  Gas production was at its highest level since March last year.British Gas' Morecambe field saw the largest increase in output, up 754MMcfd to 1,325 MMcfd in November.  BP's Bruce field was up by 195 MMcfdto 667 MMcfd.  Hamilton's Ravenspurn field increased by 194 MMcfd to291 MMcfd, Marathon's East Brae was up 150 MMcfd to 438 MMcfd, Shell'sSole Pit field output rose by 136 MMcfd to 339 MMcfd and Shell andAmoco's Indefatigable field produced 311 MMcfd, up 70 MMcfd on October. BP's Cleeton field came back into strong production, rising from just1 MMcfd to 197 MMcfd.There were few falls in production, but Mobil's Beryl and Conoco'sMurdoch fields fell by 43 MMcfd to 372 MMcfd and by 41 MMcfd to 38MMcfd respectively.  At the terminals higher production saw Bacton andBarrow increase throughput by 752 MMcfd and 754 MMcfd respectively.Easington increased by 483 MMcfd.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ROUND TABLE CALLS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ENERGY LIBERALISATIONThe UK Round Table on Sustainable Development will shortly publish areport giving broad support for energy market liberalisation, butcalling on the government to set a framework which ensures that energymarkets operate in a way that is consistent with sustainabledevelopment.The round table is a government appointed committee, set up to provideadvice to the government on sustainable development in the wake of theRio environmental conference.  It is chaired by secretary of state forthe environment, John Gummer, and includes representatives frombusiness, environmental organisations and academics.At its meeting on 11 December, the round table suggested thedevelopment of competitive markets should increase efficiency ofproduction and supply and generally provide benefits of reduced pricesand better services for customers.  However, it felt that the marketwould not of itself meet all the environmental and social objectives ofa sustainable energy policy.For this reason the round table concluded that the government shouldset objectives and be prepared to use economic instruments, incentivesand regulation where necessary, to ensure that liberalisation isachieved in the context of a sustainable energy policy.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EUROGAS SLAMS COMMISSION DIRECTIVE ON INTEGRATED RESOURCE PLANNINGThe proposed European Commission directive on integrated resourceplanning (IRP), aiming to introduce rational planning techniques in theelectricity and gas distribution sectors, is "unnecessary, potentiallyharmful and discriminatory, as far as gas is concerned" according tothe European Union of the Natural Gas Industry, Eurogas.The group calls for the directive to be withdrawn and for EU policy tofocus on developing economic conditions, to encourage energy efficiencythrough a competitive, commercial market structure.Eurogas' main objection to the IRP directive proposal, which coversrational planning activities in both the gas and electricity sectors,is that it fails to take account of recent efforts by the gas industryto increase efficient, economic and environmentally acceptable energysupply and consumption.These include end-user instruction on efficient energy use, thepromotion of energy audits, R&D into and increased use of energyefficient appliances and plant, and cooperation with the constructionindustry to encourage energy efficient housing, according to Eurogas.Eurogas also believes an IRP directive is "potentially harmful" sinceit threatens to intervene in market conditions where the need foradditional regulation is "not explained or documented".  In particular,Eurogas says, commercial competition encourages the development ofefficient energy services, especially where companies must competeagainst other energies to offer "best economic conditions to theircustomers' needs, which includes energy efficiency and low cost, andwhich applies to gas as much as to the alternative fuels".Furthermore, the proposal is unfairly biased towards gas and excludesother energies which compete in the same market and on balance"contribute for each unit of energy produced more to greenhouse gasemissions", said Eurogas.  Bearing in mind that the objective of theIRP directive proposal is to reduce emissions, Eurogas feels that theenergy efficient merits of gas over other energies such as oil shouldbe given greater consideration.Finally, the group points out that the directive "ignores andmisrepresents the actual situation in the European energy market" byreferring to out-of-date studies relating to electricity.Instead, Eurogas calls on the Commission to compile a comprehensivestudy of Europe's energy market needs and of possible initiatives to"support existing policies and practices promoting energy efficiency inthe market place", with a view to publishing the findings as aCommission Communication or Recommendation.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NIE LOOKING FOR GENERATING OPPORTUNITIES IN SOUTHERN IRELANDNorthern Ireland Electricity is believed to be looking for newelectricity generating opportunities in Southern Ireland, using naturalgas.The company made a profit of #47.5m. last year and so far has beenimmune from the takeover activity affecting UK utilities.It is exclusively a distribution/sales company, with no currentgeneration capacity.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996POWERGEN CHP CONTRACT TO SUPPLY CONOCO'S HUMBER REFINERYPowerGen CHP Ltd has been awarded a contract to supply the electricityand steam requirements of Conoco Ltd's Humber Refinery.The contract, which reflects a long-term commercial relationshipbetween the companies, will involve the construction of a new gas-firedcombined heat and power plant rated at 24 megawatts electrical and over90 megawatts thermal.The CHP plant - with capital costs of almost #23 million - will featurefour independent gas turbines with back-up systems to ensure continuousrunning even when the primary gas supply is unavailable.To coincide with the plant construction, a connection between therefinery and the existing Theddlethorpe to Killingholme gas pipelinewill be installed by Kinetica, the PowerGen/Conoco joint venture.PowerGen CHP managing director Bob Kennett said: "We have broken newground in meeting the requirements of Conoco for efficient but flexibleplant.  Both parties can be confident that the energy supply willsupport the refinery's demands in future."Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996STATOIL CONSIDERING SELLING ESTUARY FUELSStatoil is thought to be considering selling its Irish oil and gas oilimporter, Estuary Fuels Ltd, which it acquired recently when it tookover Aran Energy, the Dublin explorer.Estuary is 80% owned by Statoil, with the remainder held by Irishfarmer co-ops who are thought to be keen to liquidate their holdingsand diversify into CHP.Estuary leases 44 petrol filling stations in the south and south westof Ireland and owns a further two.Two potential buyers are thought to have considered Estuary prior tothe successful Statoil bid for Aran, and Bord na Mona, the state peatproducer, is considered a likely buyer.Bord na Mona is keen to diversify into other energy markets, includinggas.  The peat company was recently freed of most of its debt mountainby the Irish government, and is managed by Dr. Eddie O'Connor, formerlyhead of energy supply purchasing at state electricity company, ESB.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NESTE TO SELL ITS 50% SHARE IN SOVEREIGNFollowing the completion of the sale of Neste's UK oil assets to SandsPetroleum AB, Neste Oy, the Finnish oil, energy and chemicals company,has agreed to sell its 50% share in Sovereign Exploration Ltd toNorthgas Ltd, a subsidiary of Northern Electric plc.In January 1994 Neste and Northern Electric formed an upstream gascompany based on Neste's Southern Gas Basin interests, including theVictor gas field (UK Gas Report, issue 4, 28 January 1994, page 1).In addition to Victor, Sovereign Exploration has holdings in theSchooner field which starts production at the end of 1996 and in theWindermere development.Neste has stated its intention to focus its upstream activities onNorway, the Middle East and Russia.  Coinciding with the sale of its UKactivities, Neste is relocating its international business unit (whichis responsible for activities in the Middle East) from London to newoffices in Dubai.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996IRISH BOTTLED GAS COMPANY TRADING PROFITABLYBlugas plc, the Irish bottled gas company that fell into surprise halfyear losses of Ir.#400,000 to the end of September last, now says it istrading profitably, having shed top management and drafted inaccountants to manage the company short term.However, part or the entire equity of this company may be sold.  Around70% of the equity is Swiss controlled, through Jones group plc ofDublin, with the remainder held by Irish interests.Some of this equity may be taken up by Irish state peat board, Bord naMona, already selling peat and coal to households, and keen to expandinto other energy products.Blugas has around 15% of the local bottled gas market, a fiercelycompetitive market dominated by Calor and Flogas.Calor and Flogas combined last year with Temp Technology of Dublin foran assault on the local LPG-CHP market, but Blugas was excluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996TAKEOVER OF SEEBOARD CLEARED BY IAN LANGThe takeover of Seeboard, the southeast electricity company, by Centraland South West Corporation, the US utility, has been cleared by IanLang, president of the board of trade.Lang last year surprised the City with the referral of bids fromgenerators National Power and PowerGen for regional electricitycompanies to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.He passed the #1.6 billion agreed bid for Seeboard after theelectricity regulator and the director general of Fair Trading saidthey had no objections.Seeboard recently announced a joint venture with Amoco to supply gas todomestic consumers (UK Gas Report, Issue 47, 3 November 1995, page 8).Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CEDRIC BROWN UNDER FIRE AGAINBritish Gas chief executive Cedric Brown is under fire again, this timefor the size of his pension package.It is believed he could receive a pension worth between #3.4m and#5.5m, following his substantial salary increase last year.Following a survey by actuaries Lane Clark and Peacock on pensions fortop executives in the utilities sector, the Labour Party called on thegovernment to implement the Greenbury Committee recommendations on fulldisclosure of pension costs and  entitlements.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BRISTOL CITY COUNCIL TENANTS TO BENEFIT FROM NEW CHP SYSTEMBristol City Council and its tenants are to benefit from lower energybills and better heating following the installation of a new, highefficiency combined heat and power (CHP) system at the City's BartonHill estate.The project, according to the CHP Association, was supported by a grantof #75,000 from the Association's Residential CHP Programme.The new CHP system generates heating for the 715 homes on the estate,and power to offset the City Council's electricity costs.CHPA said that tenants across the city will benefit from the energycost savings which CHP's inherently high efficiency delivers to thecouncil - a proportion of the savings will be invested in furtherinitiatives by the City's Energy Efficiency Unit. Meanwhile electricitybills for the City's Council House will be reduced by an estimated#43,000 a year.The new system, opened on 7 December by CHPA vice president Peter Rost,is the latest in a series to be supported under the #2 millionResidential CHP Programme, created and managed by the CHPA for theEnergy Saving Trust.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CAMPAIGN TO WIN SUPPORT FOR DISPOSAL OF OFFSHORE INSTALLATIONSThe oil and gas industry has launched a campaign to win over publicsupport for a wide range of disposable strategies for its redundantoffshore  installations.The industry has refused to rule out deep sea dumping as an option forthe future, despite the Greenpeace Campaign which forced Shell toabandon its plans to dump the Brent Spar facility. However, playershave acknowledged the need to be more transparent and open whenconsidering options."Events of the past few months have persuaded the industry that we needto do more to understand better public concerns and to encouragepositive participation on the issue," said Dr Harold Hughes, directorgeneral of the UK Offshore Operations Association (UKOOA).With over 300 oil and gas installations due for decommissioning in theNorth Sea and North Atlantic, Hughes estimated about 50 installationscould be decommissioned in the next decade at a cost of #1.5 billion.As much as half of that cost would be met by the taxpayer.UKOOA has suggested at least 75% of the installations will be disposedof on land.The European Commission will be reviewing the "economic andenvironmental aspects" of the dumping of platforms in its review thisyear.However, no decision has been made in Brussels on whether to ban deepsea dumping.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WYBREW LEADING CONTENDER FOR APPOINTMENT TO BRITISH GASWe understand John Wybrew is the leading contender for appointment tothe main board of British Gas as director of communications strategyand planning.The appointment is seen as an attempt by BG to improve its public imagefollowing a disastrous year in terms of public relations, includingchief executive Cedric Brown's salary increase.Wybrew is currently on the board of Shell UK as corporate affairsdirector.It appears Peter Sanguinetti, the current head of corporatecommunications, will remain with the company.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BRITISH GAS ANNOUNCES APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORBritish Gas has announced the appointment of Patricia Mann as a non-executive director of the company.She is currently a vice president international of J Walker Thompson CoLtd, which she joined in 1959, and director of public affairs for itsUK Group. She has wide experience of consumer affairs, competition andregulatory issues, and corporate governance.Mann has had previous involvement with the gas industry, pre and postprivatisation, having served as a member of the Gas Consumers Councilfrom 1981 -1990.She also has a wide knowledge of competition and regulatory issues,having been a member of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for nineyears from 1984-1993, said BG.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NEW CHAIRMAN OF NATIONAL CONSUMER COUNCILDavid Hatch became chairman of the National Consumer Council (NCC) on 1January.Hatch's appointment is for a term of three years, requiring acommitment of two days a week at a salary of #21,000.He takes over from Lady Judith Wilcox, whose recent appointment to theHouse of Lords was thought to conflict with her role at NCC.Hatch has been involved in the television and radio industry since the1960s.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NEW SENSOR FOR DETECTION OF FLAMMABLE HYDROCARBONSAMG Systems has developed a new sensor for the detection andmeasurement of flammable hydrocarbons.AMG says the sensor is intrinsically safe as it uses a patentedinfrared light emitting diode (LED), in place of the usual heatedfilament bulbs which themselves present an explosion hazard.The research programme received a support award from the Department ofTrade and Industry and has attracted interest and support in the US.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BORD GAIS OFFERING GRANT TO SWITCH TO NATURAL GASIrish state gas distributor, Bord Gais, is offering households a grantof Ir.#800 to switch heating systems to natural gas.This scheme is believed to be annoying the local LPG, electricity andcoal industries,who see it as an abuse of the state company's monopoly position.There is also independent criticism from builders, who claim theynotice in the course of renovation of homes that owners wastefullyleave on their central heating, even in summer.It is claimed householders are trying to use sufficient units to reachtargets set by Board Gais that bring qualification for company bonusschemes.Other critics suggest Ireland is giving little thought to likely gasprices in the decades to come, assuming a never ending era of low gasprices.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996HOUSEHOLD BILLS COULD RISE BY ONE THIRDCharity Age Concern has estimated that the average household bill couldrise by almost one third this winter because of the bitterly coldweather and the addition of 8% VAT to domestic gas bills.The government has a system of cold weather payments for householdswhich are payable when the temperature falls to freezing for sevenconsecutive days.However, only certain people are eligible for the #8.50 allowance.To qualify for the payment, recipients must be claiming income supportand either 60 or over and claiming the basic state pension, disabled orliving with a disabled person, or with a dependent child under five.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-9IA059-000325-B008-141http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey55.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235434 text/html 16288HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:52:47 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:04 GMTContent-length: 16101Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey55.html Sample Issue Copyright U.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TESORO RE-ASSURES JOBBERS FOLLOWING BOARD OVERTHROW THREAT (260 words) GREENS SLAM ELECTRIC CAR DELAY (222 words) DEALERS ASK COURT TO STOP BELOW-COST (276 words) SUWANNEE SWIFTY EXITS ALA. (171 words) ALTERNATE FUELS MAY GET VASTLY CHEAPER COMPETITOR (507 words) GULF NABS 60 MM GAL. DEAL (59 words) TOP CHEMIST, JOBBER: CLEAN ENGINE BEATS ALTERNATE FUEL (540 words) NEWS BRIEFS (94 words) CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TESORO RE-ASSURES JOBBERS FOLLOWING BOARD OVERTHROW THREATDissident shareholders may push Tesoro to sell refiningdivision, following move to oust entire board of directors.Bid, led by Lafayette, La.-based Stone Energy Corp. chairmanJames H. Stone, seeks to improve company value through increasedstock price.To reach that goal, group would install handpicked board andlikely sell off Tesoro's refinery business to focus instead onexploration and production, according to papers filed withSecurities & Exchange Commission Dec. 26.Shareholder action comes on heels of company decision to pullout of California market (OW 12/25).Company shuts down terminals at Sacramento, Calif., (172,000barrels) and Stockton (57,000 bbl.) by mid-January.Meantime, Tesoro's branded push in Pacific Northwest (OW 7/3)shouldn't be affected by legal swirl.Several Tesoro jobbers in Oregon told Oil Week last week thatcompany has assured them Tesoro flags will continue to flyregardless of shareholder suit outcome and shut-down ofCalifornia terminals."We're not concerned by news" after talking with marketing rep,jobber said.Other jobbers report sales have picked up since they rebrandedto Tesoro.Portland-area jobber Johnson Oil rebranded Astoria station inJune and followed with Seaview and Knappa sites in Fall."The brand's working," jobber said.  Johnson will rebrand fourthstation in Manzanita when it gets signage approval from citycouncil.Tesoro spokesman declined to comment on dissident shareholdersuit.Stone spokesman also declined comment.  However, Stone Energyissued statement last week saying move was part of ChairmanStone's personal investment strategy and not a company action.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GREENS SLAM ELECTRIC CAR DELAYCalifornia Air Resource Board staff report recommends axing 2%electric car sales in 1998, delaying "zero-emission vehicle"mandate until at least 2003.CARB would vote on final plan in March following publichearings.Agency earlier told staff to come up with a new plan because E-car technology is too primitive, expensive and consumer-unfriendly (OW 11/27).ZEV Environmental Alliance, a "green" group favoring electriccars, fears latest CARB delay may be prelude to yet another E-car delay when 2003 deadline for 10% ZEV sales approaches.Massachusetts and New York may also delay any ZEV mandatebecause they're following whatever California does.Anti-ZEV group, Californians Against Hidden Taxes (CAHT),praises CARB staff report for axing 1998 deadline.But group says it's dismayed that CARB plan would eventuallymandate electric cars, since that would only result in a 1% airquality improvement at a cost in excess of $20 billion.CAHT spokesperson Anita Mangels says it's time for CARB to lookfor other, more cost-effective measures to clean up the air.CARB might "chicken out" on costly, consumer-unfriendly ZEVmandate as 2003 approaches, but Mangels says consumers have noassurance that.Many observers feel CARB can't mandate ZEVs in 1998 because ofgrowing voter/consumer revolt against costly, impracticalgovernment mandates and subsidies.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996DEALERS ASK COURT TO STOP BELOW-COSTBelow-cost sales fight in Southern Florida heats up, with ajobber filing a below-cost selling lawsuit against an Amocobranded retailer.Jobber, Maximo Investments, is joined by Mobil dealer JorgelinaLago, M & H Citgo, and Sunshine Gasoline Distributors in suitagainst ISJ Energy.Suit, filed in circuit court in Dade County, also names JayDavid Weinstock as defendant.Suit seeks damages in excess of $45,000 under state's Motor FuelMarketing Practices Act.Sunshine owns and manages Miami Palm Plaza Mobil with Lago as acontract operator.Sunshine also provides management services for a Miami-areaCitgo station owned by Maximo.M & H Citgo is a contract operator for Maximo's station.ISJ owns an Amoco branded station nearby, managed by Weinstock.Florida law prohibits below-cost sales where the effect injurescompetition.  Retailers are, however, allowed to sell belowtheir cost in order to meet competition.Suit alleges Amoco station has sold between 7-11 cents/gal.below cost on all grades since November 1.That's in a market where dealer laid-in cost was about$1.059/gallon for regular unleaded and retailers were sellingfor 99.9 cents/gal.Suit seeks actual damages in excess of $15,000, plus attorney'sfees.  Suit also seeks injunctive relief.ISJ signed consent decree with attorney general in 1992 forbelow-cost selling at another Amoco branded outlet.In light of alleged violation of consent decree, suit requestscourt treble actual damages.Retailers in Southern Florida complain Attorney General rarelyenforces below-cost law because it is unpopular politically.So, jobbers and dealers are taking matters into their own handsin the courts.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SUWANNEE SWIFTY EXITS ALA.Florida-based C-store chain Suwannee Swifty completes exit fromAlabama with sale of four stores to Griffin, Ga.-basedPetroSouth.PetroSouth, which operates about 135 units in Alabama andGeorgia, will rebrand the sites to Citgo or its own brand,company says.Sites will be rebranded first quarter 1996.Buy is part of PetroSouth's goal to grow by at least 50locations by end of 1996.Company plans to move into in Florida early 1996.Meantime, Suwannee Swifty's exit from Alabama is part ofcompany's plan to focus on core markets, company says.Company raised eyebrows in Tallahassee, Fla. this month when itclosed three stores overnight.One store still had help wanted sign in window, while anotherhad a happy holidays sign on reader board.Suwannee Swifty says closures were planned.Company says although it is consolidating now, it expects tostart growing in core markets early in 1996.Company now operates about 200 stores in South Georgia andNorthern Florida.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996ALTERNATE FUELS MAY GET VASTLY CHEAPER COMPETITOREngine/heavy equipment giant Caterpillar takes another bigstride in quest to prove its "A-21" naptha/water/surfactantemulsion as a clean, cheap alternate fuel.Fuel has made headlines since Caterpillar's announcement lastyear of a scientific breakthrough with new fuel, invented byscientist Rudolph Gunnerman of A-55/Advanced Fuels of Reno,Nevada.Fuel is an emulsion of about half water and half petroleumnaptha; large-volume production eventually would cost about 35cents/gallon ex-tax at refinery gate.Plus, fuel would get about same mileage as conventional dieselor gasoline, according to company test results submitted toNevada Bureau of Air Quality.Fuel would require no changes to oil industry distributionstructure and only minor, relatively cheap changes to engines.Fuel also would save refiners from further costly upgrades torefineries and eliminate costlier alternate-fuel competitors.Few details about the fuel have emerged since initialannouncement.However, Nevada just certified A-21 fuel for use as a cleanalternative fuel, with a ringing endorsement from Gov. BobMiller.Now, Nevada State Energy Office says it's pushing fordemonstration of A-21-fueled power generator at a new alternate-fuels facility, formerly the nuclear Nevada Test Site.Still, Caterpillar has yet to register A-21 fuel with EPA or getit certified by federal Dept. of Energy as an "alternate fuel"that fleets could use to meet costly Energy Policy Act mandates.But company officials met with DOE Secretary Hazel O'Learyrecently, and a DOE policy office has begun to take a look atthe fuel, we've learned.Meantime, several demonstration test projects are underway, someinvolving stationary engines and some involving motor vehicles.Test results submitted to state of Nevada for designating A-21as an "alternate fuel" describe fuel as an emulsion of 52% water(by weight) and 48% hydrocarbon plus 0.5% hydrocarbon surfactantholding fuel in stable emulsion.Fuel could be used in either spark or compression-ignitionengines.Spokesman for Advanced Fuels, Caterpillar's joint-venturepartner in fuel, says water emulsion keeps engine temperaturedown, allowing slower, more complete combustion and much loweremissions.  Similar principle was used in World War IIairplanes.A nickel catalyst installed in cylinder, possibly employing asmall nickel plate or a nickel spark plug, might promotecombustion of hydrogen molecules in water-fuel emulsion, or sotheorizes fuel's inventor.In any case, water vapor is a major component of tailpipe gases,even if water molecules actually provide little or no energy.Test results submitted to Nevada Bureau of Air Quality show fuelpasses California's tough Phase 2 emission regs and EPA's toughnew regs for diesel engine emissions.Assuming fuel passes federal regulatory hurdles, marketing wouldinitially target diesel fleets, then any fleets in areasaffected by "alternate fuels" mandates.Fuel would require dedicated tank storage.  In extra-cold areas,fuel may require some ethanol blending to prevent icing.If demand grows enough, then shipping from naptharefiner/blenders via pipeline to terminals would become morefeasible, an Advanced Fuels spokesman says.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GULF NABS 60 MM GAL. DEALGulf Oil just inked a seven-year supply agreement with HarnedOil of Conneaut Lake, Pa., tied to station conversions of formerSunoco jobber GasOil, of Erie, Pa.Deal adds some 60 million gallons of Gulf brand gas to westernPennsylvania, including some 15 stations formerly controlled byGasOil, bought in a bankruptcy proceeding.  Harned plans moreacquisitions.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TOP CHEMIST, JOBBER: CLEAN ENGINE BEATS ALTERNATE FUELProperly-tuned cars with properly-maintained oil and fuelsystems do far more to prevent air pollution than multi-billion-dollar alternate fuels programs.That's what University of Denver chemistry professor DonStedman, inventor of increasingly-popular "remote sensingdevice" (RSD) pollution detector, has been telling EPA for years(OW 1/2/95, 2/21/94).But politicians have had more fun beating up on oil companies bymandating costly alternate-fuel programs, rather than insistingconsumers keep their vehicle systems clean, Stedman says.About 10% of cars on the road today cause most air pollution,studies show.So, detecting those "gross polluters" and then fixing them withgood maintenance would save U.S. consumers and taxpayersbillions of dollars wasted on alternate fuels and oxy-fuels.California jobber Steve Kludt heartily agrees with Stedman.That's why Kludt has been trying to get government agencies topromote good maintenance over alternate fuels.He's also prodded one local agency to test "Super Tune" oil andfuel system cleansing additive, a mixture of common, well-knownchemical solvents that he's marketed to fleet accounts foryears.Kludt agrees that well-tuned vehicles with good maintenance andregular oil changes don't necessarily need an extra dose ofcleaning solvents to cut air pollution.But some vehicles do need that extra shot of engine cleanserfrom time to time.Fleet vehicles can even extend oil change intervals, offsettingcost of the solvent additives, he says.Unlike goofy fuel-system magnets and other "secret formula"snake-oils, Super Tune is nothing more than toluene, methyl-ethyl-ketone, isopropyl alcohol and a lightweight mineralcarrying oil.Those are well-known, common oil/chemical industry solvents,Stedman confirms.While Stedman personally doesn't recommend any sort ofadditives, he concedes that perhaps 10% of vehicles mayoccasionally need something extra, such as solvents, to removepollution-causing dirt from engines.As Kludt explains, "you cannot properly tune an engine if it hascrankcase and fuel system deposits."Cleaning those systems, properly tuning vehicle and changing oilregularly will cut pollution dramatically.Ironically, auto manufacturers now push 50,000 mile tuneups andlengthy oil change intervals.  That not only causes pollution,but could ruin engines.Planned obsolescence could explain those automakerrecommendations, Kludt says.Meantime, consumer revolt against costly alternate fuelscontinues to grow, as evidenced by more states opting-out ofcostly RFG programs and California beginning to back-offelectric-car and natural-gas-car mandates.So now may be right time for oil industry to propose far-less-costly alternatives, such as better emissions inspections, tune-ups for dirty cars and proper oil/fuel system maintenance.While many automotive aftermarket bottlers target dirty fuelsystems, "nobody thinks about crankcase deposits," Kludt says.Those deposits can foul PCV valves, which in turn cause tailpipepollution.  Proper oil changes, plus a solvent treatment forespecially-dirty cars, could clean up crankcases that cause somuch pollution.At only about $3.75 per bottle with regular oil changes,solvents such as Super-Tune could fix pollution problems a lotcheaper than $40,000 electric cars, $30,000 CNG cars or RFGgasolines costing 10-25 cents/gal. more than ordinary gasoline,Kludt maintains.Kludt also says he hopes to get more jobbers interested inpromoting maintenance over alternate fuels.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NEWS BRIEFS*  Circle K Xmas gives 10 shares of stock to 1,700 storemanagers to reward longevity:  Stock now trades at $25/share, sobenefit cost Circle K about $425,000.  Managers need one year'sservice to qualify.*  Marketers report Texaco selling its fuel oil companies:Star/Texaco says deals aren't final, but Global Petroleumconfirms it will buy White Fuels (Boston).  Petroleum Heat &Power confirms it will buy Texaco Home Heat (Long Island).Santoro Oil has yet to confirm buying Kelleher Oil (Providence,R.I.).  Peterson Oil (Worcester, Mass.) has yet to confirmbuying Coughlin-Donaghue.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-10IA059-000325-B008-177http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey83.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235508 text/html 67972HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:53:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:21 GMTContent-length: 67785Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey83.html Sample Issue Copyright UTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 10TH CIR.: WILLIAMS BOUND TO BUY GAS BEYOND 20-YEAR TERM OF 'TAKE-OR-PAY' PACT (486 words) DC CIR. VOIDS FERC'S INTERPRETATION OF 1968 GAS SALE CONTRACT (473 words) 5TH CIRCUIT VACATES APPOINTMENT OF CAJUN BANKRUPTCY TRUSTEE (603 words) CONVICTION REVERSED IN DESTRUCTION OF KY NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION TOWER (345 words) 11TH CIR.: GA PRISON OFFICIALS DUE IMMUNITY IN POWER CONTRACT BID SUIT (405 words) DEMAND EXCUSED BY MAJORITY HOLDER'S INFLUENCE ON BOARD MEMBER, SAYS DE CT. (717 words) CA CT. GRANTS JUDGMENT FOR DEFENSE IN OFFICE EMF EXPOSURE CASE (852 words) CA COURT VOIDS FRAUD, CONDEMNATION, NUISANCE CLAIMS AGAINST TANC (565 words) 9TH CIR. DETERMINES HEALTH ASSESSMENT TO CONSTITUTE REMOVAL OR RESPONSE (906 words) 9TH CIR. ASKED TO DECIDE NGA AND 'HINSHAW' STATUS OF MOJAVE'S CA EXPANSION (771 words) CALIFORNIA SUPREME COURT AFFIRMS $1.3M WRONGFUL DEMOTION AWARD (654 words) PLAINTIFF IN ILL HEALTH SEEKS EXPEDITED APPEAL OF CA DEFENSE VERDICT (694 words) CA SUP. CT. TO DECIDE MOBILE HOME SUBMETER SYSTEMS RATE DISPUTE (501 words) DC CIR. REVERSES FERC'S APPROVAL OF 'BLENDED RATE' FOR MICHCON GAS SERVICE (429 words) CA SUP. CT. ASKED TO REVIEW REQUEST FOR GAS CONTRACT DATA (839 words) NC COURT OF APPEALS DENIES EASEMENT FOR UTILITY INSTALLATION (284 words) CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199610TH CIR.: WILLIAMS BOUNDTO BUY GAS BEYOND 20-YEARTERM OF 'TAKE-OR-PAY' PACT     The 10th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 5 that,under the terms of a 20-year "take-or-pay" natural gas purchasecontract forged in 1982, Williams Natural Gas Co. is obliged tocontinue buying gas beyond the contract period if the plaintiffsellers do not revise prices or contract terms.  Talus PropertiesLimited Partnership et al. v. Williams Natural Gas Co., No. 95-1056 (10th Cir.).     Seeking reversal of a U.S. District Court ruling affirmingthe validity of the contracts with plaintiffs Yuma County OilCo., Talus Properties Limited Partnership and others for naturalgas produced in Yuma County, CO, Williams argued that theagreements were ambiguous.  Williams said the U.S. District Courtfor the District of Colorado erred in rejecting its request toenter extrinsic evidence of the parties' intent to remedy theambiguity.  It also said the trial judge erred in not reachingits claim in favor of reformation of the agreements.     In a non-binding order and judgment, the 10th Circuit saidthe contracts were clear and unambiguous.  "The primary term ofeach of the contracts is twenty years.  Once the primary termexpires, the contract will remain in effect under the same termsand conditions, unless, during the allotted time periods, therespective plaintiffs offer to sell the defendant the gas underdifferent terms and conditions," the panel ruled.  "Because therelevant provisions are unambiguous, defendant cannot introduceextrinsic evidence to vary or contradict their terms."     The panel said Williams' purported extrinsic data is notpermitted because it is not evidence of additional contractterms.  "Under the plain language of the contracts, defendantcontinues to be obligated to purchase gas from plaintiffs afterthe expiration of the primary term unless plaintiffs offerdefendant a new price for the gas, which defendant rejects.Defendant, however, wants to introduce extrinsic evidence that itcontends establishes that defendant has no obligation to purchasegas from plaintiffs after the expiration of the primary term.Because the evidence would vary, rather than supplement, thewritten terms, it is not admissible under the guise of CO Rev.Stat. Sec. 4-2-202(b)."     The 10th Circuit's opinion, by Circuit Judge Deanell ReeceTacha, said there was no evidence to support Williams' claim thatthe contracts should be reformed because of the mutual mistake ofboth parties of not including provisions for a drop in naturalgas prices.     "The provisions at issue originated with defendant andbecame part of the final contracts without any discussion by theparties.  Nothing suggests that plaintiffs failed to consider thepossibility of future declining prices when they executed therespective contracts," concluded the court.  "To the contrary,the contracts work to plaintiffs' advantage in a decliningmarket.  Nor is there any evidence that plaintiffs knew at thetime they executed the contracts that defendant's assent to thecontracts was based on its mistaken belief that future gas priceswould not fall."Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DC CIR. VOIDS FERC'SINTERPRETATION OF 1968GAS SALE CONTRACT     The District of Columbia Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals onDec. 12 vacated a Federal Energy Regulatory Commission order thatsaid a 1975 gas sale contract between Jack Grynberg and RockyMountain Natural Gas Co. was illegal because the gas sold underthe pact was dedicated to interstate commerce in a 1968 contractbetween Grynberg and another interstate pipeline.  Grynberg etal. v. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Nos. 94-1699 and 95-1134 (DC Cir.).     The court's ruling comes after both Grynberg and RockyMountain challenged the FERC's finding that since the Colorado-produced gas had been dedicated to interstate commerce, themaximum lawful price would be lower than the price paid by RockyMountain.  Grynberg contested the FERC's dedication to commerceruling, while Rocky Mountain challenged the Commission's refusalto order Grynberg to refund certain overpayments.     In an opinion by Judge A. Raymond Randolph, the DC Circuitsaid that, even in allowing jurisdictional deference, the FERC'sinterpretation of the 1968 agreement between Grynberg andMountain Fuel Co. was "not reasonable" because that contract didnot tie future production from those fields to interstatecommerce usage.  The panel remanded the case for further FERCreview without considering Rocky Mountain's petition.     "The Commission's reading of the contract is entitled tojudicial respect..., but here the Commission has gone beyond afair construction to reach a result it has not supported," saidthe DC Circuit.  "The Commission viewed the 1968 agreement ashaving dedicated all of the gas underlying the fields describedin the contract to Mountain Fuel."  The FERC, said the panel,improperly derived its finding from an introductory "Whereas"clause in the beginning of the 1968 contract which states:"WHEREAS, Seller owns or controls, and desires to sell and Buyerdesires to purchase Seller's share of gas underlying the landsand leaseholds (subject lands) described in Appendix 'A'...."     The DC Circuit said the FERC reached its conclusion based onthe introductory clause and "brush[ing] aside" a subsequent partof the contract (Article II-1) prohibiting application of the1968 contract to lands adjoining the pertinent wells.  "Ignoringthe rest of the contract, the Commission offers little more thanan assertion to support its idea that the prefatory Whereasclause defines the scope of the dedication," wrote JudgeRandolph.  "According to the Commission, Grynberg agreed to sellall of the gas underlying the subject lands to Mountain Fuel.But if the Whereas clause defines the extent of the obligation tosell and dedicates all of the gas to Mountain Fuel, what is therole of Article II-1?"     Nancy J. Skancke of Grammer, Kissel, Robbins & Skanckerepresents Grynberg.  The FERC is represented by CommissionAttorney Jill L. Hall and Solicitor Jerome M. Feit.  John T.Miller Jr. argued the cause for intervenor Rocky Mountain.  Allare located in Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19965TH CIRCUIT VACATESAPPOINTMENT OF CAJUNBANKRUPTCY TRUSTEE     Holding that a trial court's appointment of a bankruptcytrustee for debtor Cajun Electric Cooperative is not in the bestinterest of the parties involved, as required under 11 U.S.C.Sec. 1104(a)(2), a divided Fifth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals onNov. 20 vacated the appointment at the request of Cajun andseveral of its creditors.  In re Cajun Electric PowerCooperative, Inc.; Cajun Electric Power Cooperative, Inc. v.Central Louisiana Electric Co., Inc., No. 95-30760 (5th Cir.);see Utilities Industry LR, July 1995.     After making a threshold determination that the appointmentof a trustee by a district court sitting in bankruptcy is a finalappealable order, the Fifth Circuit ruled 2-1 that such anappointment here was wrong because it was based on the trialcourt's incorrect assumption that there was a conflict ofinterest in the makeup of Cajun's board of directors.     Cajun chose Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection aftersustaining major losses from investments in the ill-fated RiverBend Nuclear Power Facility and then being ordered to lower itsrates by the Louisiana Public Service Commission.  The courtbelow appointed a bankruptcy trustee for Cajun after boarddifficulty by board members in deciding whether to appeal the PSCorder.     Although the board voted to appeal the rate reductionruling, the trial judge said the decision was complicated by thefact that many Cajun board members were either managers or boardmembers of Cajun's 12 member companies, all of whom bought powerfrom Cajun.  A vote to appeal would mean they were attempting toraise rates for their subsidiary companies; not to appeal wouldmean added difficulty for Cajun to pay its debt obligation.  Atrustee was appointed at the request of Rural Utility Service(RUS), the federal agency from which Cajun received a $1.6billion loan to invest in River Bend.     On appeal, the Fifth Circuit majority said that theappointment of a trustee is an extraordinary remedy under Sec.1104(a)(1), one for which the moving parties failed to meet theirburden of proof.  The panel said that while the district courtoffered several reasons for its decision, they all stemmed fromthe inherent conflict between the interests of its member-customers and those of its creditors.     "However, because this inherent conflict results fromCajun's organizational structure " a structure that Congressencouraged it to adopt " the conflict is insufficient to justifythe appointment of a trustee," said the majority in an opinion byJudge Reynaldo G. Garza.  "The fact that Congress and the RUSencouraged " if not required Cajun to organize itself as acooperative leads us to believe that any conflict inherentlyarising from Cajun's organization as a cooperative isinsufficient to justify the appointment of a trustee."     "Further," the panel added, "holding that these inherentconflicts constitute cause for appointing a trustee would createa per se rule permitting the appointment of a trustee in any caseinvolving a cooperative."     Writing in dissent, Judge Emilio M. Garza disagreed with themajority's per se rule assumption, saying the trustee'sappointment should stand.     "The conflicts present in this case go beyond the 'inherent'conflicts under which all healthy cooperatives operate," he said."Presumably, healthy cooperatives do not fail to collect moniesowed by member-customers or attempt to deny member-customersaccess to information.  Nor do members in healthy cooperativesconsider strategies which seem designed to break-up and scavengethe assets of the debtor....  Once cooperative members beginworking at cross-purposes, to the extent Cajun's members have,the appointment of a trustee may be the only effective way topursue reorganization."Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONVICTION REVERSED INDESTRUCTION OF KY NATURALGAS TRANSMISSION TOWER     A divided Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Nov. 29reversed the conviction of a defendant who hired people whomistakenly destroyed an interstate transmission tower owned by anatural gas company.  United States v. Howard, No. 95-5433(6th Cir.).     The 2-1 majority said defendant Ricky Nelson Howard did notintend to destroy an interstate transmission facility but hadmistakenly targeted the wrong tower.     Howard, who owned a Kentucky cable television company,offered to pay a man $1,000 to destroy a tower operated by acompetitor, but mistakenly pointed out a nearby Columbia GasTransmission Corp. tower as the target.  That man recruited afriend to assist.  When Howard refused to pay the $1,000 feebecause the wrong tower had been destroyed, the disgruntledaccomplice contacted the FBI.     An Eastern District of Kentucky grand jury indicted allthree for conspiracy and aiding and abetting in the destructionof an interstate facility under the Natural Gas Pipeline SafetyAct (NGPSA).  The two men who carried out the destruction pleadedguilty.  A jury convicted Howard at trial before Judge Joseph M.Hood.     The Sixth Circuit reversed in an unpublished, 2-1 per curiamdecision.     Howard unsuccessfully argued the Columbia Gas tower was acommunication rather than transmission facility and was not apipeline facility under NGPSA; it had an electronic system toconvert pipeline pressures and flow rates into electrical signalsand to transmit the results to a central monitoring location.  Healso unsuccessfully argued the tower was exempt from protectionunder NGPSA because it was located in a rural area.     However, the majority said the conviction must be reversedbecause the conspirators lacked specific intent to cut down a gastower.  As a result, it said a jury could not reasonably concludethat the defendants knowingly and willfully destroyed a gaspipeline facility.     Dissenting, Judge Harry W. Wellford said the mistake as toownership of the Columbia Gas tower was insufficient forreversal.  Howard, in fact, did point out the Columbia Gas towerto a co-conspirator, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199611TH CIR.: GA PRISONOFFICIALS DUE IMMUNITY INPOWER CONTRACT BID SUIT               Although ruling that two low-bidding electric cooperativesheld a state-created property right in electrical servicecontracts granted to high-bidder Georgia Power Co. by Georgia'sDepartment of Corrections (DOC), the 11th Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals on Nov. 15 reversed a district court's denial ofqualified immunity for DOC officials and remanded the case forfurther state law action.  Flint Electrical Membership Corp. v.Whitworth et al.; Pataula Electric Membership Corp. v. Whitworthet al., Nos. 94-9199 and 94-9227 (11th Cir.).     The court's action came in the consolidated treatment ofseparate lawsuits by Flint Electrical Membership Corp. andPataula Electric Membership Corp. (the EMCs), which claimed theywere denied their due process rights to supply power to certainDOC facilities when DOC violated Georgia's State Purchasing Actand awarded the contracts to Georgia Power.     U.S. District Judge Horace T. Ward of the Northern Districtof Georgia originally dismissed the actions on the pleadings forfailure to state a claim under 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1983, holding thatthe EMCs had no federally protected property interest in thecontracts.  The 11th Circuit, in an earlier ruling, reversedJudge Ward on the grounds that Georgia law requires electricalservice contracts to be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder"whenever possible."     Holding that DOC officials should have known the arerequired to follow competitive bidding procedures, the 11thCircuit remanded the case to trial court, where DOC and GeorgiaPower, also a defendant, moved for summary judgment.  Upon thecourt's denial of all such motions, the DOC officials appealed tothe 11th Circuit.     In a per curiam opinion, the panel found that although theEMC's right to a property interest in the contracts remain, theDOC defendants are now entitled to qualified immunity due to achange in the law under the 11th Circuit's 1994 ruling inMcKinney v. Pate.  In that case, the 11th Circuit held that Sec.1983 substantive due process claims arising from nonlegislativedeprivations of state-created property interests are no longercognizable in the circuit.     The panel noted that the EMCs should have, but did not, filesuit against DOC in state court under Georgia law O.C.G.A. Sec.50-5-79, designed to challenge the issuance of improperly bidstate contracts.  "Because they failed to do so, and because therule of law announced in McKinney must be appliedretroactively..., their Sec. 1983 due process claims are notactionable," the court concluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DEMAND EXCUSED BY MAJORITYHOLDER'S INFLUENCE ONBOARD MEMBER, SAYS DE CT.     A shareholder plaintiff was excused from making pre-suitdemand on the board of York Research Corp. by a Delaware statecourt judge who on Dec. 4 found that a majority of the boardlacked independence due to a dominant director/shareholder'sability to exert "considerable influence" over a swing votedirector.  Friedman v. Beningson et al., No. 12232 (DE Ch. Ct.).     In his memorandum opinion, Chancellor William T. Allenrejected a motion to dismiss breach of duty and insider tradingcharges from Delaware Chancery Court, finding that in order toallege lack of independence, it was not necessary to show thatthe swing vote director's continued employment and remunerationhinged solely on the whim of the controlling director.     At issue in the derivative suit by Irving Friedman was thedecision of York Research Corp. " a Delaware company thatdevelops, constructs and operates co-generation power plants " toissue interest-free loans to several of its directors andofficers so that they could buy large blocks of stock in thecompany.  According to the complaint, the directors and officersthen made false statements regarding revenue growth and futurebusiness prospects to inflate York's stock price and sold theirshares before announcing that revenues would be significantlybelow projections.     Friedman alleged that the defendant officers and directorsnot only misused corporate office but cost the company a $500,000settlement used to obtain the dismissal of shareholder securitiessuits in federal court in New York City.     After the suit was amended, defendants in July 1993 moved todismiss it for failure to make demand on the board beforeinitiating the action.  Friedman contended that he was excusedfrom making pre-suit demand because the majority of the threeboard members lacked both independence and disinterest.  He saiddefendant York director/president Robert Beningson was themastermind of the interest-free loan and insider trading schemeand that he exerted a controlling interest over board member JohnEllis through his control of his remuneration.     The court said it need only address the first prong of thetwo-prong test used in Aronson v. Lewis, DE Sup. 473 A.2d 805, 8(1984), i.e., whether plaintiff has alleged particularized factscreating a reasonable doubt whether those directors could, underthe circumstances, exercise a judgment on the suit and demandthat would qualify for the deference of the business judgmentrule.     "This inquiry may include the subject whether some or alldirectors are 'beholden' to or under the control, domination orstrong influence of a party with a material financial interest inthe transaction under attack, which interest is adverse to thatof the corporation," the court wrote.  "Such circumstances alonemay sometimes raise a reasonable doubt that directors in such asituation could exercise judgment on behalf of the corporationconcerning the transaction involving such dominant or influentialparty."     The court noted that the state Supreme Court held in Ralesv. Blasband, DE Sup. 634 A.2d 927, 936, that "although thedirector/officer's continued employment and remuneration did nothinge solely on his relations with the defendant directors, theofficial authority of the defendant directors 'placed them in aposition to exert considerable influence over the directorofficer.'"  Ellis's continued receipt of consulting fees,"...when considered in the context of the other facts alleged,represents a substantial interest subject to possible corporateretribution had he exercised judgment in a way displeasing to thefinancially interested shareholder/CEO," the court concluded.     The court also noted that Beningson's ties to York'sprincipal client empower him in relation to the other directors,"...since they must remain cognizant of and sensitive to hisability to affect York's business prospects."  The chancelloralso noted (1) the size of the loans " the loan to Beningson wasgreater than the company's net revenue that year; and (2) York'ssettlement of the federal class actions without any directorcontribution, despite the profits earned by Beningson.     Plaintiffs are represented by Joseph Rosenthal and John Dayof Rosenthal, Monhait, Gross & Goddess in Wilmington; and RonaldFutterman and Michael Behn of Futterman & Howard, Chtd. inChicago.     Defendants are represented by Richard Elliot Jr. and ThomasBeck of Richards, Layton & Finger in Wilmington; and RogerWaldman and Philip Zimmerman of Moses & Singer in New York City.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA CT. GRANTS JUDGMENTFOR DEFENSE IN OFFICEEMF EXPOSURE CASE     Holding that the plaintiffs would be unable to submit causalevidence associating electromagnetic field exposure to thedevelopment of cancer in humans, a California Superior Courtjudge on Dec. 8 granted defendant Southern California Edison's(SCE) motion for summary judgment in a suit by office workers whosay they developed cancer due to the location of an SCEtransformer beneath their office.  Johsz et al. v. Koll Co. etal., No. 726765 (CA Super. Ct., Orange Cty.); see UtilitiesIndustry LR, October 1995.     Orange County Superior Court Judge H. Warren Siegel said heagreed with SCE's assertion that plaintiffs' proffered testimonywould not meet the Kelly-Frye admissibility test as laid out inthe California Supreme Court's 1976 ruling in People v. Kelly.Such testimony, which was to have been given at trial beginningthis month, he said, failed to conclusively say EMFs causedplaintiff's cancers.  The testimony expected from plaintiffs'experts Samuel Milham, M.D., M.P.H., and David Michael Ozonoff,M.D., suggested only that "there is a causal association; thatbased on statistics it 'may' be a cause," the judge ruled.     The judge added, "Statistics may lend credence to an opinionthat EMF caused plaintiff's cancers, but there is no expertopinion that it did in these cases and Ozonoff and Milham are theonly causation experts proposed by the plaintiffs on the EMFissue."     Co-defendants Koll Co. and Grubb & Ellis joined in theutility's summary judgment motion.     Plaintiffs Michael and Jill Johsz, James and ChristianneNichols, and Mary Ann Stewart voluntarily withdrew their causesof action for battery and fraudulent concealment and theirrequest for punitive damages after SCE moved for summary judgmenton Nov. 7.  Plaintiff attorney Annee Della Donna, who plans tofile a motion for a new trial this month, says the ruling doesnot affect companion cases Younkin v. Southern California Edison(see Utilities Industry LR, September 1995, P. 11,032), in whicha March settlement conference is slated, or Muir v. SouthernCalifornia Edison (see Utilities Industry LR, June 1995), whichis scheduled for trial on May 20, 1996.     The plaintiffs discounted SCE's summary judgment motionclaim that the Kelly-Frye test is inapplicable, arguing that itapplies only to admissibility of "new scientific methods, devicesor techniques" in criminal cases.  Instead, they said that theirconclusions and opinions should be judged, and are shownreliable, under the 35-year-old "Hill Criteria," developed inEngland.  The Hill Criteria, they argued, include strength,consistency, specificity, temporality, biological gradient,plausibility, coherence, experiment and analogy.     "Plaintiffs argue that the Kelly-Frye rule is not applicableto the scientific principle of whether EMF causes cancer, butrather is limited to novel scientific techniques, methods ortests," SCE responded.  "In support of this argument, plaintiffscite several California decisions which have held that the Kelly-Frye rule is not applicable to medical opinion testimony based onan examination of a particular physical or psychological injury."     "However," the utility continued, "the cases cited byplaintiffs on this point are inapposite in that the issue withrespect to Edison's motion for summary judgment is not theadmissibility of medical opinion testimony that EMF causedplaintiffs' specific cancers, but rather the admissibility ofscientific evidence on the threshold issue of whether EMF causescancer generally.  This distinction is highlighted by the factthat the expert declarations submitted to plaintiffs inopposition to Edison's motion for summary judgment do notindicate that either of the declarants have ever examined any ofthe plaintiffs in this action, but rather base their opinionssolely upon scientific literature and epidemiologic studiesregarding the health effects of EMF."     Opposing SCE's motion, the plaintiffs challenged thequalifications of defense experts Philip Cole, M.D., Chairman ofthe University of Alabama School of Public Health's Department ofEpidemiology; and Jack D. Sahl, M.S., M.P.H., Ph.D, an SCEresearch scientist since 1983.  Both men, the plaintiffs argued,"are so tied to the utility companies that their testimony is notcredible."     SCE replied, "in contrast to the declaration of Dr. Cole[that there is no causal relationship between human cancerdevelopment and EMF exposure], the declarations submitted byplaintiffs are devoid of any reference to general acceptancewithin the scientific community of the principle that EMF causescancer.  Rather than addressing the consensus of the scientificcommunity, Dr. Milham simply states that there are a number ofbiological mechanisms by which EMF 'may' cause cancer, that EMF'may' affect and compromise the immune system, and that, in hisopinion, EMF exposure promotes a number of cancers."     The plaintiffs are represented by Della Donna and Wylie A.Aitken of the Law Offices of Wylie A. Aitken in Santa Ana, CA.SCE is represented by Duncan Barr and Joel C. Lamp of O'Connor,Cohn, Dillon & Barr in San Francisco; Frank C. Rothrock andD. Susan Wiens of Palmieri, Tyler, Wiener, Wilhelm & Waldron inIrvine, CA; and corporate attorneys John Tinker and Sumner Kochof Rosemead, CA.  Koll is represented by Elliot Olson, GaryKwasniewski and Steven Di Saia of Sedgwick, Detert, Moran &Arnold in Los Angeles.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA COURT VOIDS FRAUD,CONDEMNATION, NUISANCECLAIMS AGAINST TANC     A California Superior Court judge ruled Nov. 21 that theplaintiffs failed to meet their burden of proving that theTransmission Agency of Northern California (TANC) committed fraudin refusing to disclose the potential dangers of electromagneticfields when it acquired a 200-foot-wide right-of-way across their100-acre farm in 1991.  Jess et al. v. Transmission Agency ofNorthern California et al., No. V-0072568 (CA Super. Ct., AlamedaCty.); see Utilities Industry LR, Feb. 15, 1994.     Judge Richard A. Hodge said that although TANC had a duty toinform John Jess Jr. and his wife, Nell Jess, of the "existenceof a public controversy" concerning the effects of EMF on humanhealth, TANC did not defraud the couple when TANC right-of-wayagent Robert Gray negotiated a deal to purchase the 11.4-acrestrip of land for $80,960.  Claims for reasonably foreseeablehealth hazards resulting from the placement of the 500kVtransmission line, the court added, are moot under a waivercontained in the right-of-way contract.     The fraud, inverse condemnation and nuisance suit chargedTANC with failure to reveal that the operation of the line atfull capacity would result in a 1 milligauss (mG) EMF or moreover an area of up to 600 feet from the center of thetransmission line.  The complainants said there was a diminutionof the value of their property as a result of the EMF and thatthere was an interference with their use and enjoyment of theirproperty.     Weighing the testimony of opposing property appraisers,Judge Hodge said the estimated valuation drop suggested byclaimants' appraiser Arthur Gimmy was inconclusive because itfailed to differentiate between the loss attributed to EMF fearand that due to the general installation of a high voltage lineacross a rural property.     "The court...was not persuaded that Mr. Gimmy had adequatelydistinguished loss of value from perceived health problems fromloss of value attributed to the manifold negatives otherwiseassociated with transmission lines," Judge Hodge wrote.  "In thisregard, it is important to observe that the plaintiffs negotiatedtheir easement and right-of-way contracts with full appreciationof the visual, aural, and 'convenience' negatives.  Presumably,the plaintiffs calculated these negatives in their acceptance ofthe $80,960 contract price."     The court ruled, "The fact that EMF MAY engender biologicaleffects of unknown consequence is not sufficient to establish abasis for damages.  Plaintiffs' proof of actual harm derived fromasserted biological effects of EMF has been singularly lacking inpersuasive force."     Judge Hodge concluded, "Plaintiffs have failed to meet theirburden of proof to establish fraud, inverse condemnation ornuisance.  Plaintiffs have failed to establish any damages.There is no established nexus between EMF exposure and any knownhealth hazard.  While a diminution in property value may beexpected from the proximity to EMF transmission lines, hereplaintiffs have been unable to demonstrate any diminution invalue attributable specifically  to the fear of health hazards asopposed to other of the known detriments.  Plaintiffs negotiatedand accepted a price for the easement which accurately reflectedthe damage to their property."     TANC is represented by Ivor E. Samson of Sonnenschein Nath &Rosenthal and by Valerie Smith Boyd of Marron, Reid & Sheehy,both of San Francisco.  The plaintiffs are represented by Paul N.McCloskey Jr. and John J. Keating of the Law Office of JohnKeating in Woodside, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19969TH CIR. DETERMINES HEALTHASSESSMENT TO CONSTITUTEREMOVAL OR RESPONSE     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 7 affirmed aWashington federal court's dismissal of a citizens' group's bidto compel the Agency for Toxic Research and Disease Registry(ATSDR) to initiate a health assessment program in the region ofthe Hanford Nuclear Reservation.  Hanford Downwinders Coalitionet al. v. Dowdle et al., No. 94-35100 (9th Cir.).     (The opinion is available from Andrews Document AccessService.)     The panel agreed that no federal court jurisdiction existedover the claim and concluded that the ATSDR's ongoing healthassessment activity in the region constituted a removal orremedial action for the purposes of CERCLA's Timing of Reviewprovision.     The litigation stems from ongoing cleanup efforts at theHanford facility in Richland, WA, which for some 30 yearsproduced plutonium for the Department of Defense.  The facilitygenerated releases of radioactive iodine and other hazardoussubstances into the atmosphere, soil and water of the region.     In 1988, the EPA proposed adding the Hanford site to theNational Priorities List (NPL).  The following year, the EPA,Department of Energy and Washington Department of Ecologyoutlined their response.  The ATSDR was assigned specificresponsibilities under the response plan to prepare preliminaryhealth assessments, and was given the discretion to expand themto full health assessments if warranted.     The Hanford site has remained the subject of continuedresearch by the ATSDR.  In 1993, the ATSDR declared the site tobe among the Superfund sites posing the greatest threat to publichealth, and has applied the results of the Centers for DiseaseControl's 1994 study to its criteria for determining whethermedical monitoring would be appropriate.     Plaintiffs Hanford Downwinders Coalition Inc. (HDC) broughtthe instant litigation in July 1993, alleging that the ATSDR hasa mandatory duty under CERCLA Sec. 9604(i)(9) to commence ahealth surveillance program in the region, including medicaltesting and monitoring for individuals exposed to radioactiveiodine.  The Eastern District of Washington granted the defense'sdismissal motion, concluding that the ATSDR's health-relatedactivities at Hanford constituted ongoing removal or responseactivity, and that the plaintiffs' claim was therefore animpermissible challenge.     Affirming, the Ninth Circuit first rejected the plaintiffs'contentions that the language of the statute supported theirconstruction of the statute.  The HDC asserted that when Congressinstructed the ATSDR to "effectuate and implement [CERCLA's]health-related authorities" in Sec. 9604(i)(1) of the statute, itmeant to distinguish these health-related authorities from"response authorities" as defined under Sec. 9604.  "There is noindication that Congress' characterization of ATSDR authoritiesas 'health related' was intended to render the Sec. 9604'response authorities' section superfluous as to ATSDR actions,"the panel rejoined.     The panel found that the language of Sec. 9604(i)(1) "shouldbe read narrowly as a means to distinguish between differenttypes of response authorities, rather than interpreted broadly asan effort to differentiate ATSDR health assessment andsurveillance activity from response actions protected by theTiming of Review provision."     Cautioning that not all Sec. 9604 "response authorities" areto be considered removal or remedial actions per se, the NinthCircuit engaged in an analysis of whether the ATSDR's conductcould be shown to be removal or remedial activity.  "The ATSDRhealth assessment and surveillance activities challenged by theHDC," the panel wrote, "are a necessary part of the government'sefforts to safeguard the public health at NPL sites....  [TheATDSR] is an integral part of Congress' effort to protect thehealth of those exposed to hazardous releases from facilitieslisted on the NPL."     The court reconciled the instant case with its holdings inDurfey v. E.I. DuPont (1995) and Price v. U.S. Navy (1994), whichdeclared that independent private actions for medical monitoringwere not removal or remedial actions.  "The reasoning in Durfeyand Price does not apply to health assessment and surveillanceactions engaged in by a governmental agency pursuant to explicitCERCLA provisions," wrote the panel.     The plaintiffs pointed to the structure of CERCLA, notingthat Sec. 9607(a)(4)(A), which provides for the government torecover "all costs of removal or remedial action," is separatefrom Sec. 9607(a)(4)(D), which provides for the recovery of "thecosts of any health assessment" made by the ATSDR.  The panelrejoined that Sec. 9607(a)(4)(D) was in fact part of the 1986SARA amendments, and "decline[d] to read the failure of Congressto accomplish the seamless integration of ATSDR provisions withthe other authorities found under subsection 9607(a)(4)(A) ascompelling proof of Congress' intent to distinguish ATSDRactivities from removal and remedial actions."     The plaintiffs also pointed to the separate treatment ofresponse costs and ATSDR costs in CERCLA Sec. Sec. 9611(a) and9611(c).  Noting the fact that the legislative history was silentas to why the distinction was made, the panel stated itsobligation "to choose the interpretation that is most consistentwith the remainder of the Act."     Having established that the ATSDR's conduct constitutedremoval or remedial action, the Ninth Circuit disposed of HDC'sassertions that the requirements of the Timing of Reviewprovision were otherwise unsatisfied.  The panel looked to its1995 holdings in MESS v. Perry and Razore v. Tulalip Tribes inconcluding that the HDC's suit was a "challenge" to the ongoingremoval or remediation.     Tom H. Foulds, Seattle, represents the appellants.     Elizabeth Ann Peterson of the U.S. Department of Justice,Environment and Natural Resources Division, Washington, DC,represents the appellees.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19969TH CIR. ASKED TO DECIDENGA AND 'HINSHAW' STATUSOF MOJAVE'S CA EXPANSION     In an intervenor's brief filed Dec. 18, Process GasConsumers Group (PGCG) told the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals to reject the California Public Utilities Commission'spetition to vacate two Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionorders asserting regulatory authority over Mojave Pipeline Co.'splanned 400-mile-plus "Northward Expansion" gas transmission linefrom Sycamore, CA to the San Francisco Bay area.  PublicUtilities Commission of the State of California v. Federal EnergyRegulatory Commission, No. 95-70611 (9th Cir.); see relatedstory, Pacific Gas & Electric v. Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission, Utilities Industry LR, June 1995.     PGCG sided with Mojave's Dec. 13 intervenor brief, whichurged the court to affirm FERC authority over the project basedon the FERC's finding that Mojave will neither be (1) engaged inlocal gas distribution and subject to state jurisdiction underNatural Gas Act (NGA) Sec. 717(b); nor (2) under PUC rule throughthe NGA's "Hinshaw Amendment" exemption.     In November, the PUC asked the Ninth Circuit to vacate theFERC orders (No. 61,194, Feb. 15, 1994; No. 61,167, Aug. 4, 1995)that rendered void a 1993 PUC order asserting PUC jurisdictionover the high-pressure line.  The FERC said it holds authorityover the line because it is designed to provide directtransportation-only service to end-users, not local distributionretail sales.     The PUC, however, says the project meets the criteria forHinshaw Amendment exemption from NGA rule, which are that,"(1) the person or facilities must either transport or be legallyauthorized to transport gas which is 'received by such personfrom another person within or at the boundary of a State';(2) 'all the natural gas so received [must be] consumed withinsuch State'; and (3) 'the rates and services of such person andfacilities [must] be subject to regulation by a Statecommission.'"     The PUC argued that "[i]f Mojave's Northward Expansionapplication were granted, both Mojave " the 'person' " and the'facilities' used by Mojave to transport gas received by Mojavein California and ultimately consumed in California, would beexempted from FERC jurisdiction by the plain language of theHinshaw Amendment.  The FERC is therefore, without jurisdictionto grant the expansion certificate requested by Mojave.  Such acertificate can only be granted by the PUC, which has certifiedto the FERC that 'it has regulatory jurisdiction over the ratesand services of the Mojave Pipeline Co. and the facilities usedby Mojave to transport gas received by Mojave in California andultimately consumed in California and that it is exercising suchjurisdiction.'"     On Nov. 14, a joint intervening brief was filed on the PUC'sbehalf by Associated Gas Distributors (AGD), the NationalAssociation of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, Pacific Gas &Electric Co., San Diego Gas & Electric Co. and Toward UtilityRate Normalization, a consumer action agency that saysresidential and small business customers have experiencedsignificant rate hikes in recent years due to interstate pipelinebypass.     AGD and the joint intervenors say the record "amplydemonstrates that Mojave's Northward Expansion project willengage in the local distribution of natural gas and is thereforeexempt from FERC regulation."  The FERC's assertion of authority,they add, is "inconsistent with the statutory language,legislative history, and case law of Sec. 1(b)."     The PGCG added on the FERC's behalf, "The proposedfacilities are not Hinshaw facilities exempt from the NGA.Mojave's pipeline crosses the Arizona-California border,and...Mojave's integrated pipeline transports gas as part of acontinuous stream of interstate commerce.  The fact that some gasmight potentially also be received from Kern River [GasTransmission Co.] in California does not change the interstatecharacter of the transportation.  In order to qualify as aHinshaw pipeline, a pipeline must operate exclusively in onestate; Mojave does not.  The mere existence of an extension orbranch located within a state does not render an integratedinterstate pipeline company a Hinshaw pipeline.  Nor wouldreceipt of gas from another interstate pipeline within the statealter the multi-state pipeline's interstate character."     The PUC brief was filed by PUC attorneys Mark Fogelman,Peter Arth Jr. and Edward W. O'Neill of San Francisco.  Mojave isrepresented by corporate attorney Michael D. Ferguson ofBakersfield, CA, and by Mary Anne Mason, Kenneth L. Wiseman, andKenneth M. Minesinger of Andrews & Kurth L.L.P., in Washington,DC.     The AGD intervenor brief was filed by Frederick Moring andAnn H. Kim of Crowell & Moring in Washington, DC.  PGCG isrepresented by Edward J. Grenier Jr., William H. Penniman, GlenS. Howard and Daniel E. Frank of Sutherland, Asbill & Brennan.All are located in Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CALIFORNIA SUPREME COURTAFFIRMS $1.3M WRONGFULDEMOTION AWARD     A company that demoted two employees without following theprocedures outlined in its personnel manual was ordered to pay$1.3 million in damages to those workers by the CaliforniaSupreme Court on Nov. 13.  Scott et al. v. Pacific Gas andElectric, No. S042601 (CA Sup. Ct.); see Utilities Industry LR,April 19, 1994.     In a unanimous decision on an issue of first impression, thecourt said that there was no reason why an employer's policy thatits employees not be demoted except for good cause could notbecome an implied term of an employment contract.     Plaintiffs C. Byron Scott and Al Johnson were engineers withdefendant Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E)'s technical andecological services unit when they were demoted in 1988.  Justprior to the demotion, PG&E's internal auditing department beganan investigation into Scott's and Johnson's supervisory practicesand outside business interests.  According to court documents,both men were partners in an outside consulting firm, and PG&Ehad been informed of this involvement from the outset.     As a result of the investigation, Scott and Johnson wereaccused of being negligent supervisors and of resolving againstPG&E any conflicts of interest that arose from their dualpositions as proprietors of an outside business and employees ofPG&E.  They were suspended with only a brief explanation of thecharges against them and were denied copies of the report.  Theirresponse to the report was submitted in three days, and containedextensive documentary support for their denials that they favoredvendors or employees of their outside business while employed byPG&E.     Scott and Johnson filed suit, claiming that PG&E breached animplied contract term not to demote employees without good cause.Their theory was based on the company's detailed personnelpolicies, and there was evidence at trial that PG&E intended tobind itself to those disciplinary policies.  There was alsotestimony that neither Scott nor Johnson had shown anyfavoritism.     The jury found in favor of the employees and awarded them$1.325 million in economic damages and $75,000 each for emotionaldistress.  A divided state Court of Appeal reversed, finding acontract action for "wrongful demotion" inherently vague.  Thecourt also concluded that judicial involvement in employmentdecisions short of termination would constitute an unacceptableintrusion into the employer-employee relationship.     The California high court reversed, agreeing with theplaintiffs' argument that their breach of an implied-in-factagreement with PG&E not to be demoted without good cause issubstantially similar to an action for breach of an implied-in-fact contract not to be discharged without good cause.  Thelatter cause of action was held to be enforceable in Foley v.Interactive Data Corp., 47 Cal.3d 654 (1988), noted JusticeStanley Mosk, who delivered the opinion of the court.     The principle that implied contract terms may arise from anemployer's official and unofficial policies and practices is onethat pre-dates Foley, and has not been confined to the area ofwrongful termination, said Justice Mosk.  Where an employerpromises to confer a significant benefit on an employee " such asa promise to restrict termination or provide for severance pay "it is a question of fact whether that promise was reasonablyunderstood by the employee to create a contractual obligation,said the court.  Here the jury resolved that issue in favor ofScott and Johnson.     Turning to the evidence of an implied contract adduced inthe instant case, Justice Mosk concluded that that evidence was"not merely substantial, but compelling."  He cited the companydetailed "positive discipline" and testimony from PG&E's ownhuman resources managers to support the jury's conclusion thatthere was an implied contract, and that its terms were not toovague to enforce.     Scott and Johnson are represented by Christopher Platten ofWylie, McBride, Jesinger, Sure & Platten in San Jose.  Counselfor PG&E is corporate attorney Maureen Fries in San Francisco.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PLAINTIFF IN ILL HEALTHSEEKS EXPEDITED APPEALOF CA DEFENSE VERDICT     The plaintiff in a personal injury suit against the ownersand operators of the St. Onofre Nuclear Generating Station(SONGS) will petition the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appealsthis week for an expedited appeal of a jury verdict in favor ofthe defense after losing a bid for a retrial on Dec. 5, accordingto his attorney, Don Howarth.   James v. Southern CaliforniaEdison Co., No. 94-1085 (SD CA).     Howarth filed a notice of appeal on Dec. 22.  He said thathis client, Glen James, 63, who is suffering from chronicmyelogenous leukemia, is in rapidly deteriorating health and thathe wants to expedite the appeal on James' behalf "while it maystill do him some good."  James, an engineer, worked at SONGS inthe mid-1980s.     Howarth moved for a new trial after the eight-person juryreturned a verdict in favor of defendants Southern CaliforniaEdison and Combustion Engineering Inc. on Oct. 12.  He arguedthat the jury was improperly influenced by the O.J. Simpson trialand by juror misconduct.     Howarth argued that the verdict was against the weight ofthe evidence, that it was the product of improper passion andprejudice and that the jury improperly considered extraneous,prejudicial information.     According to the motion, one of the jurors, GenevieveFitzwater, told the others that she had received radiationtherapy for thyroid cancer and that "it had saved my life."  Inaddition, after the jurors were allowed to watch the verdict inthe O.J. Simpson case, Fitzwater also allegedly told the othersthat they must apply the same "reasonable doubt" standard used inthe Simpson murder case to the evidence in this case.     James also alleged that a second juror told a post-verdictgathering that he had made his mind up for the defense early inthe trial before all of the evidence had been presented and thathe had never wavered in his belief.     Southern District of California Judge Napoleon Jones Jr.rejected all of those arguments, finding that under the FederalRules of Evidence, most of juror Gregory Hafen's declarationsupporting the allegations of juror misconduct is inadmissible.     According to Rule 606(b), a juror may not testify toanything that may have influenced his decision duringdeliberations except on the question of whether extraneousprejudicial information was improperly brought to the jury'sattention.     Under that rule, only Fitzwater's statements about herradiation treatment and applying the reasonable doubt standardmay be admissible if they can be shown to be extraneousinformation and prejudicial by a preponderance of the evidence,Judge Jones said.     He ruled, however, that Fitzwater's alleged statements abouther radiation treatment are not prejudicial extraneousinformation but "are best classified as personal experienceapplied to the evidence in the case...."     Citing to Hard v. Burlington Northern Railroad Co., 870 F.2d61 (9th Cir. 1989), Judge Jones said, "The type of after-acquiredinformation that potentially taints a jury verdict should becarefully distinguished from the general knowledge, opinions,feelings and bias that every juror carries into the jury room."     In Hard, he said, the Ninth Circuit found that it isacceptable for a juror to use his own personal experience tointerpret the evidence in a case.  In addition, even ifFitzwater's statements did constitute impermissible extraneousinformation, the plaintiff failed to show prejudice by apreponderance of the evidence.     On the reasonable doubt issue, Judge Jones found that suchallegations are not admissible because they constitute testimonyon the mental processes of the jury.  He found no Ninth Circuitprecedence on the issue, but he cited two Fifth Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals cases that hold that once a verdict is rendered,the court may not inquire into the jury's deliberative process todetermine if the jury properly followed the court's instructions(United States v. D'Angelo, 598 F.2d 1002 [1979] and Robles v.Exxon Corp., 862 F.2d 1201 [1989]).     In addition to Howarth, the Jameses are represented bySuzelle M. Smith of Howarth & Smith in Los Angeles.  SouthernCalifornia Edison is represented by Jack Reding of Crosby,Heafey, Roach & May in Oakland, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA SUP. CT. TO DECIDEMOBILE HOME SUBMETERSYSTEMS RATE DISPUTE     A consortium of California mobilehome park owners on Sept.12 asked the California Supreme Court to decide if the statePublic Utilities Commission misinterpreted the public utilitiescode in barring park owners from recovering the unreimbursedcosts of operating their submeter utility systems.  WesternMobilehome Parkowners Association et al. v. Public UtilitiesCommission of the State of California, No. S048893 (CA Sup. Ct.).     Western Mobilehome Parkowners Association (WMA) sought thecourt's review after the PUC refused WMA's motion to rehear theissue in August (Decision Nos. 95-02-090 and 95-08-056).  Thegroup, whose members operate 5,780 master-meter/submeter electricand gas distribution systems, says they have been disadvantagedby the PUC's refusal to let them recover, via rent increases,system operation costs above the discounted rate provided bytheir local utility.     WMA says that since Public Utility Code Sec. 739.5(a) doesnot expressly prohibit parkowners from recovering unreimbursedcosts, the PUC has overstepped its authority and has illegallyengaged in rent control by forcing them to make up the differenceout of their pockets.  The PUC issued the ruling after mobilehomepark residents complained they were, in some cases, being double-billed for park system maintenance costs, once in the rates theypaid and again in landlord-imposed rent increases.     The Supreme Court petition maintains that since theimplementation of Sec. 729.5(a), the submetering discountprovided parkowners "has been set based on utility comparablecosts which have been determined to be substantially lower thanthe reasonable costs of master-metered mobilehome park owners ofproviding submetered service."  It adds that "the PSC in D.95-02-090 has now decided that as between owners of mobilehome parksand residents in mobilehome parks, mobilehome park owners mustunderwrite all those reimbursed costs, that is losses incurred inowning, operating and maintaining submetered systems, WITHOUT ANYRECOURSE."     In an Oct. 16 answering brief, the PUC says the issue wasappropriately decided because Sec. 739.5 bars subsystem operatorsfrom recovery of costs above the submetering discount.  The PUCsays the legislative intent of the section was not to allow fullcompensation for subsystem operations, but to give a "sufficientdifferential to cover the reasonable average costs to master-meter customers of providing submeter service."     "Moreover," the PUC added, "the regulation may serve alegitimate public purpose in preventing the potential for thedouble recovery of costs by park owner.  The double recovery mayexist if the leases provide for rents that include the capitalcosts related to the submetered system, and these same costs arefactored into the discount received by the park owner, and thetenants do not receive a credit.  Thus, this double recoverywould be a windfall for the park owner.  The elimination of sucha windfall is a legitimate public interest."     WMA is represented by Richard L. Hamilton and James E. Youngof the Law Office of Richard L. Hamilton in Sacramento.  Theanswer was filed by PUC attorneys Peter Arth Jr. and Helen W. Yeeof San Francisco.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DC CIR. REVERSES FERC'SAPPROVAL OF 'BLENDED RATE'FOR MICHCON GAS SERVICE     Siding with an ANR Pipeline Co. petition that alleged theFederal Energy Regulatory Commission arbitrarily and capriciouslyallowed Michigan Consolidated Gas Co. (MichCon) to employ a"blended rate" schedule for natural gas transport services, theDistrict of Columbia Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 12reversed the FERC ruling and remanded it for further review.  ANRPipeline Co. v. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, No. 94-1705(DC Cir.).     ANR asked the court to review the FERC's decision,complaining that it violated the Commission's own anti-rateblending edict in Order No. 636.  In that order, the FERCmandated use of a straight fixed-variable (SFV) rate plan forintrastate or "Hinshaw" pipelines operating in cooperation withinterstate lines under Sec. 311 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of1978 (NGPA).     The panel noted that ANR opposed MichCon's use of blendedrates as an intervenor in FERC proceedings and that theCommission approved the rate plan despite ANR's insistence thatthe approach would provide MichCon the anticompetitive ability toprovide a discount in its rates under Michigan law, which isunavailable to federally ruled interstate lines.     "The reasons given by FERC fail to explain why MichCon'sblended rates would not present the ills that FERC concluded inOrder No. 636 would result from continued authority to blendrates," said the DC Circuit in an opinion written by Judge JudithW. Rogers.  On remand, said the panel, the FERC must addressANR's concerns about MichCon's use of blended rates and"...provide a reasonable justification for excluding MichCon fromthe SFV requirements, in view of FERC's conclusions about rateblending and about the necessity of the SFV rate method topromoting congressional directives for a natural gas market."     The court added that the FERC "missed the point" when itanswered ANR's rate-blending concerns by holding that ANR andother interstate pipelines can remain competitive by discountingtheir rates.  "A pipeline that cannot blend rates is unable torecover fixed costs foregone as a result of discounting itsdemand charges.  Conversely, a pipeline with the ability to blendrates can recover such fixed costs by shifting them from thedemand charge to the usage charge."     Daniel F. Collins, G. Mark Cook and Christine R. Pembroke ofThe Coastal Corp. represent ANR.  The FERC is represented byCommission Attorney Katherine Waldbauer, Solicitor Jerome M.Feit, and Deputy Solicitor Joseph S. Davies.  All are located inWashington, DC.  Intervenor MichCon is represented by corporateattorney Dennis R. O'Connell of Detroit and Steven H. Neinast ofJenner & Block in Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA SUP. CT. ASKED TOREVIEW REQUEST FORGAS CONTRACT DATA     The California Supreme Court has been asked by two utilityconsortiums to issue a writ of mandate compelling the statePublic Utilities Commission to open its files on four SouthernCalifornia Gas Co. (SoCalGas) natural gas transmission contractsfor inspection under the provisions of the California PublicRecords Act.  Southern California Utility Power Pool et al. v.Public Utilities Commission of the State of California; SouthernCalifornia Gas Co., real party in interest, No. S049667 (CASup. Ct.).               Southern California Utility Power Pool (SCUPP) and ImperialIrrigation District (IID) comprise publicly owned utilities thatsay the PUC violated the public access provision of Sec. 6250-65when it denied their access requests as contrary to the publicinterest.  The PUC conceded that while California Public UtilityCode Sec. 489 charges utilities with the responsibility of filingand keeping "open to public inspection," rate schedules andcontracts that affect rates, SCUPP and IID, as potential SoCalGascompetitors, are not entitled to view the unredacted contracts.     Allowing the petitioners access to the proprietaryinformation on rates charged by SoCalGas under the agreements,said the PUC, would be unfair because neither SCUPP nor IID areunder PUC regulation, thus denying SoCalGas any opportunity ofrequesting inspection of their transmission agreements.  Each ofthe pacts at issue was approved under the PUC's "ExpeditedApplication Docket" (EAD) process, which allows transmissioncompanies to provide discounts for customers threatening to"bypass" the utility for another power source.     The PUC's reciprocity argument, says SCUPP/IID, is"misplaced" because "neither the members of SCUPP nor IID competewith SoCalGas to provide gas transmission service.  They operatepublicly owned electric utility systems that consume gas togenerate electricity for their retail electric customers."  SCUPPincludes the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and thecities of Burbank, Glendale and Pasadena.     The petitioners told the Supreme Court that the PUC deniedthe request despite the fact that it knew the contracts were noteligible for exemption from public inspection under the Act."For an agency to properly apply the law that it is empowered toenforce, it must first look to the language of the statute todetermine if it is clear.  If the language is clear, the agencymust apply that language," argued SCUPP and IID.  "It is notwithin the discretion of the agency to rewrite the provisions ofthe relevant statute to fit its goals.  Any actions that areinconsistent with the clear pronouncement of the legislature mustbe overturned."     In a Dec. 1 answer, the PUC said its actions were warrantedunder Public Records Act Sec. 6255, which holds that "the agencyshall justify withholding any record by demonstrating that therecord in question is exempt under express provisions of thischapter or that on the facts of the particular case the publicinterest served by not making the record public clearly outweighsthe public interest served by disclosure of the record."     The PUC contended that "SCUPP/IID can ignore Commissionorders to disclose records while demanding (as it does here) thatthe Commission order SoCalGas to disclose the very same type ofdocument.  The legislature did not intend to create unfaircompetition.  That is exactly what will happen under SCUPP/IID'sversion of the law in this case in that SoCalGas would be placedin an unfair competitive position in negotiations with SCUPP/IIDand other entities if disclosure of its similar gas contracts isrequired.  On these facts, the conclusion that non-disclosureoutweighs disclosure was lawful."     On Nov. 21, SoCalGas, as real party in interest, filed aSupreme Court brief opposing the writ petition.  It said the PUCproperly based its denial of the contract access requests on theincreasingly competitive California natural gas market.  "TheCommission's EAD decision noted that in light of the imminentthreat of bypass of historic public utility facilities (two majornew interstate pipelines have commenced service in Californiasince 1990, providing service to customers previously served bySoCalGas), the Commission determined to prevent public disclosureof the information in arrangements which could be detrimental tothe competitive position of the public utility company and itsremaining ratepayers during the period such bypass threatscontinue.     SoCalGas says the Records Act, based on the federal Freedomof Information Act, "was enacted with the clear intent to exemptfrom disclosure those documents on file with the governmentwhich, if made available, would result in business disadvantageto a company vis-a-vis its competition."  SCUPP and IID'sdiscussion of the Act, it adds, "fails to comment specifically onthe long-standing exception to disclosure for BOTH corporatetrade secrets and commercial information likely to causecompetitive harm."     The petitioners are represented by Norman A. Pederson andKirstin Porter-Whitley of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue in LosAngeles.  The PUC is represented by agency attorneys Peter ArthJr., William N. Foley and Lawrence Q. Garcia of San Francisco.The SoCalGas response was filed by corporate attorneys Daniel G.Clement and Norman J. Provost.  All are located in Los Angeles.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NC COURT OF APPEALSDENIES EASEMENT FORUTILITY INSTALLATION     An easement that does not expressly permit access forutilities cannot be judicially expanded to authorize installationof underground utility and telephone lines, the North CarolinaCourt of Appeals ruled Nov. 21 in a 2-1 decision.  Swaim v.Simpson et al., No. COA94-1205 (NC Ct. App.).     The majority said the easement holder is bound by theexpress and limited language of the conveyance.     Rickey Swaim was granted a recorded easement to hisresidential lot for a "right of way for ingress and egress" overa lot owned by Elmer and Joan Simpson in Yadkin County, NC.After the Simpsons refused him permission to install undergroundutility and phone lines along the easement, Swaim filed adeclaratory judgment complaint in Yadkin County District Court,where Judge Samuel L. Osborne granted summary judgment in favorof Swaim.     The Court of Appeals reversed in a majority opinion by ChiefJudge Gerald Arnold.  Once an easement is established, theeasement holder cannot change the use for which it was created ina way that increases the burden on the subservient land, said thepanel.  Allowing the location, installation and maintenance offacilities for domestic utilities on the Simpsons' property wouldincrease that burden, it said, and the easement cannot bejudicially expanded.     Dissenting, Judge Clifton E. Johnson said Swaim'sunderground utilities would not encumber the Simpsons' propertyor use of the easement.  He also said it is reasonable tointerpret the easement language as including the right to installutilities to a residential lot.     C.R. "Skip" Long Jr. of Morrow, Alexander, Tash & Longrepresented the Simpsons.  N. Lawrence Hudspeth III and DouglasP. Mayo of Shore Hudspeth & Harding appeared for Swaim.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-11IA059-000325-B008-218http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey12.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235536 text/html 53734HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:53:43 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:52 GMTContent-length: 53547Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey12.html Sample Issue Copyright UTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT; UTILITY REVENUES AND RATES * CONSEQUENCES OF FEDERAL UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) LEGISLATION TO UTILITIES (307 words) UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS: 1989 THROUGH 1998 (308 words) IMPACT EVALUATION OF UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMS (220 words) IMPACTS OF ELECTRIC UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMS ON ELECTRICITY PRICE (282 words) STUDY OF NET LOSS REVENUE ADJUSTMENTS FOR UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMS (255 words) A SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT MODEL FOR STUDYING THE DEMOGRAPHIC IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVE UTILITY RATE DESIGNS (229 words) ELECTRIC AND GAS RATES FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL SECTORS IN 1994 FOR 45 U.S. CITIES (191 words) ** ELECTRICITY; ELECTRIC UTILITIES; POWER PLANTS ** STUDY OF THE EXTENT OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN THE PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY (176 words) INVENTORY OF POWER PLANTS IN THE U.S. (102 words) ELECTRIC UTILITIES' ROLE IN BUILDING THE NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (NII) (310 words) ANALYSIS OF THE NET ENERGY DIFFERENCES FROM DIFFERENT ELECTRICITY GENERATING SYSTEMS (118 words) THE WHEELING OF COGENERATED POWER (103 words) ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELD LEVELS FROM HIGH-VOLTAGE TRANSMISSION LINES VERSUS THEIR DESIGN OPTIONS AND COST (159 words) SUPERCONDUCTIVITY FOR ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS (184 words) CONCERNS REGARDING ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL EFFICIENCY IN COMPETITIVE POWER MARKETS (245 words) ELECTRICITY REGULATION IN GERMANY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE EUROPEAN MARKET (330 words) HOW A SMALL ENVIRONMENTAL GROUP HELPED REFORM ELECTRIC UTILITY REGULATION (163 words) ** HEATING; COOLING; HEAT TRANSFER; COMBUSTION ** INDUSTRIAL MICROWAVE HEATING AND EQUIPMENT (134 words) THERMAL BARRIER COATINGS (172 words) ** TRANSPORTATION ENERGY ** THE TRANSPORTATION ENERGY DATA BOOK (167 words) FLEET DEMONSTRATION OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS FOR VEHICLES (107 words) INTERNATIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE PROGRAMS AND POLICIES AND THEIR LIKELY CONSEQUENCES (97 words) A NATURAL GAS CONVERSION VEHICLE PROJECT FOR MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (125 words) ** ALCOHOL AS A FUEL ** DIRECT CONVERSION OF METHANE TO METHANOL (129 words) THE NET ENERGY BALANCE OF CORN ETHANOL (130 words) ** SOLAR ENERGY ** SOLAR ENERGY STORAGE APPLIED TO PHOTOCHEMISTRY (149 words) REVIEW OF DOE'S SOLAR INDUSTRIAL PROGRAM (104 words) ** BATTERIES ** HIGH ENERGY DENSITY BATTERIES (224 words) DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATIONS OF ALUMINUM-AIR BATTERIES (161 words) OPPORTUNITIES FOR BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE IN UTILITY APPLICATIONS (86 words) POLYMERIC BATTERIES (128 words) MONITORING THE STATE OF CHARGE OF BATTERIES (103 words) ** NEW ENERGY R&D IN JAPAN ** NEW ENERGY R&D IN JAPAN (177 words) CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONSEQUENCES OF FEDERAL UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT(DSM) LEGISLATION TO UTILITIESThis (Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) paperreviews some of the potential consequences of recentfederal legislation on Demand-Side Management (DSM) toutilities.  It covers the 1992 Energy Policy Act(EPAct), the 1990 Amendments to the Clean Air Act, andFERC Order No. 636.  The paper: outlines the contentsof the federal legislation regarding utility DSMprograms; explains some of the impacts of these lawsand regulations on utility programs, particularly thelikely effects with respect to the emerging competitiveutility market; and seeks to understand where and howaction will be needed to carry out many of theprovisions of these laws in the most cost-effectivemanner.Examples of specific activities regarding DSM inPennsylvania are included for illustration.  Each ofthe federal laws under discussion is unique in terms oforigin, goals, and focus; nevertheless they all focuson the regulated energy industries in such a way thattheir effects tend to combine to force massive changes.In the regulated electric and natural gas industries,this synergy is compounding the complexity ofmanagement and, at least in the short term,contributing to increases in the cost of doingbusiness.  In the long term, these federal initiativesare likely to lead to a massive reassessment ofstate-regulated energy sources in production and enduse, and their environmental consequences.  The overalleffect of all three pieces of legislation is toincrease competition among the state-regulatedutilities.  The differences between competitive andregulated industries are also noted in an effort toexplain the effect of inducing competition among energyutilities.  This has particular relevance toutility-sponsored energy-efficiency programs such asDSM, and other customer-assistance activities.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960101; Mar. 1994,7 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS: 1989 THROUGH1998Over the pest five years, the Energy InformationAdministration (EIA) has been collecting data annuallyfrom U.S. electric utilities on their Demand-SideManagement (DSM) programs, both current and projected.The latest data, presented in this (Oak Ridge NationalLaboratory) report, cover activities for 1993 andprojections for 1994 and 1998.In 1993, 991 utilities operated DSM programs and spent$2.8 billion, a 13% increase over 1992 expenditures.These and earlier DSM programs saved 44,000 GWh ofenergy and reduced potential peak demand by 40,000 MW,30% and 22% increases over the 1992 values,respectively.  While some people predict the demise ofelectric-utility DSM programs, the data do not paint asbleak a picture.  In most parts of the country, DSMprograms grew in 1993, and utilities (as of Spring1994) projected continued growth through 1998.Expenditures grew from 1.3% of revenues in 1992 to 1.5%in 1993, and are expected to grow 2.5% per year fasterthan inflation.  Thus, DSM spending is expected to stayconstant at 1.5% of revenues through 1998.Because of the cumulative effect of DSM programs,energy savings are expected to grow from 1.2% of salesin 1992 to 1.6% in 1993 and 3.0% in 1998.  Potentialpeak reductions are expected to increase from 5 9% ofpeak demand in 1992 to 6.8% in 1993 and 8.9% in 1998;however this growth in spending is not as rapid as the8% annual real growth projected a year earlier. Actualexpenditures in 1993 were 6.5% lower than projectedearly that year; while energy savings were the same asprojected earlier.  Potential peak reductions wereactually 9% higher than previously projected.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960102; Feb. 1995,47 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMPACT EVALUATION OF UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT(DSM) PROGRAMSOver the past several years, four of the largestinvestor-owned California utilities have completed morethan 50 evaluation studies designed to measure theenergy and demand impacts of their Demand-SideManagement (DSM) programs.  The four utilities are:Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern CaliforniaEdison (SCE), Southern California Gas (SoCalGas), andSan Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E).  These studiescover residential, commercial, industrial, andagricultural DSM programs and provide a wealth ofinformation on program impacts.This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) report summarizesthe results of these DSM evaluation studies in order todescribe what DSM has achieved in California.  Itassesses how well these achievements were forecast andcompares the effectiveness of the different types ofDSM programs.  It also documents the sizableinvestments made by the California utilities in their1990-1992 DSM programs.  Between 1990 and 1992, thefour utilities spent $772 million on energy-efficiencyand energy-conservation programs.  The reportsummarizes the realization rates estimated by the50+ evaluation studies.  Realization rates -- definedas ex-post net savings estimates divided by ex-ante netsavings estimates -- are summarized for 158 programsand program segments.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960103; Oct. 1994,84 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMPACTS OF ELECTRIC UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT(DSM) PROGRAMS ON ELECTRICITY PRICEAs competition in the electricity industry increases,utilities (and others) worry more about the upwardpressure on electricity prices that Demand-SideManagement (DSM) programs often impose.  Because ofthese concerns, several utilities have recently reducedthe scope of their DSM programs, or have focused themmore on customer service and peak-demand reductions andless on improving energy efficiency.This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) study uses ORFIN(the Oak Ridge Financial Model) to calculate the rateimpacts of DSM.  ORFIN is used to examine the twofactors that contribute to DSM's upward pressure onprices: (1) the cost of the programs themselves; and(2) the loss of revenue associated with fixed-costrecovery.  The second factor reflects the reduction inrevenues caused by the DSM-induced energy and demandsavings that exceed the reduction in utility costs.The analysis examines DSM price impacts as functions ofthe following factors: (1) the DSM program itself,including: cost; conservation load factor; geographicfocus on deferral of transmission and distributioninvestments; and mix across customer classes; (2) theutility's cost and pricing structures, which includefactors at least partly under the utility's control,such as: retail tariffs; fixed vs. variable operatingcosts; and capital costs not related to kW or kWhgrowth; and (3) external economic and regulatoryfactors, including: the level and temporal pattern ofavoided energy and capacity costs; rate-basing vs.expensing of DSM-program costs; shareholder incentivesfor DSM programs; load growth; and the rates forincome, property, and revenue taxes.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960104; Nov. 1994,33 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996STUDY OF NET LOSS REVENUE ADJUSTMENTS FOR UTILITYDEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMSUtility shareholders can lose money on Demand-SideManagement (DSM) investments between rate cases.Several industry analysts argue that the revenues lostfrom utility DSM programs are an important financialdisincentive to utility DSM investment.  A key utilityregulatory reform undertaken since 1989 allowsutilities to recover the lost revenues incurred throughsuccessful operation of DSM programs.  Explicitlydefined net lost revenue adjustment (NLRA) mechanismsare the states' preferred approach to lost-revenuerecovery from DSM programs.This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) report examinesthe experiences that states and utilities are havingwith the NLRA approach.  The report: determines whetherNLRA is a feasible and successful approach to removingthe cost-revenue disincentive to utility operation ofDSM programs; identifies the conditions linked tosuccessful implementation of NLRA mechanisms indifferent states; assesses whether NLRA has changedutility investment behavior; suggests improvements toNLRA mechanisms; identifies states having NLRAmechanisms where utilities are recovering cost revenuesfrom DSM programs, through interviews of regulatoryagency staffs in these states and utility staffs infour states; analyzes regulatory agency ordersinvolving NLRA, as well as associated testimony,reports, and utility lost revenue recovery filings; anduses qualitative and quantitative indicators to assessNLRA's effectiveness. Contrary to the concerns raisedby some industry analysts, the results indicate thatNLRA is a feasible approach to the lost-revenuedisincentive.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960105; Jan. 1995,112 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996A SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT MODEL FOR STUDYING THEDEMOGRAPHIC IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVE UTILITY RATE DESIGNSHistorically, utility customers have beendifferentiated into various customer classes based ontheir utility service demand characteristics.  This(Argonne National Laboratory) paper argues that greaterdifferentiation based on value and cost of service canbe justified on grounds of economic efficiency, and ifdone properly, can also promote economic equity.  Doingthis would require a break with traditional customerclassifications.  With this break, more detailedinformation on how and why certain utility services areconsumed would be required.In line with the issue of heterogeneity within theresidential customer class, is the differential impactthat different utility rates might have on differentpopulation groups.  The paper shows how differences inthe pattern of energy use may give rise to disparateeconomic impacts, depending on the rate structure, andhow more equitable and efficient outcomes might beachieved if these differences are taken into account.For this purpose, an analytical model has beendeveloped.  The Energy Policy Socioeconomic ImpactModel (EPSIM) is an econometric simulation model toassess the economic impact of utility rate designs andDemand-Side Management programs on various populationgroups.  The paper provides a conceptual description ofthe theoretical underpinnings associated with theEPSIM.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960106; 1994,11 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRIC AND GAS RATES FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, ANDINDUSTRIAL SECTORS IN 1994 FOR 45 U.S. CITIESThis 2-volume report (by Casazza, Schultz andAssociates) contains electric and gas rates for theresidential, commercial, and industrial sectors in45 U.S. cities during 1994.  The rates were collectedfrom the utilities that serve the 45 cities involved inthe study.  These rates apply to the residential,commercial, and industrial sectors of service andinclude both general service and various innovativerate structures.  The information compiled from theutilities is compared to data from other sources toensure consistency.  Additional contacts were made withspecific utilities to resolve observed conflicts ofinformation.  The information is organized in severallengthy appendixes (A, B, and C in Volume 1, and D, E,F, and G in Volume 2) with introductory explanatorychapters in Volume 1.  Appendixes D and E provide rateabstracts for the South and West regions; Appendix Fprovides a list of known utility rate revisions; andAppendix G provides 1994 utility sales data.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960107; Mar. 1995,1011 pp. in 2 vols.  Price: $999.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996STUDY OF THE EXTENT OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN THEPRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITYThis (Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) studyfocuses on technological change in electricityproduction.  The study is based on empirical economicresearch on production functions in the electricutility industry.  It advances a seldom used approach,called the engineering-production function, instead ofthe more common neoclassical approach used byeconomists.  Combined with this approach is a majordeparture from the type of data used to conducteconometric estimations of production parameters.  Theresearch draws upon a consistent set of ex-ante orblueprint data that better reflects planned technicalperformance and cost data elements, in contrast to themore customary expect-type of data from actual firmand/or plant operations.  The results from theexamination of coal-fired technologies indicate thepresence of technical change.  Using data for theperiod 1979 to 1989, it finds technical change to becapital-augmenting at the rate of 1.8% per year.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960108; Jan. 1995,26 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996INVENTORY OF POWER PLANTS IN THE U.S.This (DOE) report provides 1993 year-end statisticsabout electric generating units operated by electricutilities in the U.S. (all 50 states and the Districtof Columbia).  It also provides a 10-year outlook offuture generating unit additions in the U.S.  The datasummarized in the report are useful to a wide audienceinvolved with governmental activities, privateindustry, personnel involved with the electric utilityindustry, and the general public.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960109; Dec. 1994,388 pp.  Price: $409.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRIC UTILITIES' ROLE IN BUILDING THE NATIONALINFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (NII)In two particular aspects, from a lawyer's perspective,that are briefly investigated in this (DOE) study ,electric utilities appear uniquely well-positioned tocontribute to the National Information Infrastructure(NII).One aspect concerns the legal powers that utilitieshave derived from their charters and operatingauthorities and confirmed in their rights-of-way, tocarry out activities and functions necessary fordelivering electric service.  These activities andfunctions include building telecommunicationsfacilities and undertaking information services thatare essential to manage electricity demand and supply.The economic value, to utilities and society, from theefficiencies made possible by telecommunications andinformation could be substantial.  How great remains tobe established, but by many estimates, electric utilityapplications could fund a significant share of thecapital costs of building the NII.  Although utilities'legal powers to pursue such efficiencies throughtelecommunications and information appear beyonddispute, it is likely that effort to do so will producesubstantial excess capacity.  Who will benefit fromthis excess capacity is a potentially contentiouspolitical question that demands early resolution.  Willthis windfall go to the utility, the customer, or noone because of political paralysis, or will there besome equitable and practical split.A second aspect, one of inquiry, points to anothercontemporary issue of very great societal importancethat could very well become the platform on which thefirst question can be resolved fortuitously: how toachieve universal telecommunications service.  In theeffort to fashion the NII that will now continue, waysand means to maximize the unique potential contributionof electric utilities to meet important social andeconomic needs -- in particular, universal service --merit priority attention.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960110; Nov. 1994,38 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ANALYSIS OF THE NET ENERGY DIFFERENCES FROM DIFFERENTELECTRICITY GENERATING SYSTEMSThis translation from Austria (the International AtomicEnergy Agency) is a report on the net energy analysisof nuclear power and other electricity generationsystems.  The report provides a comprehensive review ofthe state of knowledge on net energy analysis ofnuclear and other energy systems for electricitygeneration, and addresses traditional questions such aswhether nuclear power is a net energy producer or not.In addition, the report discusses work in progress onrenewed application of the net energy analysis methodto environmental issues.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960111; July 1994,107 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE WHEELING OF COGENERATED POWERThis (Engineering Research and Consulting Inc.) reportconcerns project considerations and design systems forthe wheeling of cogenerated power.  The term "wheelingelectric power" refers to utility transmission of powerthat it doesn't own.  The term "cogeneration" refers tosimultaneous production of electric and thermal powerfrom an energy source that, in many instances, is moreefficient and less expensive than separate productionof electricity and thermal power alone.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960112; Aug. 1994,94 pp.  Price: $119.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELD LEVELS FROM HIGH-VOLTAGETRANSMISSION LINES VERSUS THEIR DESIGN OPTIONS AND COSTThis (Argonne National Laboratory) report providesbackground information regarding electric and magneticfields (EMFs) of high-voltage transmission lines attypical voltages and line configurations and typicaltransmission line design-option costs, to assist withalternatives for environmental control of fieldstrengths.  EMF strengths up to 200 ft from atransmission-conductor centerline are calculated for:an ac overhead line; a 345-kV and a 230-kV acunderground line; and a (+ or -)450-kV dc overheadline.  Compacting and height sensitivity factors arecomputed for variation in EMFs when the line conductorsare moved closer or raised.  Estimated costs for thelines are presented and discussed, so that the impactof using alternative strategies for reducing EMFstrengths, and the implications of implementing thestrategies, can be better appreciated.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960113; Nov. 1994,74 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996SUPERCONDUCTIVITY FOR ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMSThis (NREL) report presents a program overview ofsuperconductivity for use in electric power systems.Largely due to government and private industrypartnerships, electric power applications based uponhigh-temperature superconductivity are now beingdesigned and tested, only 7 years after the discoveryof high-temperature superconductors.  Theseapplications offer many benefits to the nationalelectric system, including: increased energyefficiency; reduced equipment size; reduced emissions;increased stability/reliability; deferred expansion;and flexible electricity dispatch/load management.  Allof these benefits have a common outcome: lowerelectricity costs and improved environmental quality.The DOE sponsors research and development through itsSuperconductivity Program for Electric Power Systems,which will help develop the technology needed for U.S.industries to commercialize high-temperaturesuperconductive electric power applications.  The DOEenvisions that by the year 2010, the U.S. electricpower systems equipment industry will regain a majorshare of the global market by offering superconductingproducts that outperform the competition.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960114; Feb. 1995,12 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONCERNS REGARDING ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL EFFICIENCYIN COMPETITIVE POWER MARKETSFor years the electric utility industry operated as aregulated monopoly, largely immune to market forcesexcept those of competing fuels.  That era came to anend with the Public Utilities Regulatory Policy Act(PURPA) of 1974, which created a market for non-utilitygenerated power. Within 20 years, non-regulatednon-utility generators have become the primary supplierof new energy resources.  Their market power is matchedby their political power, as evidenced in the EnergyPolicy Act of 1994 (EPAct) that requires open access toutility transmission lines to facilitate inter-utilitybulk power sales.Conventional wisdom regarding this issue believes thatactive wholesale power markets with competition amongalternative generators will lead to lowerpower-development costs and cheaper retail powerprices.  However, the trend towards alternative bulkpower sources at low prices intersects with largeretail power customers' interests in accessingalternative power supplies.  In many instances, thesealternatives to local utilities are at a lower costthan retail rates.For the most part, proponents of generation competitionhave remained silent about potential environmentalconsequences.  However, skeptics of increasedcompetition, including some major environmental groups,cite environmental impacts among their concerns.  This(Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) paper dealswith energy and environmental efficiency in competitivepower markets, and examines these concerns.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960115; Feb. 1995,16 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRICITY REGULATION IN GERMANY IN THE CONTEXT OF THEEUROPEAN MARKETThis translation from Germany (Oldenburg University)concerns electricity regulation in Germany in thecontext of the European Market.  It presents a surveyof the electric power regulatory thinking and situationin Germany with respect to ongoing European Marketreform.  Electric utilities in Germany are semi-publicor private enterprises having a wide variety of size.The large producer-utilities operate the high voltagegrid on the basis of private contracts.  Regionaldistribution companies, mostly without a considerableshare in production and often in cooperation with localdistributors, deliver electricity in the non-urbanareas; whereas mostly city-owned electric utilitiessupply the large cities, often with a considerableshare of electricity produced in cogeneration plants.In the past, the equilibrium between the parts of thissystem was ensured by a legal framework that protectedlocal monopolies, as well as by long-term contractsbetween producers and distributors.  This equilibriumderived its stability from political, more theneconomic, factors.Now, deregulation trends inherent in European Marketlegislation on competition threaten this stability.  Inthe first phase of this legislation, resistance againsta more competitive order seemed unanimous.  Since thattime, however, the different players have had time torethink their positionS.  The European Council has nowproposed a more moderate regulation, taking intoaccount the large differences among the differentmember countries.  The German Government has made aproposal for some important changes in the EuropeanMarket Energy Law and connected passages in theCompetition Law, which would introduce somemore-competitive elements into the system.  Wholesaleproducers and regional distributors, as well ascustomer groups, are in favor of this reform, whereasthe local distributors fear they will become the losersin the ongoing reform process.  Environmentalistsexpress concern that a more competitive order couldlead to a lowering of environmental standards.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960116; June 1994,18 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996HOW A SMALL ENVIRONMENTAL GROUP HELPED REFORM ELECTRICUTILITY REGULATIONThis (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) paper tells astory about David and Goliaths; how a smallenvironmental group helped reform electric utilityregulation.  In 1991, the Land and Water Fund of theRockies (LAW Fund) -- a regional environmentalorganization -- started an energy project with twolawyers and a scientist to challenge theenergy-efficiency, renewable-resource, andenvironmental-protection practices of utilities in thevast six-state Rocky Mountain region.  Within threeyears, Colorado and Utah had adopted comprehensiveIntegrated Resource Planning (IRP) rules, and severalutilities had developed plans to expand theirDemand-Side Management (DSM) activities.  The paperdiscusses the role that this small band of lawyers andpolicy analysts played in stimulating these changes.It also comments on the substantial influence andvaluable services that such a small group can provide.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960117; 1994, 8 pp.Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDUSTRIAL MICROWAVE HEATING AND EQUIPMENTThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns industrial uses and the design of microwaveheating equipment.  Included are: heating and drying ofpaper; industrial process heat; vulcanization; textileprocessing; metallurgical heat for sintering andceramic manufacturing; food processing; the curing ofpolymers; and more.  The report consists of acollection of abstracts of available reports, papers,studies, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.  It will be updatedto include the most current information available atthe time you place your order.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD508JC, minimum of181 citations as of Oct. 1994.  Price: $279.00,prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THERMAL BARRIER COATINGSThis report (from the INSPEC Database) concernschemical and physical coating methods, performanceevaluations, failure analysis, and heat and corrosionresistant applications involving thermal barriercoatings. Various coating methods are covered,including for example: plasma spraying; vapordeposition; sprayed ceramic; sputtering; and diffusion.Other topics include: coating materials; coatingprocesses and equipment; substrate-coatingcompatibility; thermal shock resistance;yttria-stabilized zirconia coatings; coating aging anddegradation; coating life prediction; and more.Applications involving hot corrosion and erosiveenvironments for gas turbines and components areemphasized.  The report consists of a collection ofabstracts of available reports, papers, studies, andother documentation, with references for theiracquisition and extensive indexing to make it easy tofind exactly what you want.  It will be updated toinclude the most current information available at thetime you place your order.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD508P, minimum of161 citations as of Nov. 1994.  Price: $279.00,prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE TRANSPORTATION ENERGY DATA BOOKThis (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) transportationenergy data book is a desk-top reference that presentsan assembly and display of statistics and informationthat characterize transportation activity and presentdata on the factors that influence transportationenergy use.  It presents relevant statistical data inthe form of tables and graphs.  Each of the majortransportation media is treated in separate chapters orsections.   The data book compares U.S. transportationdata with data from other countries, and presentsaggregate energy use and energy supply data for allmodes of transportation.  It covers: the highway mode,including automobiles, trucks, buses, fleet vehicles,federal standards, fuel economies, and high-occupancyvehicle-lane data; household travel behaviorcharacteristics; alternative fuels andalternatively-fueled vehicles; major nonhighway modesof transportation, including air, water, and rail;environmental issues relating to transportation; andmore.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD509L; May 1994,310 pp.  Price: $339.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996FLEET DEMONSTRATION OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS FOR VEHICLESThis (New York State Energy R&D Authority) reportsummarizes the accomplishments and results of the firstfive years of a fleet demonstration program involvingalternative fuels for vehicles.  It covers 24 majortasks involving various kinds of alternative fuels andvarious kinds of vehicles.  The demonstrations involvea wide range of alternative fuel/vehicle hardwaredesigns, software packages, operation of vehiclefleets, and the first steps to establish analternative-fuel infrastructure in New York State.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510DA; Oct. 1994,87 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996INTERNATIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE PROGRAMS AND POLICIESAND THEIR LIKELY CONSEQUENCESThis (GAO) report examines international electricvehicle development and commercialization programs, andthe likely consequences they will have on the futurefor electric vehicles.  The study also encompasses areview of current barriers to electric vehicleimplementation, field visits in seven nations and theU.S. to examine electric vehicle programs and policies,and analyses of electric vehicle effects on economics,energy, and the environment.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510DB; Dec. 1994,138 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996A NATURAL GAS CONVERSION VEHICLE PROJECT FOR MEXICOCITY, MEXICOThis (Power Design International Inc.) report details afeasibility study for the implementation of a naturalgas vehicle conversion project for the Mexico City,Mexico metropolitan area.  It presents the results ofan extensive study done to show cause for theintegration of natural gas powered vehicles, to helpalleviate the low air quality within the Mexico Citymetropolitan area.  The report consists of:geographical information; the design and implementationof a conversion vehicle; and an assessment of theavailability and design of refueling stations.  Itcovers: diagnostics; regulations; technology; andimplementation.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510DC; Sep. 1994,221 pp.  Price: $249.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIRECT CONVERSION OF METHANE TO METHANOLThis (University of Colorado) report covers a programto demonstrate the effectiveness of a catalyticmembrane reactor (a ceramic membrane combined with acatalyst) to solely produce methanol by partialoxidation of methane.  Methanol synthesis andseparation in one step would make methane more valuablefor producing chemicals and fuels.  Both ceramic andmetal membranes are tested, and similar results areobtained.  A cooling tube is inserted inside themembrane reactor to create a low-temperature zone thatrapidly quenches the product stream.  Thisnon-isothermal non-permselective membrane reactor hasproved effective for increasing methanol selectivityduring CH4 oxidation.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510KA; 1994, 8 pp.Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE NET ENERGY BALANCE OF CORN ETHANOLStudies conducted since the late 1970s have estimatedthe net energy value of corn ethanol; however,variations in the data and assumptions used among thestudies have resulted in a wide range of estimates.This (Economic Research Service) study identifies thefactors causing this wide variation and develops a moreconsistent estimate.  It concludes that the net energyvalue of corn ethanol has become positive in recentyears due to technological advances in ethanolconversion and increased efficiency in farm production.It shows that corn ethanol is energy efficient, asindicated by an energy ration of 1.24.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960125; June 1995,22 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996SOLAR ENERGY STORAGE APPLIED TO PHOTOCHEMISTRYThis English-language report from Egypt (Ain ShamsUniversity) presents the proceedings of aninternational conference on solar energy storageapplied to photochemistry (Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 6-11,1993).  The report includes the text of manypresentations, for example: Strategies for solar fuelgeneration; Photobiotechnology: Application ofphotosynthesis to the production of renewable fuels andchemicals; Gold-platinum bimetallic cluster catalystsfor visible light-induced hydrogen production fromwater; Light-induced hydrogen production using wastecompounds as sacrificial electron donors; Purificationof drinking water by irradiation; What's new instereophotolithography?; Heterogeneous and homogeneousphoto-assisted wastewater treatment; Appliedphotochemistry in dental science; Kinetics of sunlightphotodegradation of 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuranin natural water; Supramolecular photochemistry;Luminescent and redox-active dendritic polynuclearmetal complexes; and more.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510MB; Dec. 1993,508 pp.  Price: $559.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996REVIEW OF DOE'S SOLAR INDUSTRIAL PROGRAMThis (DOE) report on the Solar Industrial Program for1994 includes: an overview of the program and itsparticipants and objectives; solar detoxification usingsolar energy to destroy environmental contaminants inair, water, and soil; solar process heat -- thegeneration of industrial quantities of hot water,steam, and hot air from solar energy; and advancedprocesses using concentrated solar energy tomanufacture high-technology materials and to developnew industrial processes.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960127; Mar. 1995,16 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996HIGH ENERGY DENSITY BATTERIESThis report (from the INSPEC Database) concerns highenergy density electric batteries.  It covers, forexample: battery electrolyte materials, such assodium-sulfur, lithium-aluminum, nickel-cadmium,lithium-thionyl, lithium-lead, nickel-iron,nickel-zinc, sodium-sodiumpolysulfide, andalkali-sulfur; test methods for these high energybatteries; molten salt electrochemical studies for highenergy cells; military applications; and more.  Thereport consists of a collection of up to 250 abstractsof the latest available reports, papers, studies, andother documentation, with references for theiracquisition and extensive indexing to make it easy tofind exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960128A; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)A companion report (from the Energy Science andTechnology Database) covering the same subject matteris also available.  The report consists of a collectionof up to 250 abstracts of the latest available reports,papers, studies, and other documentation, withreferences for their acquisition and extensive indexingto make it easy to find exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960128B; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATIONS OF ALUMINUM-AIR BATTERIESThis report (from the Energy Science and TechnologyDatabase) concerns aluminum-air batteries forautomotive and electric utility applications.  Thesebatteries have advantages including high energydensity, long life, light weight, and low cost.  Thereport covers many topics, for instance: controllingelectrolyte conductivity in an aluminum-air batterythrough catalytic reaction or by adding an externalcrystallizer; corrosion prevention of the aluminumalloy electrodes by adding gallium, indium, orthallium; batteries for long-range electric vehicles;battery storage systems for electric power plants; andmore.  The report consists of a collection of up to250 abstracts of the latest available reports, papers,studies, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960129; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996OPPORTUNITIES FOR BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE IN UTILITYAPPLICATIONSThis (Sandia National Laboratories) report details aninitial analysis to: identify specific utilityapplications for energy storage batteries; developengineering requirements for each of them; identifyentry markets for specific battery technologies; assessnational-level benefits for each application.  Input isprovided by representatives from utilities, battery andbattery systems manufacturers, consultants, and others.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960130; Oct. 1994,67 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996POLYMERIC BATTERIESThis report (from the INSPEC Database) concerns thedevelopment, models, and evaluations of polymerelectrolyte batteries, including, among other topics:the design and fabrication of polymeric materials forlithium and solid-state batteries; applications inmarine electric propulsion and electric vehicles;microelectronics; and more.  The report consists of acollection of abstracts of available reports, papers,studies, assessments, and other documentation, withreferences for their acquisition and extensive indexingto make it easy to find exactly what you want.  It willbe updated to include the most current informationavailable at the time you place your order.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960131; latest250 citations.  Price: $319.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996MONITORING THE STATE OF CHARGE OF BATTERIESThis report (from the Energy Science and TechnologyDatabase) concerns the use of electrical or electronicindicators to monitor the state of charge of batteries.The report consists of a collection of up to250 abstracts of the latest available reports, papers,studies, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960132; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996NEW ENERGY R&D IN JAPANThis translation from Japan (by Japan's New EnergyDevelopment Organization) summarizes the implementationplans for R&D projects involving new energy.  Theimplementation plans cover the following energydivisions: coal conversion technology, including coalliquefaction plant development; coal-based hydrogenproduction plant development; entrained-flow coalgasification power generation plant development; solarenergy technology, including polycrystalline and thinfilm solar cell systems development; geothermal hotwater power generation plant development technology;energy conversion and storage technology, includingfuel cell power generation plants development;alcohol/biomass energy technology; geothermal energyresources development, including geothermaldevelopments, promotions, and survey projects; coalresources exploration projects in China and Indonesia;superconductivity technology; new energy promotiondepartment activities; policy planning departmentprojects; and NEDO information center activities.  Theproject themes, R&D contents, states of progress, andannual research budgets in FY 1993, are illustrated inthe report for 58 projects in 11 energy divisions.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD509KB; Apr. 1993,125 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List WT03-B36-12IA059-000325-B008-246http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey14.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235704 text/html 17019HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:54:59 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:53 GMTContent-length: 16832Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey14.html Sample Issue Copyright WORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNet March 23, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WEST AFRICAN DEEP WATER DRILLING SET TO TAKE OFF END YEAR (1160 words) OFFSHORE RIG TOP DRIVE SURVEY (788 words) NORTH SEA SEMI DEMAND TUMBLES (236 words) MEDITERRANEAN MARKET POSSIBLY NOW IN BALANCE (253 words) GULF OF MEXICO JACK-UP MARKET FUTURE UNCLEAR (198 words) CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994WEST AFRICAN DEEP WATER DRILLING SET TO TAKE OFF END YEARA new market for high specification semi-submersibles opens up in deepwater off West Africa at the end of this year.  Suitable drilling unitswill need to be brought in from outside the region to cope with waterdepths varying from 2,500 to over 4,000 feet.Co-operation is likely between the operators planning to drill during1995/6 to reduce mobilisation costs and avoid undue competition withinthe small worldwide pool of suitable rigs.  This will probably limitthe number of deep water rigs required offshore Nigeria to two - one anupgraded third generation or standard fourth generation unit operatingin intermediate water depths of around 2,500 ft, and the other aspecialist deep water rig capable of drilling in 4,000 ft or more.There are also deep water drilling programmes planned elsewhereoffshore West Africa, notably in Angola, but also in Congo, GabonEquatorial Guinea and potentially Namibia.  These could providecontinuing employment for one other deep water unit. The DP drillshipPelerin has begun to establish a foothold in this segment of themarket.Pelerin moved from South East Asia last year to drill two deep waterwells for Elf in the Congo, although the contract was terminated aftera single well.  However, after modifications in Cape Town, Pelerin willdrill two deep water wells for Shell in Block 16 in Angola starting inMay.The critical players in the Nigerian deep water semi market are Shelland Statoil, the latter operating on behalf of the Statoil/BPconsortium.  Statoil and Shell are due to drill up to six wells apiecein the period 1995 to 1997, amounting to approximately six monthsdrilling by each company per year.Initially, the two operators investigated combining their programmes,and sharing a suitable rig.  A pre-tender was issued late last year fora semi for a one year term starting at the end of 1994, with twofurther one year options. Partly as a result of this pre-tender theincompatibility of the two programmes in terms of rig specification andtiming became clear.Both operators require semis equipped with 15,000 psi BOP stacks forprogrammes starting early in 1995.  Shell plans three wells in over2,500 ft of water and one in over 4,000 ft.  Two of these are plannedto be drilled from the first quarter of 1995.  After a four month gapto early 1996, a further two wells will be drilled.  Shell is thenconsidering two further deep water wells in 1997.  In contrast five ofsix wells planned by Statoil are understood to be in around 2,500 ft ofwater, while one well in deeper water is being deferred until 1997.For its programmes in 1995 and 1996, Statoil is believed to consider anupgraded third generation semi to be suitable, whereas Shell will needa more specialised fourth generation deep water rig.  Havingestablished the mutual incompatibility of theirprogrammes, the two operators are now seeking alternative partners tofill the gaps in their requirement with a single rig contract.  Shell istalking to Esso which is planning a well in over 3,250 ft of water inthe third quarter of 1995, and could, with minor adjustment, neatly fillthe gap between Shell's 1995 and 1996 programmes.Statoil is understood to have circulated other operators with theresults of its joint pre-tender exercise with The Norwegian statecompany is expected to tender by early April for a semi to start workat the end of 1994.  As well as attempting to set up a partnership withone or more other operators, it is thought Statoil could base itscontract on anything from one to six firm wells plus options.Other operators in NigeriaOther operators planning deep water wells offshore Nigeria from the endof 1994 have already begun their own market inquiries.  This month Agiphas sought details of availability and indicative rates for a semi forone firm well plus two options starting between December 1994 andFebruary 1995 based on one of two possible scenarios.  Option A isbased on a water depth of 3,600 ft and Option B on a maximum depth of2,650 ft.  In both cases a 15,000 psi BOP, three mud pumps andchain/wire mooring with propulsion assist form the basis of therequirement.  In terms of start date Agip's plans appear to clash withboth Statoil and Shell, so some compromise may need to be worked withone or the other depending whether Agip goes for Option A or B.Among others planning deep water wells off Nigeria, Dupont has alocation in about 2,700 ft of water, although the spud is not nowexpected until late in 1995.  Elf could also drill in 1995, although ithas indicated it might be 1996 before it drills on its acreage inpermits OPL 222 and OPL 223 where the water depth ranges from 3,000 to6,000 ft.  Mobil has yet to formulate definite plans for its deep waterNigerian acreage, but has indicated it intends to work with otheroperators to ensure it has access to a suitable rig at the appropriatetime.Angolan deep water marketApart from its two wells this year with the drillship Pelerin, Shellalso plans three more deep water wells in Angola Block 16 starting inmid-1995.  While it is not yet definite that the Pelerin will beretained for this work, Shell does have options on the rig.  Subject tosuccessfully concluding its initial two well programme with Shell, thePelerin should be well placed to win a further contract with Elf whichis planning a well in Angola Block 17 in 3,300 ft of water spudding inAugust or September 1994.  Also in Angola, BP is operator on Block 15for a consortium including Statoil and Exxon where deep water drillingwill be required, although details of the start date are not yet known.Congo, Gabon, Namibia and Equatorial GuineaElsewhere in West Africa exploration is gradually moving into deeperwater off the edge of the continental shelf.  In Congo, Elf has alreadydrilled a deep water well in 1994 and could return in the next year ortwo to drill deep water well Moho-1. This had previously been plannedfor a 1994 spud.  In Gabon, British Gas could drill a well in 1995 inaround 1800 ft of water, while Shell is planning a well in similardepths on its Kenguerie Marin permit in mid-1996.UMIC/Mobil is understood to be planning a well in 1700 ft of wateroffshore Equatorial Guinea at the end of 1994.  Some acreage in therecently licensed Namibian offshore also includes deep water territory. Norsk Hydro's block is in water depths up to 6,000 ft, but althoughconsideration has been given to drilling a well in around 3,000 ft ofwater, this prospect now appears to have been dropped in favour ofconcentrating on more accessible prospects.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994OFFSHORE RIG TOP DRIVE SURVEYUse of top drives in Americas below world average.The Gulf of Mexico lags behind the rest of the world in the fitting oftop drives or power swivels on offshore rigs.  The top end of the jack-up market in the US Gulf is well supplied with top drives, as would beexpected in an area with so much development drilling.  This is not thecase for the lower specification units.  However, recent increasedcompetition, with many rigs mobilising to the area last year, shouldresult in a rise in the number of top drives fitted.Experience in the North Sea has shown that while there may well be aninitial dayrate premium gained by rigs with top drive, this disappearsas top drive installation becomes a necessity in order to remain in themarket.  All the competitive jack-ups and all the marketed semi-submersibles in the North Sea are equipped with top drive.Just under 52 % of the competitive offshore rig fleet is now equippedwith a top drive or power swivel.  64 % of semis in the world have topdrives, largely reflecting operator preference in the North Sea, wheremany semis are still based.  Only 49 % of jack-ups worldwide have topdrives, reflecting the lower percentage of rigs so equipped in themajor jack-up market, the US Gulf, and in other parts of the Americas.In India top drives are not an ONGC requirement, so statistically thereare a below average number of top drives in the Middle East/Indiaregion.  Top drives are, however, widely used in the Middle East Gulf,and to a slightly lesser extent in the Gulf of Suez.Only three drillships have top drives, just 16 % of the world fleet,principally because drillships are mostly involved in exploratoryrather development drilling.  Of the three which are fitted, Canmar hastwo, and Sonat has one on the Discoverer 534.Rigs with a higher initial capital cost and/or of a more sophisticateddesign tend to be fitted with top drive. (see table p 3)  70 % ofdeeper water jack-ups and 86 semis are equipped with top drive or a powerswivel.  Many older rigs are not marketed, and upgrades are notcontemplated, so the percentage of marketed rigs with top drive or apower swivel .  Many older rigs with top drives amongst 1st and 2ndgeneration semis and shallower water jack-ups is higher than it appearsstatistically.The provision of top drives and power swivels is dominated by Varco,which has supplied 215 or 83 % of the top drives to the offshore mobilecompetitive rig fleet.  Maritime Hydraulics is having increased success,and to date has supplied 11 % of the units to the mobile fleet.Portable top drives have been developedby both companies.  National Oilwell and ACB,  the market.A comparison of the investment which drilling contractors have made infitting top drives to offshore rigs is interesting.  Seven of the majorcontractors (managing over 80 % of their rigs equipped with top drives. This figure would be increased to eight., if Global Marine had notrecently purchased three 116 jack-ups which arees.  Although the Gulfof Mexico has, on average, a lower proportion of top drives comparedwith the rest of the world, several of these contractors have the bulkof their fleet in the US Gulf.The figures for top drives fitted by contractors is revealing aboutcontractor status in the largest jack-up market in the world: the USGulf.  Three types of controse with over 50% of their rigs equippedwith top drives: Diamond, Dual, ENSCO, Global Marine, and Rowan.  Thosethat have a few of their rigs so equipped: Chiles (although that rig iscurrently in West Africa,) Marine Drilling, and Noble; and those withno top drives yet fitted: Falcon Drilling, NR Marine and Southwestern.Competition will ensure that more top drives are bought.Explanation of definitions used in top drive tablesThe accompanying tables (in the hard copy) on pages 5 to 13, and alsoon page 3, give a 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th generation description for eachsemi-submersible.  Many rigs, however, have been upgraded to have someof the characteristics of the next generation of units; the earlierSedco 700 series being a particular case in point.  However, somesubjective demarcatioon of a generation to a semi-submersible has beenmade more on build date than on physical characteristics.Jack-ups in India have been grouped with those in the Middle East,whereas drillships in India have been grouped with those in Asia,reflecting the way the market for these two types of rigs tends tofunction.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994NORTH SEA SEMI DEMAND TUMBLESAs expected there has been a dramatic drop in the utilisation levels ofsemi-submersibles in the North Sea.  In January there were 34 semisworking in NW Europe.  This is expected to drop to 22 or 23 in the nextmonth.  With the large exodus out of the North Sea at the end of lastyear, demand elsewhere in the world for North Sea semi-submersibles hasfor the foreseeable future mostly been satisfied.  There are fewopportunities for contractors now, and lay up for most is aprobability.For the surplus North Sea semis there may be work for one in theMediterranean for Repsol off Egypt, and two deepwater units will berequired in West Africa at the end of the year.  Competition for thesewill be strong, with the West African deepwater tenders likely to bebid also by contractors with rigs in the Americas.  However, of theNorth Sea semis, West Delta is mobilising to the Far East for a onewell plus two options contract with Mobil Indonesia in 1,800 ft ofwater.  On previously awarded contracts Dan Baroness is substitutingfor Dan Countess for Unocal Trinidad, with Dan Princess now mobilisingto LASMO Vietnam, leaving the older Dan Countess stacked in UK.  Thejack-up market in NW Europe has fairly low utilisation levelsanticipated for the rest of 1994, but demand is at least expected tostay constant.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994MEDITERRANEAN MARKET POSSIBLY NOW IN BALANCEIn the Mediterranean a potential shortage of a jack-up in the area hasprobably been solved by Santa Fe which plans to mobilise Key Hawaii fora 2 well plus option contract with Samedan offshore Tunisia.  KeyHawaii is currently working for Mobil Nigeria, but NNPC paymentproblems have made it difficult for Mobil to confirm a definiteextension of a proposed contract.There are longer term tenders in the Mediterranean area, notably withTPAO in the Sea of Marmara and Agip Italy where the results are as yetundetermined.  Sonny Voss is a candidate for mobilising through theSuez Canal, if the rig is awarded work in the Mediterranean.  INA'sjack-up Labin, based in the Mediterranean, was refused work in Tunisiaat the turn of the year as a protest against political events in formerYugoslavia.  Whether this will extend to other Muslim countries remainsto be seen, but in such a small market, currently just nine jackups,this could be of importance.The award of QGPC's term programme off Qatar will affect rig contractsin the Gulf of Suez, and possibly the Mediterranean.  QGPC tenders werelodged at the end of December, and the operator is nearing a decision,but has not yet awarded the work.  Santa Fe has offered a rig to QGPC,and is apparently in competition with Maersk for the contract.  IfSanta Fe is successful it will have to mobilise a rig from outside theArabian Gulf, probably from the Gulf of Suez or Singapore.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994GULF OF MEXICO JACK-UP MARKET FUTURE UNCLEARThe Gulf of Mexico jack-up market, apart from the Far East and WestAfrican floater markets, now remains the only one in the world whereutilisation in 1994 might be reasonable.  As current natural gas pricesare still well over the $2/mmbtu level, as are the futures prices, theprognosis is good.  Confidence has not fully returned to the marketafter the optimism shown at the end of 1993 before the oil price drop.Plans being formulated at the moment by many of the operators will becritical for the market.  A survey of operators' intentions wasintended earlier in the year for this issue of World Rig Forecast, butin the event, many plans were not firm enough to make a comprehensivesurvey worth publishing.With the large number of mobilisations into the Gulf of Mexico in 1993,and the heavy refurbishment programme of previously stacked units,there must remain a doubt about utilisation levels of jack-ups in 1994. The top end of the market is showing continuing strength with highspecification units being extended at end 1993 rates.  Those wishing tore-enter the market after lay-up are having to cut rates.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-13IA059-000325-B008-282http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/el05.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235727 text/html 7506HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:55:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:19 GMTContent-length: 7320Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/el05.html Sample Issue Copyright THE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNet May 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ========================= CHRISTOPHER CREEK, SONOMA COUNTY--LARRY WALKER LIKES THEIR TWO REDS; CO-OWNER SUSAN MITCHELL SUGGESTS FOOD PAIRINGS; THEIR CHARDONNAY, WHICH WALKER ALSO LIKES, IS AVAILABLE ONLY AT WINERY: 707/433-2001 (478 words) 'SONOMA ODYSSEY' JUNE 1, 1996--WORTH A VISIT (179 words) MURPHY-GOODE 1993 SONOMA COUNTY FUME BLANC-- DON'T RUSH OUT TO GET IT BECAUSE IT'S SOLD OUT, BUT THEIR 1995, $10.50 IS WIDELY AVAILABLE (302 words) CopyrightTHE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNetMay 1, 1996CHRISTOPHER CREEK, SONOMA COUNTY--LARRY WALKER LIKES THEIR TWO REDS;CO-OWNER SUSAN MITCHELL SUGGESTS FOOD PAIRINGS;  THEIR CHARDONNAY,WHICH WALKER ALSO LIKES, IS AVAILABLE ONLY AT WINERY: 707/433-2001  If Rhone-style wines go out of favor in the USA, most producers ofsyrah, mourvedre, carignane and the like can go back to blending thoserich wines into their other reds.  But tiny Christopher Creek Winery, just south of Healdsburg, has betthe farm they bought almost ten years ago on petite sirah and the trueRhone, syrah, both of which win them numerous medals and much praise.Except for an acre or so of chardonnay, which is distributed mostly fromthe winery, their land is devoted to the two reds.  Larry Walker recently tasted the wines and recorded co-owner SusanMitchell's food suggestions, in the California Visitors Review, a greatweekly magazine, $40 per year from PO Box 92, El Verano, CA 95433, tel.707/938-3494, fax 938-3674 (they don't have e-mail yet, I guess).    -- The 1991 syrah, $14, brought forth from Walker's quill "lush;rich;  dark velvety fruit;  full;  layered."  Susan Mitchell, mother ofthe teen-age Christopher for whom the winery is named, says heartycassoulet is a great match.    -- The 1992 syrah, also $14, is big and powerful, Walker says-- butbecause of tasty fruit, there's a certain graceful quality about it aswell.  So Ms. Mitchell suggests "a chicken and turkey meatloaf withgarlic mashed potatoes and a green salad."    -- The 1992 petite sirah runs true to its varietal character --deeply intense, lots of flavor including a full-flavored finish, andwhat Walker calls "meaty tannins" which must mean you can pair it withsome hard-knuckled, hot-tempered foods:  sure enough, here's Ms.Mitchell suggesting pepperoni pizza!  Maybe next year it'll be perfectwith the grilled steak, prime rib or roast pork loin she also mentioned.    -- There's a 1994 chardonnay whose oak makes its statement from"behind" a citrus character.  The wine is "elegant, stylish, poised andbalanced," says Walker, mentioning a winery price of $16.  Food?Grilled chicken or light pasta dishes.  If you contact Christopher Creek, ask for their recipes matched totheir wines.  Here's one.SUSAN'S WINTER POTATO SOUP      1/4 cup olive oil        1 medium yellow onion, chopped        4 cloves garlic, finely chopped    2-1/2 lbs Yukon gold or red potatoes        3 cups chicken stock    Also, freshly-ground pepper and salt to taste      and sun-dried tomatoes, finely chopped, or fresh Italian parsley,            finely chopped.  Saute onions and garlic one to two minutes in heated oil.  Use alarge, heavy pan.  Don't peel potatoes, but wash and cube them and addthem, with the chicken stock, to the pan;  add water as necessary tocover the potatoes.  Simmer over heat until potatoes are tender, about20 minutes.  You can serve from the pot, or puree after allowing thesoup to cool a bit.  Use the tomatoes or parsley as garnish atop eachbowl, and accompany it with warm crusty bread and syrah.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNetMay 1, 1996'SONOMA ODYSSEY' JUNE 1, 1996--WORTH A VISIT  Perfectly in tune with the high quality of Sonoma County food andwine, the gorgeous, even breathtaking scenery, and laid-back exurbanlifestyle of Sonoma County is its off-the-beaten-track (but not far)Sonoma Odyssey, June 1, 1996.  From 1 to 5 PM, at Richard's Grove--Saralee's Vineyard, you can meetfood and wine authors, taste premium wines from 30 producers, sampleMediterranean style foods (Sonoma County is a dead ringer for Tuscanyand a number of other "mid-earth" ambiances), buy new, used and rarebooks, and participate in an auction the nature of which-- who knows?  To get there you go north from Santa Rosa to the River Road exit of USHighway 101 (the Luther Burbank Center for the Performing Arts dominatesthe view here;  you can't miss it) and go west on River Road to SlusserRoad and turn north to number 3375.  Tickets are $20.  Information from co-sponsor the Sonoma County WineLibrary, PO Box 43, Healdsburg, CA 95448, tel. 707/433-2485.  The othersponsors are National Public Radio state KRCB-FM and PBS KRCB-TV,Rohnert Park.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNetMay 1, 1996MURPHY-GOODE 1993 SONOMA COUNTY FUME BLANC-- DON'T RUSH OUT TO GET ITBECAUSE IT'S SOLD OUT, BUT THEIR 1995, $10.50 IS WIDELY AVAILABLE  The Airport Club, the health facility where our family spends time andmoney (too bad the effects don't show on me), has been serving a 1993Murphy-Goode fume (sauvignon) blanc that's so good I've wanted to writeabout it.  I thought I'd wait for their 1995 to show up on the market,and taste them side by side.  Not really possible.  But a certain housestyle will connect the two, I think, and so I'll tell you the 1995 isavailable, list price $10.50, and give you the winery phone number, andlet you know what I think you might want to prepare to go with it.  The '93 probably has just a hint of residual sugar;  I can just aboutdetect it and my "threshold" is 0.03 percent.  Alcohol is 13 percent andin a white wine that level in a crisp wine can make it "hot" but I feltno such effect.  Delightful lemon and grapefruit with a background hint of tropicalfruit (typical for the Alexander Valley) come through in a wine that'scrisp from start to lemon-zesty finish.  It's so clean it would beperfect with any dish with a rich white sauce -- perhaps fettucine sosauced, with seared and braised tuna slices or chunks?  To prepare thatfresh tuna steak, I'd sear it on a bed of course-ground black pepper,remove it from the hot iron pan, reduce the heat to medium high andbraise it over lemon slices with enough of the fume blanc to come half-way up the height of the tuna flake;  remove from the pan when it seemsthe tuna will just barely begin to flake, and slice or cube it.  Alternatively you could make a lemon-garlic creamy white sauce (I useKnudsen non-dairy sour creme for that).Back to Headline List WT03-B36-14IA059-000325-B008-322http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/el01.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235744 text/html 41460HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:55:57 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:19 GMTContent-length: 41273Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/el01.html Sample Issue Copyright VIDEO WEEK via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THIS WEEK'S NEWS * WARNERVISION ANNOUNCES BUYOUT PLANS (425 words) LARGE VIDEO CHAINS GETTING BIGGER PIECE OF PIE (971 words) NOV. VCR SALES HIT RECORD, CENSUS TOPS 150 MILLION (282 words) 16-BIT VIDEOGAMES HOLD SHARE AMID NEW FORMAT BATTLES (865 words) EASTER PROMOTIONS SPRING INTO ACTION (575 words) Trident Entertainment has entered video arena with (90 words) CBS/Fox will support Feb. 6 release of 4 more titles from Mr. (75 words) Saban Home Entertainment's Feb. 20 release of Mighty Morphin (60 words) A&E Network and History Channel have launched sites on World (43 words) * VIDEO NOTES * Rental prebook record was shattered twice in 1995. Fox last (155 words) Buena Vista's sellthrough lineup for first 6 months of 1996 (248 words) Rentrak signed long-term revenue-sharing deal with First (86 words) RKO Warner Video was ordered into Chapter 7 liquidation last (85 words) Moovies completed purchase of Norcross, Ga.-based Movie Store (36 words) Tower Records has expanded into Canada, opening 22,500-sq.-ft. (38 words) Viacom, Scott Beck and Charles Howell said they settled (69 words) Video Update reported same-store sales increased 16% for 2nd (130 words) VSDA's VidTrac research and statistics program will be (35 words) Seeking to boost flagging CD-i business, Philips said it will (114 words) Commenting on 3M's leaving videotape manufacturing business, (92 words) Vidmark is promoting Jan. 30 rental release Kids with PSA on (110 words) * VIDEO EQUIPMENT SALES * Sales to dealers, from EIA, for 3nd statistical week of 5-week (179 words) * VIDEO PERSONALS * Robert Book, pres.-CEO, Tiger Eye Investments Holdings Ltd., (242 words) CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WARNERVISION ANNOUNCES BUYOUT PLANS     As expected, WarnerVision Entertainment Pres. Stuart Herschwill participate in buying company he founded as A*VisionEntertainment in 1990.  Company announced agreement in principlefor Hong Kong-based Tiger Eye Investments Holdings to buy it fromWarner Music Group.  Deal is expected to close early this year.     Executives couldn't be reached for comment over holidayseason, when WarnerVision was among many industry-related companiestaking week off.  However, news of Hersch's plans had been expectedfor several months.  Fate of WarnerVision and Hersch had been inquestion since executive shakeup began at Warner Music Groupearlier last year.  Sources had posed various scenarios -- Herschleaving company altogether or leaving Warner Music but takingWarnerVision with him, as is occurring (VW Nov 6 p6).     Although ownership is changing, WarnerVision won't sever itsdistribution ties with Warner Music -- it has 4-year deal to bedistributed by WEA, sources say.  Name will be changed, though --WarnerVision name, adopted less than year ago (VW Jan 16 p5), islikely to revert to A*Vision, name with which company was foundedas affiliate of Warner's Atlantic Records.     Price Tiger Eye will pay for WarnerVision is in $50-$70million range, sources said.  Gross sales of WarnerVision, knownfor its aggressive stance in acquiring nontheatrical properties,are believed to be in $120-million range.  It has major share offitness video market and owns leading direct response fitnessequipment distribution company Fitness Quest, which it acquired in1994.  It also distributes children's, music and other specialinterest videos along with some direct-to-video movies.     Tiger Eye Pres.-CEO Robert Book will become chmn. of newcompany.  Tiger Eye specializes in acquiring media, publishing andentertainment companies.  Hersch is expected to continue to runWarnerVision.  Before founding it he was COO of King WorldProductions, serving as key figure in taking company public.     Time Warner won't lose much by selling WarnerVision, which itstill will distribute.  Although losing ownership of one videocompany, Time Warner will gain others if pending merger with Turnergoes through.  Time Warner owns Warner Home Video and HBO Videoalong with direct response specialist Time Life;  it will gainTurner Home Entertainment and New Line.       Sale of WarnerVision comes after months of turmoil inexecutive ranks of Warner Music Group that most recently resultedin resignation of Michael Fuchs (VW Nov 20 p7).  Earlier ousters atWarner Music included Doug Morris, who originally set Hersch up atAtlantic and now is at MCA -- one of possible future homes that hadbeen rumored for WarnerVision.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LARGE VIDEO CHAINS GETTING BIGGER PIECE OF PIE     Stores making up top 100 video chains now represent more than25% of the more than 28,000 video specialty outlets in U.S.,according to annual Top 100 report in Video Store Magazine.  Totalnumber of stores among top 100 chains for 1995 was 7,220 -- 24%increase over 1994.  However, total revenue for top 100 amounted to$4.06 billion, only 3% increase over $3.95 billion in 1994.     Consolidation was main reason for increase in number ofstores, report said.  Acquisition-hungry newly public chainsswallowed many smaller chains that had made Top 100 in past,leaving room for 24 chains to make list for first time.  Top 20chains earned $3.65 billion -- up $15 million in year.  Increasecame despite overall decline in video rental business, which VideoStore documents as down 6% for retailers on industrywide basis from1994.     However, average Top 100 store grossed only $568,000 in 1995-- off 16% from $679,000 in 1994.  Drop followed 3 consecutiveyears of advances.  Report said decline is "more a result of theswelling ranks of Top 100 retailers than anything else."  Increasein total stores of 24% was far greater than any in history ofreport since 1987.  Commenting on overall revenue gain of only 3%for Top 100 chains, report said that "as chains grow, it takes awhile for new stores to come up to speed."     Video revenue inched up 2% for Top 100 and ancillary revenue5%, indicating growing importance of such products as snacks,audiobooks, CD-ROMs, videogames, music, magazines, licensedmerchandise.  Biggest ancillary category, videogames, accounted for9.8% of average Top 100 store's revenue -- up 4% despite overallslump in 16-bit market.  Videogame rentals accounted for 8.3%,sales 1.5%.  Sales and rentals of laserdiscs and CD-ROMs went upslightly to 0.9% each from 0.8%;  food and drink sales were downslightly to 0.7% from 0.8%.     Percentage of average Top 100 store's revenue earned fromvideocassette rentals actually increased slightly to 77% from 76.3% after several years of decline.  Only 8.3% of average Top 100store's revenue came from video sellthrough, and almost half ofthat was from previously viewed cassettes.  Total was down 10% frompreceding year's 9.3%.     Blockbuster continued to dominate Top 100, although its powerwas slightly diluted because of challenges from newly publiccompetitors and chains hoping to go public soon.  Blockbuster'sshare of Top 100 revenue amounted to 62% in 1995, down from 67% in1994, and its gross revenues for 1995 were $2.6 billion.  Companyhad 3,350 domestic locations at year-end.     Hollywood Video, which went public in 1993, exploded to 280stores in 1995 from 97, increasing revenues to $165 million from$73 million.  Movie Gallery, which made initial public offering(IPO) in Aug. 1994, grew to 665 stores in 1995 including 90franchisees, from 279, increasing revenue to almost $200 millionfrom $90 million.  Video Update, whose IPO was in July 1994, roseto 250 stores from 45, growing revenue to $82.5 million from $26.9million.  Moovies, only chain to complete IPO in 1995(Aug.),expanded to 107 stores  from 11, with revenue soaring to $49million from $5.5 million.     Home Vision, which filed registration statement for IPO inOct. that has yet to hit market, increased its store count to 53from 38 during year, with growing to $25.5 million from $18.8million.  West Coast Entertainment, franchiser that was purchasedby smaller Giant Video in 1995, had about 500 franchised locationsthroughout year, with revenues increasing to $195 million from$183.6 million, report said, and plans IPO early this year. Roadrunner Video, which became public by merging with shell companyBusiness Data Group in July, maintained 53 stores throughout yearwith annual revenues of $22 million.  First National Entertainment,public company that originated as film distributor, purchased25-store Video Tyme of Las Vegas, with annual revenue of $13.1million.     Top 10 chains accounted for 84.8% of Top 100 revenue -- $3.44billion.  Preceding year's top 10 accounted for 83.2% of total.  Ofentire video specialty business, top 10 chains drew 39% of income,up from 34% in 1994.  Top 10, ranked by 1995 gross revenue, were(1) Blockbuster, (2) West Coast, (3) Hollywood, (4) Movie Gallery,(5) Tower Records/Video, (6) Video Update, (7) Moovies, (8) VideoConnection (recently sold to Movie Gallery), (9) Palmer Video(expected to be sold to West Coast), (10) Home Vision.     Chain with most revenue per store was tiny 2-store OdysseyVideo of L.A. -- No. 82 on Top 100 list, its locations had averagerental revenue of $1.45 million.  Blockbuster Video stores averagedhighest amount of rental income -- $645,900 per store, down from$826,300 in 1994.  Chain with highest sellthrough revenue per storewas RKO Warner Video, which ironically was forced into liquidationat year-end despite almost doubling sellthrough income to $241,500per store from $143,182 in 1994 (see separate item in this issue). Average Top 100 store earned only $37,776 from sellthrough in 1995.     Lion's share of consumer dollars spent on video sellthroughisn't claimed by video specialists.  Video Store puts totalindustry retail revenue at $14.5 billion for 1995, $8.3 billion ofit spent in video specialty stores ($7.6 billion rental and only$690 million sellthrough).  That leaves whopping $6.2 billion spentin nonspecialty outlets, most of them sellthrough-oriented.  Top 10stores of any type carrying video in N. America in 1995, accordingto report:  (1) Blockbuster, (2) Suncoast Motion Picture Co. (410stores, $280 million in video revenue), (3) Wal-Mart (2,189 stores,$271 million in video revenue), (4) K mart (2,163 stores, $249million), (5) merged Price Club/Costco (242 stores, $173 million),(6) West Coast Video, (7) Wherehouse Entertainment (327 stores,$155 million), (8) Sam's Club (433 stores, $141 million), (9)Musicland/Sam Goody (869 stores, $139 million), (10) HollywoodVideo. Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NOV. VCR SALES HIT RECORD, CENSUS TOPS 150 MILLION     Our running count of VCR sales since inception in 1975 showscumulative total U.S. sales hit 150 million in Nov. after just over20 years on market.  In other Nov. hardware news, EIA figures showdealers' purchases of VCR and several other consumer electronicsproducts set records for month despite less-than-enthusiasticestimates of holiday sales potential.     TV/VCR combo sales showed biggest advance of all -- 49.1% --but fell shy of record for month because of huge combo sales inNov. 1993.  VCR decks, achieving record, were up 23.5%.  VCR censuspassed 150 million unit mark in 4th week of Nov., reaching150,039,297 (VW Dec 11 p8).     Here's how 1995 probably will go down in record books, basedon seasonal rates for first 11 months:  Direct-view color(excluding combos), 23.56 million, down 4.8% from last year'srecord 24.71 million.  Projection TV, 828,700, big 30.3% gain over1994's record 636,177.  TV/VCR, 2,190,000, record 8.5% more than1994's 2.02 million.  VCR decks, record at 13.71 million, 4.7% over13.09 million last year.  Camcorders, 3.66 million, topping 1994record of 3.21 million by 14%.     Following is table of EIA figures on sales to dealers forNov.:     Product           Nov. 1995   Nov. 1994 % Change  Nov. 1993     Total color...... 2,830,624*  2,785,792  + 1.6  2,713,898        Direct-view... 2,724,755*  2,710,528  + 0.5  2,665,970         TV only...... 2,452,823   2,528,184  - 3.0  2,372,512         TV/VCR combo.   271,932     182,344  +49.1    293,458        Projection....   105,869**    75,264  +40.7     47,827     Total VCR#....... 1,792,885*  1,414,090  +26.8  1,501,131        VCR decks..... 1,520,953*  1,231,746r +23.5  1,207,673     Camcorders.......   409,465*    282,375  +45.0    320,468     Laserdisc players    21,830      21,349  + 2.3     21,770     * Record for any Nov.  # Includes TV/VCR combinations.  **Record for any month.  r Revised by EIA.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199616-BIT VIDEOGAMES HOLD SHARE AMID NEW FORMAT BATTLES     "Old-fashioned" 16-bit videogame systems probably will holdonto major market share even this year as manufacturers wage war ofwords, games and marketing dollars over high-powered newtechnology.     Sparking latest contretemps were comments by 3DO Chmn. William(Trip) Hawkins that internal "bus" structure of Nintendo Ultra 64would severely limit performance of system overall, and was like"squeezing a fire hose into a garden hose."     "That's bull," said Nintendo of America Sales & Mktg. Exec. VpPeter Main.  At issue is ability of Nintendo's system to moveinformation from one part of machine to another.  Some portions ofNintendo's machine use 32-bit bus structure.  Hawkins says thatwill limit system's performance, Main and Nintendo engineers sayabsolutely not.  What's clear is that such battles definitely willwind up dominating media coverage and high-end game scene -- butperhaps not dollar volume.     Introduction of Ultra 64 in Japan is absolute lock for April21, Main said.  Picture in U.S. is far fuzzier, with potentiallaunch dates ranging from May to Aug.  Some observers are bettingon spring launch themed on Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) inL.A.  If that's to be case, Nintendo is going to have to do somefast advertising footwork.  In visit last week to Nintendo'sRedmond, Wash., hq, company told our affiliated publicationConsumer Multimedia Report that no ads had been placed in game fanperiodicals, even though deadlines are drawing near.  Another signthat Ultra may come later rather than sooner:  Despite flyinghalf-dozen journalists to Redmond, Nintendo had only Ultra 64videotape to show, not game itself.     One thing is sure:  1995 was tough year for videogameindustry, Nintendo included.  "This year was called the great yearof confusion," Main said.  One big challenge:  Primary audience --8-12-year-old boys -- is getting more choosy than ever before,willing to skip products that don't offer dramatic edge inperformance and game play.  "We're dealing with 8-12-year-oldsacting like 35-40-year-olds in terms of savvy," he said.  That'sresulted in good and bad news for Nintendo -- software sales havebeen strong, but company's new hardware introduction, Virtual Boy,is struggling so hard that company is planning "relaunch" in bothU.S. and Japan.     "It was the year of hits, not bits," Main said, with winnerdetermined by "who is going to have the greatest content."  Hepointed to Nintendo's Donkey Kong Country 2 as both hit and goodsoftware product.  "Even while other software is selling at best60-70% of last year's totals, this one has worldwide demand of110-120%," he said.  One sign that strength of 16-bit market caughtNintendo as well as most of rest of videogame market by surprise isfact that DKC2 is sold out on global basis.  Main predicted 16-bitstrength would continue to lesser degree through 1996.  "At thistime next year [16-bit] is going to represent 35-40% of thevideogame market," he said.     While Donkey Kong may be doing well, rest of videogame marketisn't setting any records.  Projections were that game market wouldbe down anywhere from 5-6% to 20%, Main said.  He thinks totaldecline will come to 10-12%, with U.S. videogame dollar volume at$3.8-$3.9 million.  Once counted out, 16-bit products represent 2/3of that, he said.  Market share of 16-bit games declined to 66% oftotal sales in 1995 to 77% in 1994.  Hand-held market share alsoslumped, to 15-16% from 25%.  That still represents somesignificant volume, though.  "We've got 19 million Game Boys sold,"Main said.  "This year we'll be moving 5.7 million pieces."     New technology, including 32-bit games and Virtual Boy,account for only fraction of total market, about 19%, Main said. He estimated that fewer than one million units of 32-bit consolessold.  Of that number, Sony's Playstation accounted for400,000-500,000, Sega's Saturn for 200,000 and 3DO for 150,000,with Atari's Jaguar and other devices accounting for rest.  Bycontrast, 16-bit Super Nintendo Entertainment system sold 2.4million units, he said.  Virtual Boy's sales were far underexpectations, Main admitted.  "It's been a long year for VirtualBoy in the U.S."  Even though 3D game playing units have sold farunder expectations, "we are not finished with Virtual Boy," hesaid.     Nintendo has sold 400,000 Virtual Boys in U.S. and 250,000 inJapan, Main said.  Games released for unit just scratch surface ofits unique capabilities, he said.  In Japan, "they are planning torelaunch the product in February," he said, with similar relaunchset for U.S.  "It has not seen its full potential.  It is going tohave another round."     One area Nintendo isn't planning to explore is CD-ROM games. Cost structures in CD-ROM market benefit manufacturers, notconsumers, Main said.  When it comes to adding bulk memory capacityto Ultra 64, Nintendo is going to stick with recordable magneticdisc that company already has announced, he said.  Disc will moveat 8 times CD-ROM speed.  Position may leave Nintendo vulnerablewhen DVD hits market, since competing M-2 and Sony PlayStationsystems reportedly will be able to play back DVD discs withrelatively simple upgrade.  Signs are that Ultra 64, with itsproprietary magnetic discs, won't have that capability.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EASTER PROMOTIONS SPRING INTO ACTION     With Christmas over, now is time for full concentration on 2ndbiggest selling season of year -- Easter.  Suppliers readyingpromotions for Feb.-April period include ABC, Disney, LIVE,Paramount, Sony Wonder, Turner.  Easter falls on April 7 this yearand Passover begins at sunset April 3.     "Disney's Easter Video Shop" debuts Feb. 21 with collection of14 titles including 2 new to video -- The Best of Roger Rabbitfeaturing 3 "Maroon Cartoons" originally shown in theaters, and TheEaster Chipmunk featuring Alvin, Simon and Theodore.  Titles arepriced at $12.99-$14.99.  Who Framed Roger Rabbit is included atnew low price of $14.99.  Promotional support includes mail-inrefund offering savings of up to $1.50 on any greeting card withadditional purchase of one Easter video.  Buena Vista is providingoptional Roger Rabbit-themed display, reporting retailers who usedEaster display last year saw incremental sales increase of almost30% over preceding year compared with those who didn't use display.     LIVE's Family Home Entertainment (FHE) label will rerelease 10titles at $12.98 each Feb. 20 in cross-promotion with TCBY.  Amongtitles are Here Comes Peter Cottontail, The Velveteen Rabbit, Talesof Beatrix Potter.  TCBY's 1,000 stores will offer coloring sheetsfeaturing characters from FHE titles for 6 weeks;  children canredeem finished sheets for free frozen yogurt cup or cone.  Couponsfor $2 off FHE Easter videos and $2 off TCBY cake or pie will beincluded with sheets.  For whole family LIVE is offering 3 filmspriced at $14.98-$69.98, including 3-vol. Jesus of Nazareth. Company's Easter promotion titles have sold more than 2.3 millionunits over last 4 years, said Tim Fournier, vp-sales, sellthrough& multimedia.     Paramount and distributed label ABC Video each have Easterpromotions.  Paramount's Peanuts Easter Promotion will includererelease of It's the Easter Beagle, Charlie Brown, for first timein clamshell packaging, March 5 at $12.95.  ABC's Easter titleswill be released March 19.  ABC Classic Easter Promotion consistsof religious titles such as Pope John Paul II Celebrates Mass inCentral Park.  ABC Children's Easter Promotion consists of 4 titlesincluding Jirimpimbira:  An African Folktale ($9.95), program thatwill air as ABC Weekend Special Feb. 24.  Company also has 6-titleGolf Promotion including Byron Nelson's Timeless Golf Lessons. Further details will be forthcoming.     Turner Home Entertainment (THE) will rerelease 2 series of$9.98 volumes Feb. 13 -- The Greatest Adventure Stories from theBible and Timeless Tales from Hallmark.  Titles also are availablein gift sets.  THE will offer $5 rebate to consumers who buy 4 ormore titles from either series and will make available "create yourown basket" displays for retailers.     Sony Wonder will emphasize Passover with Nickelodeon's ARugrats Passover ($9.98) Feb. 20.  Program was series'highest-rated ever when it aired as special last year.  Also onFeb. 20 company will offer collection of Ren & Stimpy shorts for$14.98:  Nothing but Shorts, the Unwashed Collection.  Company willinclude mail-in offer for pair of boxer shorts.                       *    *    *    *    *     Major League Baseball Home Video's 3 titles released in 4thquarter sold more than 450,000 pieces, Senior Vp Rich Domich said. Orion-distributed label's titles have sold especially well in WorldSeries markets Cleveland and Atlanta, he said, and have done wellin department store chains, music outlets and national and regionalvideo stores.  Titles are WAHOO! What a Finish on ClevelandIndians, The Official 1995 World Series Video, Cleveland Rocks.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Trident Entertainment has entered video arena with     Trident Entertainment has entered video arena withinstructional All Pro Sports Football Series featuring NFL players. Series will be available at midyear;  company is in discussionswith potential distributors, said Bruce Singman, vp-business &legal affairs, CEO of All Pro Sports Video Productions and lawyerwho has represented NFL players.  Series will consist of 12football titles featuring Jerry Rice, Reggie White, Ronnie Lott,others.  Topics will include physical conditioning, gamestrategies, insider tips, all offensive and defensive positions,coaching video.  Tapes will include computer graphics, upbeatmusic, NFL highlights.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     CBS/Fox will support Feb. 6 release of 4 more titles from Mr.     CBS/Fox will support Feb. 6 release of 4 more titles from Mr.Rogers' Neighborhood with puppet offer.  Priced at $9.98 each,titles are Going to School, Learning Is Everywhere, Our Earth: Clean and Green, The Doctor Your Friend.  Consumers will be offered2 puppets -- X the Owl and Daniel the Striped Tiger -- for price ofone, $12.95.  Titles will be advertised in Video Business, DiscountStore News, Parents' Magazine, Sesame Street Parents' Magazine.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Saban Home Entertainment's Feb. 20 release of Mighty Morphin     Saban Home Entertainment's Feb. 20 release of Mighty MorphinPower Rangers All-Time Favorites collection includes 3 titles withadditional footage made for video, at $12.95 each.  Titles also areavailable in 3-pack collectors' case at 20% savings.  Each video ispackaged with coupon for free Slurpee from participating 7-Elevensplus mail-in offer for $6 off personalized Power Rangers adventurebook.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     A&E Network and History Channel have launched sites on World     A&E Network and History Channel have launched sites on WorldWide Web, said Tom Heymann, vp-new media for A&E.  Sponsorshipareas are included, as well as those offering videos and otherproducts for sale through 800 number.  A&E -- http://www/aetv.com; History -- http://www.historychannel.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Rental prebook record was shattered twice in 1995.  Fox last     Rental prebook record was shattered twice in 1995.  Fox lastmonth reported orders of 735,000 copies of Die Hard with aVengeance in N. America, including revenue sharing and notincluding laserdisc and direct mail.  Film released on video Dec.19 grossed $100 million at box office.  Buena Vista earlierreported 715,000-piece order for Pulp Fiction, highest total sinceLIVE released Terminator 2 (VW Sept 4 p5).  Both Die Hard 3 andPulp Fiction prebooked during period when retailers overall wereexperiencing downturn in rental business.  Record numbers reflectfact that video business is becoming increasingly hit-driven, withtop titles dominating while other categories suffer.  Figures alsoattest to growing importance of revenue sharing, with Rentrak nowservicing many top chains;  both Fox and Buena Vista, which havecontracts with Rentrak, are benefiting from increased orders fortheir titles from Rentrak by settling for less money upfront whileawaiting share of retailers' income from rentals.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Buena Vista's sellthrough lineup for first 6 months of 1996     Buena Vista's sellthrough lineup for first 6 months of 1996could be its strongest ever for first half thanks to March 6release of Pocahontas, March 27 release of The Many Adventures ofWinnie the Pooh (previously released only at rental early inindustry's history), and April 24 direct-to-sellthrough debut ofanimated classic The Aristocats.  Last-named, just announced, willbe backed by tie-in with General Mills, which will offer $5 rebatewith Big G cereal purchase.  Disney will offer own $5 rebate on$26.99 title with purchase of another video.  Film was releasedtheatrically 3 times, first in 1970;  children have been awaitingits video debut since trailer appeared on The Lion King.  On rentalside, Buena Vista also plans big first half.  Its "Thriller Picksin '96" program features 3 thrillers, The Prophecy (March 12), TheTie That Binds (March 19), The Innocent (April 9).  Titles will bemarketed together on 3-sided standee, with oversized consumerpostcards along with theatrical size posters and cross-trailering. Company also will release Operation Dumbo Drop to rental marketMarch 19.  Family film that grossed $25 million theatrically willbe supported by radio promotions and POP including mobile.  Also,Miramax Home Entertainment's March 12 rental release Muriel'sWedding will be supported by Caribbean trip sweepstakes forconsumers in which retailer where winning consumer entered winsvacation too.  Company is standing behind film's rentability withrental guarantee buyback program offering $15 per tape May 13-June13 for any tape bought in 3-unit prepacks.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Rentrak signed long-term revenue-sharing deal with First     Rentrak signed long-term revenue-sharing deal with FirstNational Entertainment, company that recently acquired 25-storeVideo Tyme of Las Vegas.  Rentrak will boost its stake in companyas part of deal, agreeing to purchase additional 357,143 shares --it currently holds less than 5% of company.  In other news, Rentraksaid it's discontinuing most of its computer software businessdevelopment because of slow rate of return.  It took$200,000-charge in its fiscal 2nd quarter to reflect decision.  Itnow will focus on core pay-per-transaction and retailingbusinesses.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     RKO Warner Video was ordered into Chapter 7 liquidation last     RKO Warner Video was ordered into Chapter 7 liquidation lastmonth by U.S. bankruptcy court judge who acted on motion ofunsecured creditors committee.  N.Y.-based chain had been operatingunder Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for 4 years.  Chain is beingclosed because stores failed to make profit under Chapter 11.  RKOentered video retail in 1984 by opening stores next to its theatersand bought industry pioneer Video Shack chain in 1986;  RKO grew toabout 30 locations before scaling back to 7 this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Moovies completed purchase of Norcross, Ga.-based Movie Store     Moovies completed purchase of Norcross, Ga.-based Movie Storechain.  Acquisition includes 8 superstores in Atlanta areareporting average store revenues of $550,000, company said. Moovies, which went public in Aug., operates 145 stores in 10states.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Tower Records has expanded into Canada, opening 22,500-sq.-ft.     Tower Records has expanded into Canada, opening 22,500-sq.-ft.store in Toronto.  Outlet is stocked with 100,000 music CDs, 10,000videos, laserdiscs and CD-ROM titles, 14,000 books.  It has 50listening stations.  Tower operates 150 stores in 12 countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Viacom, Scott Beck and Charles Howell said they settled     Viacom, Scott Beck and Charles Howell said they settledlitigation on Blockbuster Entertainment's 1989 purchase offranchise operated by Beck and 3 Blockbuster Video stores in whichHowell had minority interest.  Howell, who filed 1991 lawsuit inDallas charging that Beck had sold stores without his permission,was awarded $124-million judgment in 1994 (VW Feb 20 p7).  Viacomand Beck appealed.  Settlement terms weren't disclosed because ofconfidentiality agreement.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Video Update reported same-store sales increased 16% for 2nd     Video Update reported same-store sales increased 16% for 2ndquarter ended Oct. 31, outpacing overall video retail segment,which had negative results during period.  St. Paul-basedretailer's revenues soared 523% to $10.7 million from $1.7 millionyear earlier.  Net income was up whopping 1,694% to $486,466 (5cents per share) from $27,118 (1 cents) thanks to secondary publicoffering in April and exercise of Class A warrants in Sept. Company had 383% more shares outstanding than in preceding year's2nd quarter.  For first half, revenues were up 441% to $15.8million from $2.9 million and net income was $786,418 (9 cents)compared with net loss of $122,564 (-8 cents).  Same-store saleswere up 21% for half.  Company now has 179 corporately owned storesand 24 franchised locations in N. America.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     VSDA's VidTrac research and statistics program will be     VSDA's VidTrac research and statistics program will belaunched early this quarter, Assn. said.  Assn. has securedparticipation of 9 of country's 10 largest video chains, said Pres.Jeffrey Eves, including "nation's largest chain" (Blockbuster).Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Seeking to boost flagging CD-i business, Philips said it will     Seeking to boost flagging CD-i business, Philips said it willconsolidate sales and marketing functions in Washington and shiftfocus away from "traditional retail."  Strategy is to sell through"small retailers and alternative types of distribution," includingdirect marketing, Philips N. America CD-i Mktg. Vp Gail Wellingtonsaid.  Philips Professional Media Pres. John Gray will head new, asyet unnamed, operation in Washington, while Philips Media keepsoffice in L.A., she said.  Philips Media will focus efforts onCD-ROM software and "some of the newer game platforms" as well asCD-i, company said.  As CD-i discs will be compatible with new DVDplayers, company also will try to ride DVD coattails to boostsales.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Commenting on 3M's leaving videotape manufacturing business,     Commenting on 3M's leaving videotape manufacturing business,TDK Mktg. Vp Tim Sullivan warned retailers to beware of"nonmanufacturing tape suppliers who will seize the opportunity tobuild market share by cutting prices."  Buying from such supplierscould be "penny wise and pound foolish," he said, because 3M'sdeparture could create supply shortage, leaving those supplierswith inadequate quantities.  With demand high for blank and pancaketape, "suppliers who lack the capacity to manufacture their ownproduct will not be able to service their retail customers withsufficient quantities of tape," Sullivan said.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Vidmark is promoting Jan. 30 rental release Kids with PSA on     Vidmark is promoting Jan. 30 rental release Kids with PSA onhead of tape for Children of the Night service for runaways. Company also is supporting title with post-street date radio adsand on-line promotion offering sweepstakes for college scholarship. There also are on-pack stickers promoting video on soundtrack, andcollege newspaper ads.  In Canada, Alliance Communications willrelease film Jan. 23 with program benefiting Video Industry AIDSAction Committee (VIAAC) of Canada.  Alliance will donate portionof retailers' purchase price on every copy to VIAAC Canada fordistribution to AIDS-related youth service programs.  List of AIDSInformation Hotlines throughout Canada will precede film and appearon posters promoting video.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Sales to dealers, from EIA, for 3nd statistical week of 5-week     Sales to dealers, from EIA, for 3nd statistical week of 5-weekDec. and year to date:                DEC.    1994      %    50 WEEKS    50 WEEKS     %                9-15    WEEK     CHG.    1995        1994      CHG.TOTAL VCR**... 202,070 258,772  -22.3 15,048,358* 14,403,594  + 4.5  HOME DECKS.. 175,164 229,110  -23.5 12,952,829* 12,457,532r + 4.0CAMCORDERS....  40,100  70,261  -42.9  3,419,697#  3,069,270  +11.4L'DISC PLAYERS   4,953   2,159 +129.4    249,483     264,426  - 5.7TOTAL COLOR TV 392,870 458,174  -14.3 25,301,618  26,284,320* - 3.7  DIRECT-VIEW. 376,453 445,957  -15.6 24,527,729  25,684,275* - 4.5   TV ONLY.... 350,545 416,295  -15.8 22,432,200  23,738,213* - 5.5   TV/VCR COMBO 25,908  29,662* -12.7  2,095,529#  1,945,062  + 7.7  PROJECTION..  16,417* 12,217  +34.4    773,889#    600,045  +29.0    VCR CENSUS -- Total sold to dealers to date (1975-1995): 150,895,127**.    VCR deck 5-week moving average:  1995--320,412;  1994--301,293r(up 6.3%).    TV/VCR 5-week moving average:  1995--50,032;  1994--43,725 (up14.4%).    Camcorder 5-week moving average:  1995--79,870;  1994--79,928(down 1.3%).    Direct-view TV 5-week moving average:  1995--592,011; 1994-630,665 (down 7.7%).* Record for period.  # Full-year record.  ** Includes TV/VCRcombinations.  ## Record for any week.  r Revised by EIA.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Robert Book, pres.-CEO, Tiger Eye Investments Holdings Ltd.,     Robert Book, pres.-CEO, Tiger Eye Investments Holdings Ltd.,to become chmn. of company now known as WarnerVision uponcompletion of its acquisition by Tiger Eye... Brothers Orrin andJohn Ingram promoted to co-presidents of Ingram Industries, beingsplit from Ingram Entertainment, which will be owned principally by3rd brother David Ingram as CEO;  Linwood (Chip) Lacy,co-chmn.-CEO, Ingram Micro, named vice-chmn.-CEO, IngramIndustries... Changes at Warner Home Video:  Beth Baier promoted tovp-business & legal affairs and asst. gen. counsel;  EdwardLeonard, ex-Nissan Motor Corp., joins as vp-financial planning &operations, N. America, replacing Jaime Ovadia, who relocates toMiami to join PolyGram Records... IntelliVentures, TV and videoproducer (Mitch Gaylord's Men's Total Body Workout), expands with6 appointments:  Kenny Taylor, ex-restaurant industry, todir.-sales;  John Fahr, ex-Robert Greenwald Productions, to assoc.producer;  Kirk Demorest, ex-Buena Vista Home Video, topost-production supervisor;  Bruce Brantseg to controller;  JillZemming, ex-ITC Entertainment, to exec. asst.;  Reuben Paris tooffice mgr... Named to board of Video Industry AIDS ActionCommittee (VIAAC) for 1996:  Jere Rae-Mansfield, Monterey HomeVideo, pres.;  Bruce Apar, Video Business, East Coast vp;  MariaLaMagra, MCA/Universal Home Video, vp;  Jeff Jenest, Playboy HomeEntertainment, treas.;  Bo Beatty, Central Park Media, assoc.treas.-East Coast;  Larry Klingman, Kilkea Mktg. Group, assoc.treas.-West Coast;  Eileen Fitzpatrick, Billboard, secy.; additional board members:  past pres. Leonard Levy, PMEntertainment Group;  Sheryl Biesman, Daily Variety;  Steve Wegner,MGM/UA Home Entertainment;  Michelle Fiddler, BMG Video;  BarryLyons, PM.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-15IA059-000325-B008-362http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev10.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235812 text/html 79940HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:56:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:23 GMTContent-length: 79753Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev10.html Sample Issue Copyright AIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (424 words) PROCESS BORROWED FROM THE COLD WAR VALUABLE ALLY FOR WASTEWATER PLANTS (568 words) EPA AUDIT POLICY PROVIDES LENIENCY BUT GRANTS NO 'PRIVILEGE' TO RESULTS (544 words) ASME: CHLORINE LEVELS OF FEEDSTOCKS HAVE SCANT ROLE IN DIOXIN EMISSIONS (279 words) UPCOMING NSR RULE TO GIVE FLEXIBILITY TO STATES IN MAKING BACT DECISIONS (328 words) OCCIDENTAL TO PAY U.S. $129M TO SETTLE LANDMARK LOVE-CANAL POLLUTION CASE (372 words) MEETINGS, ETC. (90 words) EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS COULD LEAD TO MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS (398 words) SENATE ENVIRONMENT PANEL MEMBERS BACKING LIMITED REWRITING OF CWA (635 words) API ASKS EPA TO REVISIT RFG PHASE II TO REPEAL NOX-REDUCTION PROVISIONS (361 words) EW FOCUS: OPEN MEETINGS HAZWASTE INCINERATORS, GREEN GROUPS CHALLENGE EPA-CEMENT NEGOTIATIONS (789 words) CALIFORNIA AIR BOARD MOVES TO DROP MINIMUM ZEV MANDATE FOR 1998 (443 words) COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDS FOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS (450 words) EPA CITES NPS FOR RCRA VIOLATIONS AT HAWAII VOLCANOES NATIONAL PARK (137 words) EPA: HEALTH BENEFITS EXCEED COSTS OF REDUCING ACID RAIN PRECURSORS (292 words) EPA, ASIWPCA ISSUE DRAFT GUIDANCE FOR EVALUATING NONPOINT PROGRAMS (255 words) STATE OFFICIALS SEE HWIR PROPOSAL COMPLICATING WASTE MANAGEMENT (391 words) PHYSICIANS' GROUP SOUNDING ALERT ABOUT DANGERS FROM AIR POLLUTION (199 words) GREENHOUSE 'CAR TALKS' REPORT URGES BOOSTING CAFE STANDARD TO 45 MPG (335 words) EPA PROPOSES AIR PERMIT EXEMPTIONS FOR SOME NON-MAJOR AREA SOURCES (356 words) REFRIGERATOR MAKERS SETTLE LAWSUIT OVER 'CFC-FREE' ADVERTISEMENTS (255 words) R E S O U R C E S (306 words) GREAT LAKES EFFORT COULD BE DAMAGED BY GOP BUDGET CUTS, BROWNER SAYS (319 words) CALIFORNIA'S AIR RESOURCES BOARD MANDATES CLEANER-BURNING FUEL (781 words) AGING DNEPR RIVER HYDRO PROJECTS THREATEN MANY AREAS OF UKRAINE (739 words) EVENTS CALENDAR (458 words) CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDSSUPERFUND HIT-The toxic-waste cleanup program joins the restof EPA in the federal budget-morass shutdown today whenSuperfund's tax-and-spend authority expires. Officials saythis means furloughing about 2,500 agency employees whooversee contractor activities at waste sites. The employeeswere able to continue working beyond the Dec. 18 governmentshutdown because Superfund's operating authority is separatefrom the rest of the agency. This authority ends today, andofficials say that without the site supervisors, "we'regoing to have to shut down the program nationwide"-exceptfor emergencies. The waste cleanup trust fund does not lackmoney, only the congressional go-ahead to spend it.A LITTLE LATE?-First, EPA gives in to state opposition anddrops its unpopular test-only requirement for vehicle-emission inspection and maintenance stations. Next, Congresstakes steps to ensure that test-only mandates remain on theregulatory shelf. Finally, with the barn door wide open, theAssociation of Vehicle Inspection Companies was formed inWashington last month by the firms that operate test-onlyfacilities under state contracts. Its rear-guard mission:"to provide sound information to help educate the public,state officials, political leaders and others on thesignificant benefits of test-only contractor-operatedvehicle inspection programs."EMPLOYERS OFF THE HOOK-Another mobile-source pollution-prevention program headed for the discard bin when PresidentClinton signed legislation Dec. 23 repealing the Clean AirAct mandate for employers in polluted areas to adopt plansto reduce commuting by employees. The Mobility Coalition forClean Air, the ad hoc group that lobbied for the repeal,said it expects most states to abandon mandatory trip-reduction requirements.THE CHLORINE FACTOR-Findings by resear-chers at Queen'sUniversity in Canada could have a bearing on U.S. EPA'songoing evaluation of drinking water disinfectants anddisinfection byproducts. The researchers report that from 10percent to 13 percent of bladder or colon cancer cases inOntario may be caused by long-term drinking of and bathingin surface water treated with chlorine. Professor Will Kingsaid people with a 35-year exposure to chlorinatedbyproducts have a 60 percent risk of bladder cancer thanpeople with little or no exposure. "We think the results areimportant, but we don't think they mean stop usingchlorination. It's still much safer to use chlorinated waterthan to use untreated water."WHAT'S HOT IN MINNESOTA?-In a year-end review of its topenvironmental issues of 1995, the state Pollution ControlAgency listed "the curious discovery of numerous deformedfrogs" in wetlands in southern Minnesota last August.Officials are still seeking answers for the frogs' missinglegs.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PROCESS BORROWED FROM THE COLD WARVALUABLE ALLY FOR WASTEWATER PLANTS   A process borrowed from U.S. and Russian Cold Wartechnology may perform a wide array of valuable functionsfor wastewater treatment plant operators, according toScientific Utilization Inc. (SUI).   In pilot studies, the pulse power process increased therate of anaerobic digestion in treatment units, the Decatur,Ala., company reports. It also can boost methane production,lower the volume of solids and neutralize cryptosporidium,SUI says.   Using pulse power, plant operators may be able to doubleanaerobic digestion of sewage sludges, SUI says. This canhelp boost methane production to power blowers, generators,heaters and other devices in treatment plants, according toSUI.   The technique works by subjecting sludge to high-energyelectric arcs as it enters a plant's digesters. The arcsrupture the cell walls of aerobic bacteria, making theirnutrients immediately available to anaerobic bacteria andreducing the time it takes anaerobic organisms to consumeaerobic microbes and cut solids volume.   Pulse power also may help turn sewage effluent intopotable water, according to the company. When used withozone and oxygen generation, the system has been shown torender cryptosporidium non-infectious. For more information,contact SUI's Randy Chew at (205) 355-2333.   Applied Spectrometry Associates Inc., Waukesha, Wis., haspurchased the ChemScanR Process Analyzer business ofBiotronics Technologies Inc., also of Waukesha.   Chester Environmental, Pittsburgh, has received thePennsylvania Governor's Export Excellence Award in theService Sector. Chester's international sales grew from$170,000 in 1992 to $12 million in 1994.   Microbics Corp., Carlsbad, Calif., and SiemensEnvironmental Systems, United Kingdom, have developedMicrotox-OS, an on-line test system for automatic monitoringof aquatic toxicity.   Pace Analytical Services Inc., Minneapolis, has beenformed to operate former PACE Inc. labs.   RFG Environmental Systems Inc., West Palm Beach, Fla.,has received the Cleaning Equipment Trade Association's 1995Technological Innovation Award for its Thermo OxidationSystem.   Rockwell International Corp., Seal Beach, Calif., says ithalved its generation of hazardous waste from 1990 through1994.   Thermo Power Corp., Waltham, Mass., is the first companyto receive ultra-low emissions vehicle certification fromEPA for a heavy-duty engine powered by natural gas.   U.S. Electricar Inc., San Francisco, has received a $2.8million contract from the Department of Defense to fieldtest advanced battery technologies in its ES-10 pickuptrucks.   Versar Inc., Springfield, Va., has been namedsubcontractor to EG&G Washington Analytical Service Centerfor environmental services to the Naval Surface WeaponsSupport Center, Indian Head, Md.   United States Filter Corp., Palm Desert, Calif., hasagreed to acquire Jet Tech Inc. of Edwardsville, Kan., forabout $12 million in cash and stock. Jet Tech, with expected1995 revenues of $16 million, manufactures sequencing batchreactors and autothermal thermophilic aerobic digesters.   PERSONNEL: Joseph Angley has joined GeoSyntecConsultants' office in Boca Raton, Fla. David Hendron hasbeen appointed manager of GeoSyntec's new regional office inChicago....New staffers in Burns & McDonnell WasteConsultants' Kansas City, Mo., office include ShannonFlannigan, William Craig, Lance Erickson and Eric Wenger.New faces at ENSR: William Siok, program manager in Acton,Mass.; Cynthia Chiles, senior program manager in Costa Mesa,Calif.; and Jacqueline Breese as senior project manager inCamarillo, Calif....Saeed Darian has joined HNTB Corp. todirect its work with industrial clients....BernardKennedy, chair/president/CEO of National Fuel Gas Co., hasbeen reelected chair of the trustees of the Institute of GasTechnology.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA AUDIT POLICY PROVIDES LENIENCYBUT GRANTS NO 'PRIVILEGE' TO RESULTS   Companies that report self-discovered environmentalviolations within 10 days and act to correct them will beeligible for reduced penalties or waivers of civilviolations and no criminal sanctions under EPA's finalpolicy on environmental audits.   The policy (Federal Register, Dec. 22, 1995, p. 66706)does not apply to violations that harm human health and theenvironment. EPA said it had been studying the issue ofself-audits for 18 months and that the policy is "theoptimum way to encourage voluntary self-policing whilepreserving fair and effective enforcement."Will Override State Laws   Under the approach, EPA retains its power to levy finesthat equal any economic gain created by the violation inorder to "preserve a level playing field." EPA also willoverride state laws shielding results of corporate self-audits from enforcement if the violations threaten publichealth or the environment. At the same time, the agency said"where a state has obtained appropriate sanctions needed todeter such misconduct, there is no need for EPA action."   The final policy is basically the same as an interimpolicy released last March. The earlier statement appliedonly to self-audits, while the final statement covers otherself-discovery steps such as due diligence. EPA defines duediligence as systemic efforts to prevent, detect and correctviolations.EPA Restates 'No Privilege'   EPA will continue its policy of not routinely requestingthe results of corporate self-audits, although the agencyreiterated its position that environmental self-audits andrelated corporate self-discovery activities are notprivileged information protected from public disclosure.This contrasts sharply with an increasing number of statelaws that provide varying degrees of privilege for auditresults.   EPA will reduce gravity-based civil penalties-those basedon the severity of the pollution problem and not on theeconomic gains a company realizes-by up 75 percent. In somecases they could be waived. To be eligible for reduced or nocivil penalties provisions of the policy, EPA said companiesmust meet these conditions:Violations must be discovered through a company's self-audits or due-diligence process.Violations must have been discovered voluntarily and not aspart of an EPA- or court-mandated monitoring, and theviolations must be reported promptly in writing to EPA.Discovery of a violation cannot be based on any third-partyaction such as a citizen suit or local governmentinvestigation.The violation must be corrected as soon as possible, and anyenvironmental damage must be mitigated.The company must take steps to prevent any reoccurrence ofthe violation.Leniency is not available to repeat offenders. Repeatedoffenses are defined as "the same or closely-relatedviolation...[occurring] previously within the past threeyears at the same facility or...part of a pattern ofviolations on the regulated entities' part over the pastfive years."Not eligible are violations that led to substantialenvironmental harm or presented an imminent and substantialdanger to public health or which violated the terms of acourt order.A company must cooperate with EPA and provide data thatcould reveal related violations.   Copies of the seven-page policy statement signed bySteven Herman, assistant agency administrator forenforcement and compliance are available from BPI's %DocuDial Service as Doc. #03-1103.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996ASME: CHLORINE LEVELS OF FEEDSTOCKSHAVE SCANT ROLE IN DIOXIN EMISSIONS   The chlorine content of combustor or incineratorfeedstocks has little or no effect on the composition orquantity of dioxin emissions, the American Society ofMechanical Engineers and other participants found in a studyof various combustion facilities.   The conclusion contradicts arguments by public interestgroups that there is a direct relationship between chlorineand dioxin emissions. The groups have advocated regulationsrestricting the amount and type of chlorinated waste thatcan be combusted in various types of combustion systems.   The study was conducted on municipal waste combustors,medical and hazardous waste incinerators, waste-firedboilers, cement kilns and biomass combustors at 169facilities. More than 1,900 test results were analyzed forThe Relationship Between Chlorine in Waste Streams andDioxin Emissions from Waste Combustor Stacks.   Researchers say they found no statistically significantrelationship between chlorine input and dioxin emissions ingas streams at 80 percent of the facilities. Ten facilitiesshowed higher dioxin/furan levels consistent with increasesin chlorine input, but eight other facilities showed adecrease in dioxin/furan emissions, the study says.   "The failure to find simultaneous increases in mostcases-and finding a few inverse relationships-indicates thatwhatever effect waste feed chlorine has on [dioxin]concentrations in combustor flue gases, it is smaller thanthe influence of other cau-sative factors," ASME said in astatement. "Any effect chlorine has on...concentrations incommercial-scale systems is a factor of air pollution-control system temperature, ash chemistry, combustionconditions, imprecise measurement and localized flowstratification."   Besides ASME, other participants in the study includedthe Vinyl Institute, the Chlorine Chemistry Council andEnvironment Canada. For a copy of the study, contact ASME at(800) 843-2763.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996UPCOMING NSR RULE TO GIVE FLEXIBILITYTO STATES IN MAKING BACT DECISIONS   Proposed new source review (NSR) rules to be announcedsoon by EPA will recommend a "top-down" approach fordetermining best available control technology (BACT), butthey will give states some flexibility in determining whatmethod to use.   The proposal will allow states to develop their own BACTdetermination criteria so long as they take into account thetop technologies available. Under the plan, states will begiven a set of minimum criteria they must use in developingmethods for making BACT determinations.   Dennis Crumpler, head of the NSR section of EPA's airquality planning & standards office, told EW the governmentshutdown and furlough affecting EPA would delay the scheduleto reform NSR.   BACT is an emission limitation based on the maximumdegree of emission reduction achievable through applicationof production processes, available methods, systems andtechniques. Crumpler said the rule will propose using a top-down approach to identify BACT technology.   New emissions sources located in areas that are inattainment with ambient air quality standards are requiredto install BACT under "prevention of significantdeterioration" requirements. BACT is determined on a case-by-case basis for each source required to install it.   Under the top-down method, available control options areranked by effectiveness for the pollutant under review.Initially, the most stringent option is regarded as theBACT, but source-specific energy, environmental, or economicconsiderations may alter the initial determination. Statesare given the discretion to determine what is the BACT forthe sources they regulate, but EPA adds two core conditionsto the state's deliberations.   First, a source must consider all available controls inmaking a BACT determination, especially the most stringentcontrol. Second, the draft rule will say, "the selection ofa particular control system as BACT must be justified interms of the statutory criteria and supported by the record,and must explain the basis for the rejection of the othermore stringent candidate control systems."Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996OCCIDENTAL TO PAY U.S. $129M TO SETTLELANDMARK LOVE-CANAL POLLUTION CASE   Ending a landmark case that provided the impetus for theSuperfund program, Occidental Chemical Corp. has agreed topay $129 million to cover costs associated with the massivepollution of Love Canal. The settlement announced by theJustice Department ends a 16-year-old cost-recovery casethat began after a toxic-waste nightmare forced abandonmentof more than 1,000 homes near Niagara Falls.   The proposed settlement "should send a message of federalpersistence and tenacity," Attorney General Janet Reno saidDec. 21. She said the government will recoup all of the $101million it spent on the cleanup, plus $28 million ininterest.   EPA's Superfund program will receive $102 million fromOccidental, with $27 million going to the Treasury on behalfof the Federal Emergency Management Agency, DoJ said. FEMAprovided funding for early cleanup and relocation effortsbefore creation of the Superfund program in 1980.Remediation Actions Taken   After enactment of the Superfund law, the U.S. governmentand New York remediated the Love Canal site. Creeks andsewers adjacent to Love Canal were cleansed of dioxinwastes, and federal and state agencies improved a leachatecollection system to contain contaminated groundwater.   Occidental was considered a "responsible party" underSuperfund. The company has insisted that the United Statesalso was a responsible party and should contribute towardcleanup costs based on regulatory actions and allegeddumping by several federal agencies. Under the settlement,the government will pay $8 million in cleanup costs toresolve this claim.   One bright spot for Occidental could be a proposed $64.5million tax credit for its Love Canal payment-a proposalthat was criticized by Lois Schiffer, head of DoJ'senvironmental section. "This would destroy the fundamentalprinciple that a polluter should pay to clean up its ownmess."   Joining Reno in supporting the agreement was EPAAdministrator Carol Browner, who said it represented "thisAdministration's firm commitment to ensuring that polluters,not the American people, pick up the tab for cleaning uptoxic waste dumps." FEMA expressed relief that "theSuperfund law has enabled us to recover our money." Thesettlement will not be final until after a 30-day publiccomment period. For more information, call DoJ at (202) 616-2771.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996MEETINGS, ETC.   -EPA's Sanitary Sewer Overflows Dialogue: public meeting,Jan. 11-12, Crystal Gateway Marriott,Arlington, Va. Contact: Lam Lim, (202) 260-7371.   -EPA's Office of Water: public meetings on approaches tomethod flexibility and streamlining of analytical methodsunder the Clean Water and Safe Drinking Water acts; Jan. 25,Boston, and Feb. 14,Chicago. Contact: Marion Thompson, (202) 260-7117.   -Energy Information Administration: Profit from Energy &Emissions Tracking conference on the Department of Energy'sVoluntary Reporting of Greenhouse Gases Program; Feb. 27-28,Washington, D.C. For information, call (800) 803-5182.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONSCOULD LEAD TO MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS   The temporary furloughing of EPA workers under thepartial government shutdown may turn into permanent layoffsfor up to one-quarter of the agency's 17,000 employees byspring, EPA officials warn. Unless Republicans substantiallyincrease EPA's funding, the agency's cut in employees "willbe devastating," EPA Administrator Carol Browner says.   While officials have repeatedly said they cannot predicthow deep personnel cuts would be, they estimate that underthe EPA appropriations bill vetoed by President Clinton, theagency would have to lay off one-third of its workers whopromulgate regulations, issue permits and performinspections. Researchers and employees involved inenvironmental cleanups would not be cut, according to oneofficial.   At a press conference Dec. 18, President Clinton said hevetoed the $5.7 billion spending bill-that called for adecrease of 21 percent from the fiscal 1995 level-becauseenvironmental enforcement would be cut 25 percent, safedrinking water aid to local governments would be slashed 45percent and the air would become dirtier. The cuts wouldcondemn "10 million children under the age of 12 to livingnear toxic waste sites that might not be cleaned up foryears," Clinton said.   The spending bill (H.R. 2099) contains six policy riders,including a first-ever provision that would prevent EPA fromoverriding Army Corps of Engineers' wetlands decisions. Thepackage also proposes a 50 percent cut in funding toimplement the Montreal treaty for protection of the ozonelayer.   In his veto statement, Clinton said that "when I agreed afew weeks ago to work with the Congress to balance thebudget in seven years, Congress committed to a budget thatprotects the environment. These bills that I have to vetotoday, I do because they do not meet that test. For 25years, leaders of both parties have recognized that ourcountry is stronger when we control pollution and protectpublic health. Environmental protection is not, or at leastit never has been until now, a partisan issue."   In response to earlier Democratic attacks on EPA fundingcuts, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo), chairman of the SenateAppropriations subcommittee that handles EPA funding, said:"I am first to admit EPA did receive some targeted budgetcuts in the appropriations process, but the reductions comefrom areas which were identified by the National Academy ofPublic Administration and others as being unnecessary,wasteful or duplicative."Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SENATE ENVIRONMENT PANEL MEMBERSBACKING LIMITED REWRITING OF CWA   Key members of the Senate Environment Committee aremaking it clear they support little more than a fine-tuningof the Clean Water Act in the 104th Congress-not thesweeping rollback bill passed by the House (A/WPR, May. 22,1995, p. 163).   Chairman John Chafee (R-R.I.), in the first of a seriesof hearings on reauthorizing the CWA, said he favors amodest bill with a limited agenda because a more ambitiouspackage such as H.R. 961 would be harder to get through thelegislative process and would engender strident oppositionthat would undermine more important goals.   The panel's ranking Democrat, Max Baucus of Montana, saidthe CWA is a "major, major success story" and that "Houseefforts to gut" it were "shortsighted, misdirected andwrongheaded....No CWA reauthorization would be better thanthe one the House suggested." Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J.)added that health and economic benefits for the fishing andtourism industries have justified the high costs of CWA-mandated improvements.   A frequent critic of environmental laws, Sen. ChristopherBond (R-Mo.), told the hearing that the CWA deserves creditfor rehabilitating the Mississippi River. He said waterquality has been getting better over the past two decadesand that he supports continued progress. Bond said he willwork to fix CWA stormwater provisions he considers "broken"and will stress the importance of proceeding with anunderstanding of what local entities, states and the federalgovernment can afford. "We have cities spending upwards of$650,000 to obtain [stormwater discharge] permits. Thisexpenditure does not result in cleaner waters." Bond addedthat "assessing humungous [CWA] fines against smallcommunities with limited resources is probably the dumbestthing you can do if you want to improve the environment."   The focus on the hearing was the CWA's impact on stateand local governments. Sen. Larry Pressler (R-S.D.) urgedthe committee to consider his proposal, S. 1390, to allowCWA fines to be invested in local pollution prevention andremediation rather than sending the money to Washington.Move to Ease Privatization   Lautenberg has introduced S 1436 to help localgovernments privatize wastewater facilities by addressing alegal quirk setting different standards for privately- andpublicly-owned systems. The bill would expand the definitionof a publicly-owned treatment works to include systems thatwere constructed, owned or operated by government buttransferred to the private sector. Ronald Dungan, presidentof the National Association of Water Companies, testifiedthat more private-sector participation is needed inwastewater treatment because the cost of repairing andmaintaining infrastructure is beyond the finances ofgovernments and municipal utilities. Dungan said S 1436would provide a "single and clear definition of a wastewatertreatment facility based on purpose rather than ownership."   Al Bilik, president of the AFL-CIO's public employeedepartment, said organized labor strongly opposesprivatization because it would result in a deterioration ofthe quality of public works. Businesses' top priority ismaking money, not public well-being, he testified. Investorsmight be able to buy public utilities at bargain-basementprices and milk them for profit while maintaining an outwardappearance of functioning well, Bilik said. If the utilitygoes bankrupt, the government will be left holding the bagbecause these services are vital, he warned.   Robert Perciasepe, head of EPA's water office, said thatin order to make $2 billion in loans to states annually forthe next 30 years, $10 billion needs to be invested in thewastewater state revolving fund (SRF) over the next sevenyears. President Clinton requested $1.59 billion in fiscal1996 to support the SRF program. The appropriations billpassed by Congress would provide $1.25 billion forwastewater capitalization grants for 1996, Perciasepe said.EPA is requesting authorization levels of $1.3 billion forfiscal 1997 and $1 billion for 1998 through 2005.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996API ASKS EPA TO REVISIT RFG PHASE IITO REPEAL NOX-REDUCTION PROVISIONS   The American Petroleum Institute is asking EPA to repealprovisions in the second phase of the reformulated gasoline(RFG) program requiring reductions in nitrogen oxideemissions. The trade group says in a petition that the NOx-reduction requirements are not a cost-effective means tocontrol summertime ozone and may not be beneficial. API alsoargues that reductions in NOx have been demonstrated in somecases not to be an effective way to curb ozone.   The NOx requirement was based partly on a 1991 NationalResearch Council report that said more attention should befocused on NOx as a means to control ozone. The second phaseof the RFG program calls for NOx emissions reductions of 5percent to 7 percent, beginning in 2000. API's petitionstates that although EPA used findings from that study, itdiscounted "those portions of the same studies showing thatNOx control may be counterproductive in many areas,depending on the VOC/NOx ratio."Disagreement over Costs   There is considerable debate on the cost of thedesulfurization of gasoline, a major part of the RFGprogram. While EPA contends that reducing sulfur to 138parts per million would have a nationwide cost of about$5,200 per ton, API counsel David Deal said the cost iscloser to more than $10,000 per ton. Deal said this costwould be passed on to consumers. "We have good reason towant to reassess the program before people make acommitment."   The petition makes another point concerning costs,stating that the cost of controlling NOx emissions in fuelsrelative to the cost of stationary sources has not beengiven enough attention by EPA.   API wants the agency to respond promptly so refiners mayhave enough time to make the necessary adjustments to theirfacilities. Although phase II of the RFG program does notbegin for another five years, "the lead time to makerefinery changes is about three years. So sometime in 1997is the time by which it is important to know what the storyis," Deal said. A copy of the 32-page petition is availablefrom BPI's % DocuDial Service as Doc. #03-1104.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EW FOCUS: OPEN MEETINGSHAZWASTE INCINERATORS, GREEN GROUPSCHALLENGE EPA-CEMENT NEGOTIATIONS   A lawsuit seeking to prevent EPA from using closed-doormeetings with the cement kiln industry to reach an"enforceable agreement" on cement kiln dust (CKD) disposalrules is coming down to whether the selective process can bedefined as a federal advisory committee. Theplaintiffs-Environmental Technology Council (ETC), SierraClub and four local environmental advocacy groups-contendthat EPA-cement industry meetings since March violate theFederal Advisory Committee Act (FACA). The cement industryand EPA argue they do not.   A cement industry official told EW Dec. 27 that despitethe diverse makeup of the plaintiffs, the case is beingpushed by the incinerator industry in an effort to gaincompetitive advantage in the market for waste-treatmentservices.   The suit (Huron Environmental Activist League et al. v.U.S. EPA, DC DC, No. 95-2124) was filed Nov. 15 (EW, Dec. 4,1995, p. 473). The battle widened when the Cement KilnRecycling Coalition (CKRC) and the American Portland CementAlliance (APCA) intervened as defendants on Nov. 29. Sincethen, papers have been flying: motions for summary judgmentwere filed by all sides Dec. 8; all sides filed responsesDec. 15, prompting still further motions. Judge CharlesRichey of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia will decide soon as to whether EPA's meetings withthe cement industry violate FACA requirements.   FACA is meant to control how private groups become asource of advice and recommendations to Federal agencies. Itrequires notice of meetings in the Federal Register and thatan agency official approve agendas and be present at allmeetings.   EPA and the cement industry had been negotiating sinceMarch over an enforceable agreement on CKD disposal. Theagency had already decided not to expose cement kilns to allof the rigors of the Resource Conservation & Recovery Act's(RCRA) Subtitle C, which governs disposal of hazardouswastes. The plaintiffs charge that seven EPA-cement industrymeetings violated FACA. EPA got advice on managementstandards from only one interest group, "closed its meetingswith the cement industry...and denied plaintiffs' requestto attend the meetings," says the Dec. 8 defendants' motionfor summary judgment.   EPA allegedly provided no public notice, no meetingsummaries and no agendas, and no documents developed fromthe meetings were made available to the public. Theplaintiffs also charge that EPA utilized APCA and CKRC as an"advisory committee" in the sense of FACA without formallyestablishing one. Once the cement industry proposed that theagency promulgate an "enforceable agreement" to manage CKDstandards, EPA crossed the line into territory governed byFACA, the plaintiffs contend.   In its motion, EPA contends that the cement kiln groupscannot be defined as "advisory committees" under FACAbecause they were not established, funded or controlled bythe government. Mere use of the committee's work product isnot enough to trigger FACA rules; the government mustexercise strict management over the group, EPA argues. EPAreferred to the only FACA case judged by the U.S. SupremeCourt (Public Citizen v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 491 U.S.1989), in which the justices upheld EPA's consultations withthe activist group founded by Ralph Nader. In that case, themajority wrote: "We cannot believe that FACA was intended tocover every formal and informal consultation between anagency and a group rendering advice."   In a response filed Dec. 15, the plaintiffs maintain thatEPA managed the advisory group and its agenda; controlledthe process by identifying the issues for the group toaddress; controlled participation by denying plaintiffs'requests to attend meetings; and suspended its efforts todevelop regulatory standards in order to conduct theadvisory-group process. The plaintiffs also argue they willnot have meaningful input on an enforceable agreement ifthey cannot meet simultaneously with the cement industry andEPA.   Andy O'Hare, vice president of APCA, told EW that therival waste-incineration industry "has been meeting with EPAall along but claims that only the cement kiln industry'sprivate meetings are in violation of FACA." In its motion,EPA says that it met at least once since March with all ofthe plaintiffs on the enforceable agreement.   O'Hare, while claiming CKD is "innocuous" from a publichealth standpoint, said the plaintiffs are led by theincinerator industry. "This whole case should be seen as anattempt by the incinerator industry to regain"competitivity." It is not an environmental issue; it is amarket-share issue." ETC, formerly known as the HazardousWaste Treatment Council, filed the case using their lawyerand brought along the environmentalists to bolster the casefor the incinerator interests, he charged.   ETC lawyer David Case was not available to respond to thestatements about the suit's genesis.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CALIFORNIA AIR BOARD MOVES TO DROPMINIMUM ZEV MANDATE FOR 1998   California has begun formalizing its retreat from itssmog-fighting mandate for zero emission vehicles (ZEVs) tocomprise at least 2 percent of the new cars and light trucksmarketed in the state in 1998.   The action throws into doubt whether Massachusetts andNew York will maintain their similar mandates, which wouldtranslate into minimum sales of electric vehicles.Massachusetts Gov. William Weld (R) said, "We think theCalifornia Air Resources [Board] staff made the wrongrecommendation, but the decision does not bindMassachusetts." In New York, a spokesman for Gov. GeorgePataki (R) made only the following statement: "the staff isevaluating New York State's legal obligation in the wake ofCalifornia's decision."   Electric car supporters and clean-air advocates chargethat California Gov. Pete Wilson (R) gave into the massiveanti-electric vehicle advertising and public relationscampaign financed by petroleum refiners and carmanufacturers.Mandate for 2003 Retained   California's Air Resources Board (CARB), which pioneeredZEV-sales mandates, will sponsor ZEV demonstration projectsin Los Angeles and Sacramento. They will use only 3,750ZEVs, rather than the 60,000 projected under the shelvedmandate. CARB maintains its requirement that 10 percent oftotal vehicles sales in the state will be ZEVs in 2003.   CARB Chair John Dunlap said: "This [revised] planprovides for a successful launch of commercially viableelectric cars that protect public health and will providenew high-tech jobs in California. This plan promotes amarket-based introduction of ZEVs and will unleash theengineering and the marketing prowess of automakers."   A spokesman for the California-based Coalition for CleanAir said the group has "seen no scientific or technicalreason for delay. The agency responsible for worldwideadoption of catalytic converters, unleaded gasoline andreformulated gasoline has never before buckled to politicalpressure."   The ZEV retreat is laid out in a CARB staff proposal thatis subject to change pending final action in March. Otherstaff recommendations include:Automakers voluntarily introduce ZEVs, with an annualproduction capacity of 5,000 in 1996-1997 rising to 14,000in 1998.Automakers produce cleaner standard cars to make up for theshortfall in lower emissions without the ZEVs.Automakers place 750 ZEVs in 1998 and 1,500 in 1999-2000 inthe Los Angeles and Sacramento areas.Automakers commit to continued ZEV research and development.CARB creates extra ZEV credits for longer-range vehicles andearly introduction of electrics.Each year the state will buy some advanced-battery vehicles.The staff proposal also calls upon all automakers to changetheir media publicity and legislative initiatives fromattacking the ZEV mandate to supporting the state-manufacturers' ZEV partnership.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDSFOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS   Newer municipal waste combustors (MWCs) will be requiredto install a combination of high-efficiency pollution-control equipment starting Jan. 29, if a direct final rulefrom EPA does not draw significant negative comments. Whilethe rule enables EPA to reduce several pollutantssimultaneously, it is expected to impose substantial capitalcosts.   The maximum achievable control technology standard willaffect existing and new MWCs capable of combusting more than35 metric tons daily. It establishes emissions limits fordioxins, furans, cadmium, lead, mercury, particulate matter,hydrogen chloride, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide andfugitive ash. Stricter performance standards apply to MWCswith capacities greater than 225 metric tons a day.   The rule, published in the Dec. 19 Federal Register,mandates that MWCs built after Sept. 20, 1994, or modifiedafter June 19, 1996, will be subject to new, more stringentperformance standards. MWCs built between Dec. 20, 1989 andSept. 20, 1994, or modified before June 19, 1996, willremain subject to MWC performance standards for plants builtafter the 1989 date. This provision was promulgated Feb. 11,1991. The dates were set to avoid same MWC plants beingsubject to overlapping rules.   EPA says there are about 307 operating MWC units at 128plants, providing a total combustion capacity of 94,000metric tons per day. It says that 179 MWCs will be affectedby the rule; about 100 are publicly owned. Costs for theupdated standard exceed those for the 1991 standard by $156million for capital investment and by $43 million for annualoperations. Total capital costs from investments mandated byboth rules approach $780 million, or an added $13 per metricton of solid waste combusted.   The agency says the benefits include annual emissionsgreater than the 1991 rule: 3,000 fewer metric tons of SO2and 4,000 fewer metric tons of hydrogen chloride. For mostcategories there is less than a 10 percent improvement, butfor mercury, the new standard will eliminate 200 percent ofthe amount removed by the 1991 rule. In total, the ruleexpects to reduce emissions of several hazardous airpollutants by about 110,000 tons per year, EPA says.   If a facility combusts less than 10 metric tons a day ofsolid waste, regardless of capacity, it is exempted from therule. Tire-burning facilities are exempted from theperformance standard but not re-cordkeeping requirements.Small independent power producers, cogeneration facilitiesand metals recovery facilities are not subject to MWCstandards.   The regulation, simultaneously released as a direct finalrule and a proposed rule, takes effect Jan 29 unlesssignificant adverse comments are received by Jan. 18. Formore information call Walter Stevenson, emission standardsdivision, (919) 541-5264.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA CITES NPS FOR RCRA VIOLATIONSAT HAWAII VOLCANOES NATIONAL PARK   EPA is asking the National Park Service (NPS) to pay a$243,800 penalty for allegedly storing hazardous wastes atHawaii Volcanoes National Park last year without therequired Resource Conservation & Recovery Act permit. Thewastes included acetone, chromium, lead, xylene, phenol,arsenic, mercury and other substances generated by roadbuilding, automotive maintenance and labs studyingvolcanoes.   NPS also was cited for storing wastes in containers thatwere rusted or leaking despite having acceptable containerson site which could have been used. The park removed thecontainers with the waste in October 1995. EPA has orderedthe facility to develop a hazardous waste-management planwithin two months. It must include procedures ensuring thatall hazardous waste is moved off site shortly after it isgenerated. For more information, contact EPA's Lois Grunwaldat (415) 744-1588.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA: HEALTH BENEFITS EXCEED COSTSOF REDUCING ACID RAIN PRECURSORS   The Clean Air Act's acid-rain provisions will providebetween $3 billion and $11 billion worth of health benefitsin 1997 to residents of 31 eastern states, according to anassessment by EPA.   The agency's report also says the value of healthbenefits from reducing acid-rain precursors will be evengreater once the controls are fully in place by 2010. Thecost of complying with the acid-rain provisions are expectedto range from $1.2 billion to $2.4 billion in 2010, thereport adds.   Sulfate aerosols comprise about 40 percent of inhalableparticulate matter in the eastern United States, accordingto the report. Reductions in the number of new cases ofchronic bronchitis account for another 9 percent of thehealth benefits, with other avoided problems accounting forthe remainder.   EPA's Regional Acid Deposition Model provided the basisfor the report, which also used SO2 emission reductionsprojected to occur under Title IV to estimate atmosphericsulfate aerosol concentrations in the eastern United Statesand Canada. This data were combined with 1990 Census data toforecast population levels in portions of the two countrieswhere changes in sulfate levels are projected.   The study used published epidemiology studies that linkcertain health effects with sulfate level changes andwillingness-to-pay estimates published in economicliterature to put a value on changes in health, according toEPA.   The report was prepared by EPA's acid rain division aspart of an effort to estimate the total costs and benefitsof the Clean Air Act. To obtain a copy, call EPA's Acid RainHotline at (202) 233-9620 or the Acid Rain Division'shomepage on the Internet athttp://www.epa.gov/docs/acidrain/ardhome.html. For moreinformation, contact Ann Watkins of the acid rain divisionat (202) 233-9113.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA, ASIWPCA ISSUE DRAFT GUIDANCEFOR EVALUATING NONPOINT PROGRAMS   States would have nine major components upon which toevaluate and upgrade their runoff pollution-controlprograms, according to a draft guidance issued by EPA and anassociation of state officials.   The guidance allows states to review and revise theirprograms to include:Explicit short- and long-term goals for protecting surfaceand ground waters.A balance between statewide, nonpoint-source programs andon-the-ground management of individual watersheds wherewater bodies are polluted or threatened.Abatement of water quality impairments from current sourcesand possible future activities.Identification of waters and watersheds polluted orthreatened by polluted runoff.A review, upgrade and implementation of all programcomponents required under Section 319 of the Clean WaterAct.Efficient and effective program management.Strong working partnerships with appropriate groups.Identification of federal lands and goals that are inharmony with state program goals.A feedback loop through which the state reviews, evaluatesand revises its nonpoint-source program and its managementevery five years.   A state that follows these requirements would beconsidered a Tier I state and would be given moreflexibility than other states, the draft guidance says. EPAwould also provide states with the necessary technical andfinancial assistance.   The final guidance is slated for release in March 1996.Comments are being sought through Jan. 19. The draftguidance is available through the Internet athttp://www.epa.gov/owow. It also is available from theAssociation of State and Interstate Water Pollution ControlAdministrators at (202) 898-0905.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996STATE OFFICIALS SEE HWIR PROPOSALCOMPLICATING WASTE MANAGEMENT   While some industry officials are cheering possibleexemptions of certain hazardous waste from strict managementrequirements under the proposed Hazardous WasteIdentification Rule (HWIR), state management officials areexpecting their role to become more complicated.   The self-implementing rule would require state officialsto conduct more sampling and inspecting at facilities toensure these businesses are complying with the rule, saidJennifer Kaduck, chief of the hazardous waste branch for theGeorgia Environmental Protection Department. The proposalsets concentration levels below which generators can managehazardous process waste constituents under Subtitle D of theResource Conservation & Recovery Act.   The rule would be difficult to enforce, Kaduck said.Although state agencies already have done much inspectionand sampling, HWIR will increase these responsibilitiesconsiderably, she said. "We have an obligation to thepublic" to ensure businesses are properly complying with therule, she said.Many Questions Expected   States also would have to consider the costs of adoptingthe rule, according to Susan Ferguson, director of wastepolicy for the Texas Natural Resources ConservationCommission. An overlooked upfront cost states would incur isthe time spent answering questions from the regulatedcommunity, Ferguson said. The rule is self-implementing forbusinesses, and companies are likely to ask about testing ofwaste to determine the hazardous concentration, she said.   The proposed rule (EW, Nov. 27, 1995, p. 451) also mayskew state funding, officials say. Many state agenciesreceive federal funding based on the management of hazardouswaste, Ferguson said.   State officials do not know how many businesses wouldseek to remove waste from Subtitle C requirements throughthe HWIR or how much of the waste stream would meet the newexit level, Ferguson said. The levels are fairly low, andtreatment residue and wastewater possibly are the mostlikely to exit Subtitle C. Ferguson said she hopes companieswill modify processes to limit the amount of listedhazardous waste they generate.   Some officials also are concerned about a section in therule's preamble asking for comments on a future proposal toset contingent management exit levels for Department ofEnergy mixed waste, Ferguson said. "States have not beenconvinced by the data" showing mixed waste is safe in lowconcentrations, she said. For more information, contactFerguson at (512) 239-5000 or Kaduck, at (404) 656-4713.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PHYSICIANS' GROUP SOUNDING ALERTABOUT DANGERS FROM AIR POLLUTION   The American Medical Association's House of Delegates hasadopted policy resolutions urging doctors to inform thepublic about air pollution's impact on the body, protectingbiological diversity and the dangers of the sun'sultraviolet rays. The group based the recommendations on thepremise that "human health is inseparable from the health ofthe natural world."   Resolution 404 seeks to alert doctors, patients and thepublic of damage to body organs and systems by indoor andoutdoor air pollution. Exposure to air pollutants occursthrough the lungs, skin and digestive tract, the resolutionstates.   John Kimball Scott, vice president of the NationalAssociation of Physicians for the Environment, said that "itis important to understand that pollution can affect notonly the lungs, but virtually every organ and system of thebody."   Resolution 403 urges physicians to be aware of biologicaldiversity and its relationship to human health, especiallyin terms of the development of drugs and biologicals derivedfrom plants, animals and other elements of the naturalworld. Resolution 405 is intended to alert the public aboutdangers from excessive exposure to ultraviolet rays inadvance of the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GREENHOUSE 'CAR TALKS' REPORT URGESBOOSTING CAFE STANDARD TO 45 MPG   Raising the corporate average fuel economy (CAFE)standard to 45 miles per gallon is the single biggest stepthat can be taken to slow global warning, according theClinton Administration's Policy Dialogue Advisory Committeeon Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Personal MotorVehicles. Because the technology to raise CAFE to 45 mpg isavailable, benefits from this step would be evident beforethose produced by reduced driving and alternative fuels, the"car talks" committee says.   The recommendation is contained in an executive summaryissued by a majority of the committee, which was unable toreach consensus following more than a year of discussionsamong regulators, environmental advocacy groups and affectedindustries such as automakers and oil companies. Althoughthe process stalemated, the committee majority said in itsDec. 13 report that three key actions can be taken to reducegreenhouse gas emissions: higher CAFE, reduced driving andcleaner fuels.Tire 'Feebates' Recommended   Higher CAFE standards, plus research and developmentsupport, should be implemented in 1998 to provide marketincentives, the summary says. Introducing "feebates" for lowrolling-resistance tires will also help fuel economy, itadds.   Recommended alternative fuels measures include supportingfurther research and development for electric vehicles andinfrastructure; tax credits for natural gas vehicles andinfrastructure; more support for liquid biofuels researchand development; and production incentives for low-emittingfuels.   Driving-reduction steps include encouraging the equitableshift of state and local road subsidies to cost-of-driving;encouraging land-use away from auto dependency by improvingfixed-route and on-demand transit services plus bicycle andpedestrian access; and reforming workplace parking-subsidyprograms.   The committee majority contended that its suggestions areneeded if the United States is to meet its obligation underthe Framework Convention on Climate Change. Besides reducingvehicle emissions, the suggestions should also reduce urbansmog and consumer expenditures, create jobs and eliminateU.S. reliance on imported oil, the summary says. For a copyof the report, contact Roni Lieberman of the Sierra Club at(202) 675-7903.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA PROPOSES AIR PERMIT EXEMPTIONSFOR SOME NON-MAJOR AREA SOURCES   Chromium electroplaters, dry cleaners and commercialsterilizers would benefit from amended EPA rules for newarea sources of hazardous air pollutants. A rule proposedDec. 13 would give these source categories a reprieve fromClean Air Act operating permit requirements.   Except in the case of Subpart X, the action proposes tolift the requirement that these non-major sources obtainTitle V operating permits. An EPA amendment to Subpart Xconfirms that existing non-major secondary lead smeltingfacilities will still be subject to Title V permit rules.   EPA says the purpose of the proposal is to reduce theregulatory burden on states and local agencies, EPA regionaloffices and industry "at a time when tremendous resourcesare necessary for the initial implementation of the Title Vpermit program."   Regulatory agencies, overburdened by a backlog of permitapplications, will be unable to assist nonmajor sources,forcing these small businesses to go through greater painsto deal with the regulation. Loosening the permitting rulewill not affect a source's obligation to implement maximumachievable control technology by the assigned date,according to EPA.   On a case-by-case basis, states will consider whether togrant facility exemptions for perchlo-roethelyne from drycleaners, ethylene oxide from commercial sterilizers, hardand decorative chromium electroplaters or anodizing tanksand halogenated solvent cleaning. Only the standard forhalogenated solvent cleaning previously had a permittingexemption. EPA decided to grant a permanent exemption frompermitting requirements to decorative chromium operationsthat use either fume suppressants or trivalent chromium bathtechnologies to reduce emissions.   The exemptions would not apply to secondary lead smeltersbecause the agency judged that meeting permittingrequirements would not impose an "undue burden" on them.There are only 16 secondary lead smelters, and five of theseare non-major sources, the proposal states. "Additionally,the five non-major smelters are owned by relatively largecompanies [that]...should be better equipped to handle thePart 70 permitting process than the small businessescharacterizing the other source categories." Comments on theproposal will be accepted through Jan. 12. For moreinformation, contact Lalit Banker of the emission standardsdivision, (919) 541-5420.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996REFRIGERATOR MAKERS SETTLE LAWSUITOVER 'CFC-FREE' ADVERTISEMENTS   Three manufacturers have agreed to change advertisingclaims about ozone-depleting chemicals used in theirrefrigerators to settle a California lawsuit brought bythree environmental advocacy groups.   The lawsuit, Ozone Action v. Amana Refrigeration, (No.973282) was filed in San Francisco Superior Court byEnvironmental Law Foundation, Earth Day 2000, and OzoneAction. It alleged that General Electric Co., AmanaRefrigeration Inc., and Whirl-pool Corp. and severalretailers were making false claims about so-called "CFC-free" refrigerators in violation of California's "Green"labeling law and Federal Trade Commission guidelines forenvironmental marketing claims.   The refrigerator manufacturers agreed to furnish stickersto dealers stating the refrigerators contain HCFC-14b, aknown ozone depleting chemical, and to display store posterslisting the HCFC content of the refrigerators. The threemanufacturers, as part of the settlement announced Dec. 22,also are making a $100,000 grant for further study of ozonedepletion.   The suit said the "CFC-Free" ads, while true, weremisleading consumers into believing the refrigerators didnot harm the ozone layer. HCFCs contribute to ozone-layerloss, but are a far smaller factor than CFCs. Thedefendants, which included Sears Roebuck & Co., Circuit CityInc., Montgomery Ward & Co. and Basic Living Products, saidthey did not believe the advertising was misleading.   In a separate action, the three environmental groups saidthey and the U.S. Public Interest Research Group will sueMaytag and Sony for allegedly failing to label theirrefrigerators as containing CFCs-a designation required bythe 1990 Clean Air Act amendments.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996R E S O U R C E SNortheast-Midwest Institute has released the 156-page reportComing Clean for Economic Development: A Resource Book onEnvironmental Cleanup and Economic Development. Copies cost$39 each. Call (202) 544-5200.U.S. Government Information has released EPA NationalPublications Catalog 1995. It is available for $42. Call(202) 512-1800.American Society for Testing & Materials has published thefirst peer-reviewed scientific examination of the fate andeffects of the Exxon Valdez oil spill. Call (610) 832-9500.U.S. Department of Commerce is organizing an EnvironmentalTechnologies Matchmaker Trade Delegation to Korea, Singaporeand Indonesia April 23-30. For information aboutparticipating, call Derek Parks at (202) 482-0287.American Society of Civil Engineers begins publication thismonth of the Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, edited byLevent Kavvas of the University of California. Call (800)548-2723 for subscription information.EPA has released Innovative Treatment Technologies: AnnualStatus Report, 7th Edition, which describes innovativemethods being used at hazardous waste sites. Forinformation, call the RCRA/Super-fund Hotline at (800) 424-9810.Wessex Institute of Technology, Southampton, U.K., hasestablished a World Wide Web site to provide information onits conferences. The site is located athttp://www.witcmi.ac.uk/.Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development hasreleased the study Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants inOECD Countries (235 pp., $56). Call (202) 785-6323.Blymyer Engineers Inc. is offering seminars on how to usethe Internet for environmental information. Dates andlocations are Feb. 21, Marietta, Ga.; Feb. 22, Atlanta, Ga.;Feb. 26, Emeryville, Calif.; Feb. 28, San Jose, Calif.;March 1, Sacramento, Calif.; March 6, Anaheim, Calif.; andMarch 7, Burbank, Calif. Call (800) 753-3773.Energy Research Corp. has established a World Wide Web siteat http://www.ercc.com.Government Institutes Inc. is distributing its 1996 catalogof materials on environmental health and safety. Call (301)921-2355.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GREAT LAKES EFFORT COULD BE DAMAGEDBY GOP BUDGET CUTS, BROWNER SAYS   The Republican-drafted EPA appropriations bill vetoed byPresident Clinton may cost the Great Lakes initiative morethan $245 million in water quality funding, EPAAdministrator Carol Browner says.   Browner issued the findings of an economic analysisestimating costs and benefits of the final guidance issuedby EPA that sets water quality standards for the Great Lakesarea. She noted that EPA has made strides in the Great Lakescleanup over the past 25 years but that the fiscal 1996spending bill threatens the Great Lakes effort.   The bill also would limit EPA's ability to takeenforcement actions in the Great Lakes area, Browner said.EPA and the Great Lakes states made more than 19,000inspections and took more than 2,000 enforcement actions inthe eight-state area in 1994. "With the Republican budget,the environmental cop would not be on the beat," she said.   Great Lakes Superfund sites would also be hurt, accordingto Browner, who said 434 sites in the area would not becleaned up because the bill "cuts funding of toxic wastecleanup by 25 percent."   The cost-benefit analysis that was performed on the areajustifies the potential costs of the Great Lakes initiative,according to EPA. Three case studies of representativecommunities were used for the analysis: the Fox River nearGreen Bay, Wis.; the Saginaw River near Bay City, Mich.; andthe Black River near Cleveland.   The analysis said the Fox River area would pay $3.6million for water-quality improvements and receive benefitsworth $4.5 million, while the Saginaw River area would pay$2.6 million and receive benefits worth $4 million. However,the Black River area would pay $2.1 million and receivebenefits worth $900,000, according to the study.   Copies of the Great Lakes reports are available bycalling (513) 489-8910. For more information on theguidance, contact Jim Hanlon (202) 260-5400 or Mark Morris(202) 260-0312.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CALIFORNIA'S AIR RESOURCES BOARDMANDATES CLEANER-BURNING FUEL   The California Air Resources Board has mandated thatcleaner-burning gasoline be sold statewide, a step officialsexpect will reduce vehicular emissions by about 1 billionpounds annually. The gasoline is produced by changing therefinery process to reduce toxic compounds and sulfurcontent of gasoline.   Although the price of the gasoline cannot be predictedbecause prices are dependant on market conditions, CARBestimates that production costs will be between five and 15cents a gallon.   CARB officials says the new gasoline has undergoneextensive testing, with more than 800 cars driven more than5 million miles. It will be available in the same octanelevels as the current gasoline. For more information, call(800) 566-6655.   CALIFORNIA-The San Diego Regional Water Quality ControlBoard has refused to reduce two fines totaling $6.2 millionagainst the San Diego for sewage spill and treatmentviolations. City officials offered $1.1 million toward aproposed $3.7 million fine for a 1993 spill in LosPenasquitos Lagoon and a separate $2.5 million fine forinadequate sludge treatment. A senior deputy city attorneysaid the city is negotiating with the regional board. SanDiego has gone to court seeking relief from the fine, andSuperior Court Judge Judith McConnell remanded the matter tothe board for a rehearing.   COLORADO-Home Depot U.S.A. Inc., U.S. EPA and the statehave announced a prospective-purchaser agreement to resolvepotential liability claims and foster commercial propertydevelopment in Denver. The deal requires Home Depot to cleanup a portion of a Superfund site in exchange for agreementby the governmental agencies not to sue it for liability.The company also will operate and maintain the property toensure there will be no risk to the public health orenvironment from past contamination. Home Depot plans astore on the remediated site. Cleanup will be supervised bythe state Department of Public Health and Environment.   DELAWARE-The Department of Natural Resources andEnvironmental Control has proposed a trading program for airemissions. The proposal would allow industries to earncredits for voluntarily reducing emissions of volatileorganic compounds or nitrogen oxides below levels set understate regulations. If a facility exceeds the targeted levelsfor emission reductions, 90 percent of the excess could bebanked, with the remainder retired to assure additional air-quality improvements. A facility seeking to expandoperations could use its banked credits to offset additionalVOC or NOx emissions or buy credits from another facility atwhatever price it can negotiate. A program audit would beconducted every three years, and public comment would besolicited during the permit-approval process. Two publichearings will be held this month, with final adoption of therules expected in April.   MASSACHUSETTS-The legislature has authorized $100 millionin bonds to continue state hazardous site cleanups. A $60million fund that has paid for cleanups since 1987 hadfallen to $150,000 when the House passed the reauthorizationbond. The state had halted cleanup at 73 sites and hadexpected to close down the remaining remediation operations.Contractors are working again on all state cleanupactivities, a state official said. For more information,contact Te Leone at (617) 292-5845.   NEW JERSEY-Auto emissions testing is being threatened byRepublican leaders in the Assembly. Assembly Speaker GarabedHaytaian and Majority Leader Jack Collins have said they arewilling to make changes in the law to respond to publicconcerns about the program. The testing has becomecontroversial because other states are bailing out of thefederally mandated program and because of publicity thatclaimed the law would lead the state to confiscate cars. Thelaw regulating testing, passed just five months ago,requires owners of vehicles that fail the test to correctproblems. Both lawmakers have said there is enough time tomake changes because the program is not scheduled to startuntil 1997.   TEXAS-The Border Environmental Cooperation Commission hasapproved a $11.7 million waste water treatment and reuseproject for El Paso. BECC, a bilateral body arising from theNorth American Free Trade Agreement, will certify additionalprojects at its next meeting. They are expected to include a$40 million wastewater treatment plant in Ciudad Juarez,Mexico; a $1 million wastewater treatment plant inMatamoros, Mexico; a $7.8 million tire recycling project inMexicali, Mexico; a $52 million water distribution andtreatment project in Nogales, Mexico; a $770,000 watersupply and waste water treatment plant in Naco, Mexico; a$118 million urban development and environmental improvementproject in Rio Tijuana, Mexico; a $2.7 million upgradingplan for a wastewater treatment plant in Somerton, Calif.;and a $2 million upgrading plan for a water system inDouglas, Ariz.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996AGING DNEPR RIVER HYDRO PROJECTSTHREATEN MANY AREAS OF UKRAINE   Decrepit Soviet-built hydroelectric works along the DneprRiver are putting vast areas of Ukraine at risk of flooding,according to an group of international experts. The groupwarns that excessively high water levels may cause the sandand soil foundation of the Kakhovka Reservoir to collapse.   The failure of this dam would release a 20-30 meter highwave moving at 130 km. per hour, capable of destroying somecities and hundreds of towns in the Kherson, Odessa, Crimeaand Nikolayev regions, the authors of the study documentsaid.   Chemicals, oil products and waste contained in thereservoir would create an environmental disaster, destroyingsoil in the Dnepr Basin and life in the Black Sea andirreparably damaging coastal areas and resorts on the Azovand Black seas. Vasyl Durdynets, Ukraine's minister forstate security and emergencies, said the government is awareof the consequences of a disaster and will submit a plan forthe safe functioning of the Dnepr reservoirs to thegovernment's commission on environmental safety.   AUSTRALIA-The nation has withheld endorsement of threeOrganization for Economic Cooperation & Developmentenvironmental resolutions, surprising observers who expectenvironmentally friendly actions from Australia. The mainblockage is over binding resolutions to extend to non-membercountries mutual acceptance of data and guidelines forchemical testing. Australia also has reservations aboutguidelines on setting up a pollutant release and transferregistry modeled on the U.S. Toxic Release Inventory.Another source of discord may concern the "greening" ofgovernment operations. Contact: Bill Long, OECD, (+33 1) 4524 8200.   CANADA-British Columbia has adopted Canada's mostrigorous new-vehicle emission standards. They are aimed atreducing pollution at least 50 percent by 2010 and 70percent by 2020 in the southwest corner of the province. Thelaw stipulates that by 1998, all cars sold in BritishColumbia will have to meet U.S. emissions standards, whichare stricter than Canada's. By 2001, all new vehicles soldin the province will have to be certified under "California"standards and emit on average 70 percent less of certainpollutants than current vehicles, if they are to sold in theprovince. The standards also mandate that zero-emissionvehicles comprise 10 percent of the market by 2003. Contact:Environment Canada, (819) 997-2800.   CHILE-The Ministry of Mining says government and privatesector actions against air pollution will bring miningoperations and smelters up to U.S. and European standards by2000. Technical requirements to set emission levels andother standards should be passed by next June, and existingdecrees aimed at specific pollutants have already affectedmining, ministry official say. Large sources such as copperproducers Codelco and ENAMI, are said to be committed tobecoming more environmentally responsible. Contact: JanetMaritano, Ministry of Mining; (+56 2) 696-5872.   ECUADOR-Fundacion Jatun Sacha has acquired 4,000 acres ofwet forest, with the goal of preserving the last 0.8 percentof land in western Ecuador. It describes the land as havingthe world's richest biodiversity. The group says it needs12,500 acres to adequately protect life forms but iscompeting with a logging company that is eyeing the entirearea. Contact: World Parks Endowment, 1616 P St. NW, #200,Washington, DC 20036; (202) 939-3808.   JAPAN-The Ministry of International Trade and Industryhas asked private businesses to prepare new voluntary anti-pollution plans to conform with ISO 14000 environmental-management standards. MITI's directive also promotesrecycling, non-polluting vehicles, measures to reduce air,water, soil and noise pollution and alternative energysources, including solar power.   NEPAL-This Himalayan nation and the European Union haveagreed to improve environmental cooperation. The accord, thefirst between the E.U. and Nepal, calls for the creation ofa permanent mechanism for facilitating communication onenvironmental and other issues.   NEW ZEALAND/AUSTRALIA-A cooperative waste programannounced at the 10th bilateral Environment and ConservationCouncil creates an "interim biogeographical regionalization"of the two nations to identify shortcomings in nationalwildlife protection. The governments will create acomprehensive mechanism for protecting natural areas.   SOUTH KOREA-Seoul has decided not to build a nuclearwaste repository on Kulop Island because two fault lineswere located about two miles away, the Environment Ministryhas announced. The facility was to store up to 1 milliondrums of waste. South Korea now has no specific site tostore waste from its 10 nuclear power plants. Five moreplants are under construction. Contact: EnvironmentalAttache, South Korean Embassy, (202) 939-6463.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EVENTS CALENDAR   Feb. 5-Risk v. Resource Allocation: EnvironmentalDecisionmaking; symposium sponsored by American Society forSafety Engineers, National Registry of EnvironmentalProfessionals and American Industrial Hygiene Association;Orlando, Fla. Call (703) 849-8888.   Feb. 5-7-The Environmental Regulation Course; presentedby Executive Enterprises Inc.; Iselin, N.J., and Denver.Also being presented Feb. 14-16 in Cincinnati and Feb. 19-21in San Diego. Call (800) 831-8333.   Feb. 5-9-Corporate Environmental Management Systems:Preparing for ISO 14000; course presented by University ofMassachusetts and Bureau Veritas Quality International;Amherst, Mass. Call (413) 545-4195.   Feb. 5-9-Field Sampling QA/QC Course; presented by Centerfor Hazardous Materials Research; Pittsburgh. Also beingpresented Sept. 9-13. Call (412) 826-5320.   Feb. 6-7-Environmental Site Assessment Practices forCommercial Real Estate; course presented by ASTM; San Diego,Calif. Call (215) 299-5480.   Feb. 6-9-Wet Weather Flows: Integrating EnvironmentalResponse in Urban Wetlands; 1996 Winter Technical Conferenceof the Association of Metropolitan Sewerage Agencies;Eldorado Hotel, Santa Fe, N.M. For information, call (202)833-2672.   Feb. 7-An Air Toxics Technical Update: Innovative Methodsfor Sampling & Analysis; seminar presented by Air ToxicsLtd.; Sacramento, Calif. Also being presented Feb. 27 in SanFrancisco and Atlanta; Feb. 28 in Seattle; and Feb. 29 inIrvine, Calif., and Denver. For information, call (800) 985-5955.   Feb. 7-9-Stormwater Management & Treatment; environmentalengineering short course presented by George WashingtonUniversity; Washington, D.C. Call (800) 424-9773.   Feb. 8-Advanced Hazardous Waste Management; coursepresented by University of Missouri College of Engineering;Kansas City, Mo. Call (800) 776-1044.   Feb. 12-13-Fundamentals of Dispersion Modeling; Feb. 14-15-Computer Modeling Laboratory; courses presented byTrinity Consultants Inc.; Greenville, S.C. Call (214) 661-8100.   Feb. 12-16-The Environmental Compliance Bootcamp: BasicTraining for New Environmental Professionals; coursepresented by Government Institutes Inc.; Salt Lake City.Call (301) 921-2345.   Feb. 13-14-1996 Conference on Corporate Environmental,Health & Safety Excellence; sponsored by Arthur D. LittleInc. and the Conference Board; Marriott Marquis, New YorkCity. Call (212) 339-0345.   Feb. 14-16-New Techniques in Risk Assessment; coursepresented by International Business Communications; LakeBuena Vista, Fla. Call (508) 481-6400.   Feb. 15-16-Title III Air Toxics Workshop; presented byAir & Waste Management Association; Atlanta. Forinformation, call (412) 232-3444, ext. 3142.   Feb. 15-16-Registered Environmental Manager and CertifiedEnvironmental Auditor Workshop and Exams; presented byNational Registry of Environmental Professionals; Orlando,Fla. Call (770) 486-9253.   Feb. 26-March 1-The Environmental Technology Institute;presented by Government Institutes Inc.; Orlando, Fla. Alsobeing presented Aug. 26-30 in Hilton Head, S.C. Call (301)921-2345.   Feb. 28-March 1-Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air ToxicsControl; conference and courses sponsored by Air & WasteManagement Association and U.S. EPA; Sheraton Sand KeyResort, Clearwater Beach, Fla. For information, call (412)232-3444, ext. 3142.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-16IA059-000325-B008-395http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev49.html 205.156.212.5 19970114235912 text/html 6054HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:57:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:38 GMTContent-length: 5868Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev49.html Sample Issue Copyright ALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet April 17, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES --------------- VOLKSWAGEN JOINS THE RACE FOR FIRST COMMERCIALLY VIABLE ELECTRIC CAR (58 words) --------------------------- ITALIAN CHEMICAL CO. INTRODUCES NEW, CLEANER DIESEL FUEL (272 words) -------------------- CHINA MOVES TOWARD VISION OF GIANT HYDRO DAM, DISPLACING 1.3 MILLION (240 words) LOS ANGELES SET TO ADD 150 MEGA-WATT GEOTHERMAL COMPLEX (98 words) CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992VOLKSWAGEN JOINS THE RACE FOR FIRST COMMERCIALLY VIABLE ELECTRIC CARVolkswagen AG has plans to unleash an electric vehiclecalled the Chico car by the end of 1993.The company has just developed a computerized system that willgreatly assist in mass producing the vehicle.  Volkswagen hopes thatthe Chico will put it in the front-running position of the newlydeveloping electric car market.(CHICAGO TRIBUNE: 4/5)Back to Headline List CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992ITALIAN CHEMICAL CO. INTRODUCES NEW, CLEANER DIESEL FUELDiesel-Bi is the name of a clean diesel fuel produced in part fromvegetable oils and methanol.  An Italian company, Novamont, based inMilan and a subsidiary of the Ferruzzi-Montedison Group, will beginfield testing the fuel this month in South Dakota.The company has worked closely for two years with Senator ThomasDaschle (D-SD) who hosted a March 28 ceremony to inaugurate the fieldtests.  A company spokesman said Ferruzzi is seeking eventual EPAapproval of the product so that it can be commercially sold in theU.S.  Testing will take place in the EPA-certified laboratory inSioux Falls, and data from these tests along with other company testswill be compared to 1993 and '94 clean diesel emissions standardsadopted in California.Diesel-Bi is made of 90 percent vegetable oil and 10 percent methanolthat is "combined in the presence of a catalyst to produce a methylester," a company official said.  Ethanol could be used, but methanolis preferred by the company as more price competitive.Palm, sunflower, soya and other oils can be used to produceDiesel-Bi.  In Europe, canola is the feedstock most commonly used.Some test results have shown that sulphur emissions have beeneliminated and particulates and carbon monoxide have been reduced upto 50 percent.  The fuel can also be used in combination withtraditional diesel fuel.Ferruzzi began his work on Diesel-Bi about two years ago and held thefirst field tests in Zurich last summer.  Two buses in Sioux Fallsare scheduled to operate solely on the fuel for four months.(NEW FUELS REPORT: 3/30)Back to Headline List CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992CHINA MOVES TOWARD VISION OF GIANT HYDRO DAM, DISPLACING 1.3 MILLIONThe dream of damming the flood-prone Yangtze, which captivated MaoZedong in the 50's, is moving toward realization.Everything about the project is enormous.  It will generate 84billion kilowatts of hydroelectric power per year by 2008.  The l85-meter-high dam will be the biggest hydropower station in the world,as well as the world's largest ship-lift.  The price: an estimated$l0.5 billion.But the human cost will be equally enormous.  Some 1.3 million peoplewill be displaced from 140 towns (some with populations of overl00,000) and countless villages.  Also lost will be 58,800 acres ofarable land, 159 smaller power stations, and 675 factories.Resistance is so strong, particularly from small farmers, that athird of the deputies to the National People's Congress, usually arubber-stamping body for government decisions, voted against it.Adding to the tension is an inequality of benefits.  Sichuanprovince, with 85 percent of the people to be displaced, stands toreceive only l0 percent of the power generated.  It will also face aheightened risk of flooding.Critics worry about the risk of the reservoir, induced earthquakesand river bank collapses.  They also contend that the rapidaccumulation of silt will wipe out much of the gains in generatingcapacity.The dam will be financed through bonds, preferential foreign loans,state funds, and power generation (expected to start nine years afterconstruction is begun).(LONDON FINANCIAL TIMES: 4/7)Back to Headline List CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992LOS ANGELES SET TO ADD 150 MEGA-WATT GEOTHERMAL COMPLEXLos Angeles joins the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Coso, CA intapping local geothermal energy. The Los Angeles Department of Water& Power (DWP) has awarded a contract for a nearby 150-megawatt powercomplex to Calpine Corporation, which built the Navy's plant therefive years ago.The Los Angeles DWP will lease a site from the Weapons Center, 200miles north of the city.  Calpine, builder of both plants, alsomaintains and operates the Navy's geothermal facility.No figures have been divulged, but observers estimate the cost atabout $200 million.(ENGINEERING NEWS-RECORD: 4/6)Back to Headline List WT03-B36-17IA059-000325-B009-27http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev27.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000022 text/html 36887HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:58:21 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:30 GMTContent-length: 36700Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev27.html Sample Issue Copyright ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (473 words) COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDS FOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS (451 words) OSHA PROVIDES GUIDANCE SOFTWARE ON AGENCY'S ASBESTOS STANDARDS (186 words) LBP STUDIES POINT TO LACK OF RESEARCH ON DANGERS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (521 words) NATIONAL CENTER FOR LEAD-SAFE HOUSING PUBLISHES SERIES OF LEAD HANDBOOKS (123 words) HAZWASTE-BURNING CEMENT KILN WAS SOURCE OF LEAD IN BLOOD, STUDY SAYS (359 words) BALTIMORE RESIDENTS FILE LAWSUIT OVER FORTHCOMING LEAD-PAINT REGULATIONS (819 words) BLOOD-LEAD MONITOR IN CONNECTICUT MAY BE APPLIED WITHIN OTHER STATES (238 words) DAMNING DOCUMENTS SINK OCF AS FIRM'S APPEAL FALLS SHORT (699 words) NEWSBRIEFS (650 words) CONTRACTS (272 words) CALENDAR (109 words) CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDS   GOOD BUDGET NEWS - Researchers and health officialsworking on lead issues received good news Jan. 5 whenCongress passed a bill that will fund the NationalInstitutes of Health (NIH) and the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC) through Sept. 30, the end ofthe fiscal year. This means NIH and CDC now can dispersegrants and carry out disease surveillance and otherprograms. NIH received $11.9 billion, a 5.7 percent increaseover its fiscal 1995 budget. CDC, which supports a varietyof lead education and other programs, was essentially flat-funded at $2.1 billion. The two agencies were the only onesto be fully funded, although the targeted appropriationsmeasure (H.R. 1358) also allocated money for specificfederal programs such as Black Lung benefit payments. H.R.1358, however, does not clearly define how NIH should dividethe appropriations among its 24 institutes, centers anddivisions. The House intended for the institutes to befunded at levels close to those detailed in H.R. 2127, whichthe House passed Aug. 4, committee staff said. But NIH maybe able to make some adjustments, staff said, adding theWhite House Office of Management and Budget is reviewing thequestion.   However, EPA and the Occupational Health and SafetyAdministration (OSHA) were not so lucky. Separate continuingresolutions (H.R. 1643 and H.J. Res. 134) sent employeesback to work but allocated funds only through Jan. 26.Republican Whip Sen. Trent Lott (Miss.) said Jan. 10 the GOPwill not force a third government shutdown. Instead,Congress likely will pass targeted appropriations. "We'llfund the programs we think are important, and we won't fundprograms we don't think important," said House BudgetCommittee Chairman John Kasich (R-Ohio Jan. 14. EPA and OSHAconsistently have been targets of the GOP's frustration withgovernment. "[T]he Republican leadership does not care aboutEPA; does not care about consumer protection; does not careabout OSHA...Corporate interests are going to have a fieldday," said Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.), referring to theomission of these programs from the recent targetedappropriations.   LOOPHOLE NEARLY CLOSED - Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge (R)is pushing to close a regulatory loophole benefitingasbestos-removal companies that has long frustrated stateofficials. Of the five states in the EnvironmentalProtection Agency's Region III, Pennsylvania is the only onewith no method to target and prosecute unscrupulouscontractors, said John Curries, spokesman for the stateDepartment of Labor and Industry (L&I). Pennsylvania beganthe effort in 1990 when the state legislature created anadvisory committee made up of government, academic andindustry representatives to determine whether the stateshould enact a licensing system. The committee endorsed theidea and in April 1995, the L&I drafted language to turn therecommendation into law. Ridge plans to approve the plan andseek a legislative sponsor.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDSFOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS   Newer municipal waste combustors (MWCs) will be requiredto install a combination of high-efficiency pollution-control equipment starting Jan. 29, if an EPA final ruledoes not draw significant negative comments. While the ruleenables EPA to reduce several pollutants, including lead,simultaneously, it is expected to impose substantial capitalcosts.   The maximum achievable control technology standard willaffect existing and new MWCs capable of combusting more than35 metric tons daily. It establishes emissions limits fordioxins, furans, cadmium, lead, mercury, particulate matter,hydrogen chloride, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide andfugitive ash. Stricter performance standards apply to MWCswith capacities greater than 225 metric tons a day.   The rule, published in the Dec. 19 Federal Register,mandates that MWCs built after Sept. 20, 1994, or modifiedafter June 19, 1996, will be subject to new, more stringentperformance standards. MWCs built between Dec. 20, 1989 andSept. 20, 1994, or modified before June 19, 1996, willremain subject to MWC performance standards for plants builtafter the 1989 date. This provision was promulgated Feb. 11,1991. The dates were set to avoid same MWC plants beingsubject to overlapping rules.   EPA says there are about 307 operating MWC units at 128plants, providing a total combustion capacity of 94,000metric tons per day. It says that 179 MWCs will be affectedby the rule; about 100 are publicly owned. Costs for theupdated standard exceed those for the 1991 standard by $156million for capital investment and by $43 million for annualoperations. Total capital costs from investments mandated byboth rules approach $780 million, or an added $13 per metricton of solid waste combusted.   The agency says the benefits include annual emissionsgreater than the 1991 rule: 3,000 fewer metric tons of SO2and 4,000 fewer metric tons of hydrogen chloride. For mostcategories there is less than a 10 percent improvement, butfor mercury, the new standard will eliminate 200 percent ofthe amount removed by the 1991 rule. In total, the ruleexpects to reduce emissions of several hazardous airpollutants by about 110,000 tons per year, EPA says.   If a facility combusts less than 10 metric tons per dayof solid waste, regardless of capacity, it is exempted fromthe rule. Tire-burning facilities are exempted from theperformance standard but not recordkeeping requirements. Andsmall independent-power producers, cogeneration facilitiesand metals recovery facilities are not subject to the MWCstandards.   The regulation, simultaneously released as a direct finalrule and a proposed rule, takes effect Jan 29 unlesssignificant adverse comments are received by Jan. 18. Formore information call Walter Stevenson, emission standardsdivision, (919) 541-5264.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996OSHA PROVIDES GUIDANCE SOFTWAREON AGENCY'S ASBESTOS STANDARDS   Customized guidance on compliance with OccupationalSafety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards onasbestos is available for free from the agency.   The OSHA Asbestos Advisor - interactive computer softwarethat can provide building owners, contractors, consultantsand others with quick answers to technical questions aboutcomplying with the standards - is available from theDepartment of Labor electronic bulletin board, LABOR NEWSand the Compliance Assistance Section of the OSHA home pageon the internet World Wide Web.   "This powerful new tool is another example of how OSHA isusing technology to make compliance with worker protectionseasier," said OSHA Administrator Joseph Dear. "Not only willit help improve compliance, it should be a great help toemployers in reducing costs."   In addition to being on the Internet, the AsbestosAdvisor will be added to the next edition of OSHA's CD-ROM,which can be purchased through the Government PrintingOffice.   The program can be accessed through the OSHA web page athttp://www.osha.gov/. It also is available from LABOR NEWSat (202) 219-4784. For more information, contact: EdwardStern, (202) 219-7283.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996LBP STUDIES POINT TO LACK OF RESEARCHON DANGERS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORKERS   State and federal officials are not sufficientlyprotecting construction workers from the hazardous effectsof lead-based paint (LBP), according to two studies. Eachreport recommends officials pay greater attention to workersafety as infrastructure repair work is performed on steelstructures and bridges.   The two LBP studies were conducted separately by theAlliance to End Childhood Lead Poisoning and by the New YorkState Department of Health in conjunction with the MountSinai Medical Center.   Years of neglect and oversight have resulted in anincreased effort on infrastructure repair, Deborah Nagin,industrial hygienist and researcher with the New YorkDepartment of Health, told the annual convention of theAmerican Public Health Association (APHA). She said morethan 90 percent of these bridges and structures needingrepair are coated with LBP.   In addition, state and federal authorities provideminimal protection for workers who must repaint and repairsteel structures and bridges containing LBP, said PierreErville, director of environmental and housing policy forthe Alliance to End Childhood Lead Poisoning, also speakingat the APHA convention. The alliance is taking an activeinterest in worker safety because it believes inadequatesafety practices on the job can spread lead contamination toothers.Widespread State Effort Needed   The two research efforts analyzed worker safety standardsin California, Connecticut, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland,Michigan, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Texas and Washington.Erville's alliance targeted the scientific procedures usedto prevent lead exposure, the rate of infrastructure repairand the state of current occupational lead poisoningprevention procedures.   Only five states - Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York,New Jersey and Maryland - have passed specific legislationto protect workers from lead exposure, Erville said. Hepointed specifically to New York transportation authorities,who require detailed reports on medical testing for workersexposed to lead from contract bidders and who also require alead exposure control plan. The result of these protectionsare that contractors bidding on construction projects willnot attempt to underbid a contract and then make up for thefinancial loss by ignoring health and risk preventionprograms.   Because most states do not have specific legislativerequirements on worker protection, the U.S. Department ofTransportation should take the lead in educating andtraining state authorities on the risks of lead exposure,Erville said. One method he suggested is a system wherecontractors who bid on projects gather for "pre-bidding"conferences where the specific level of lead content is madeknown to help contractors make accurate bids and prepare forthe necessary level of worker protection.   Erville also called upon state officials to: explicitlylist lead poisoning prevention provisions in theircontracts; consult with industrial hygienists with leadprevention expertise; and ensure a level of contractortraining and worker training programs are developed andimplemented. He also urged that contractors be required toestablish a worker blood-lead level reporting system to besubmitted to state officials.   Following up on that point, Nagin said many of thesetypes of requirements already exist. The specifics of therules and regulations, however, vary widely among states,she said.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996NATIONAL CENTER FOR LEAD-SAFE HOUSINGPUBLISHES SERIES OF LEAD HANDBOOKS   The National Center for Lead-Safe Housing, Columbia, Md.,has released several new publications dealing with leadissues.   Among the new reports: A seven-volume study on dust lead,the Rochester Lead in Dust Study; a review of the scientificevidence on interim controls, Does Residential Lead PaintHazard Control Work?; a guide explaining finance options,Financing for Lead Hazard Control: Descriptions of Programsthat Work; a "white paper" on insurance-related issues,Major Issues Affecting the Availability and Affordability ofLiability Insurance for Housing Which May Contain Lead-BasedPaint Hazard Exposures.   To obtain copies of these reports or for moreinformation, contact: Evelyne Bloomer, National Center forLead-Safe Housing, 10227 Wincopin Circle, Suite 205,Columbia, MD 21044; or call (410) 992-0712.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996HAZWASTE-BURNING CEMENT KILN WASSOURCE OF LEAD IN BLOOD, STUDY SAYS   A hazardous waste-burning cement kiln in Alpena, Mich.,contributed 75 percent of the lead found in the blood ofnearby residents, according to researchers with RutgersUniversity.   In 18 of the 24 residents living near Lafarge Corp. andwhose blood was sampled, the levels of lead in blood werethe result of exposure from the cement kiln dust. The blood-lead levels in most of the residents were under the Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention's warning level of 10micrograms per deciliter (ug/dl), though one resident showedblood-lead levels of 11.87 ug/dl.   The researchers said they aimed to trace where the leadcame from rather than the levels of lead the exposurecaused. The Association for Responsible Thermal Treatment -a trade group of commercial hazardous waste incinerators whocompete with cement kilns in the waste burning market -sponsored the study, performed by Gene Hall in Rutger'schemistry department.Seven Households Sampled   The researchers used samples of people living in sevenhouseholds close to the Lafarge facility, with one otherhousehold located farther away from the plant used as acontrol. The study also collected samples of cement kilndust at Lafarge and samples of paint, tap water and housedust from the sample households.   Currently, cement kiln operators are allowed to storepiles of dust anywhere on their property. The Rutgersconclusions could take on added importance as EPA still iscontemplating how and if cement kiln dust will be regulated.In 1994, EPA sent a report to Congress recommending that insome circumstances, cement kiln dust could be regulatedunder Subtitle C regulations in the Resource Conservationand Recovery Act (RCRA).   Most hazardous waste incinerators are fully permittedunder RCRA, with incinerator ash considered a hazardouswaste to be disposed of in Subtitle C landfills with tripleliners, ground water monitoring requirements and leachatecontrols. EPA currently is working to unify emission limitsfor hazardous waste incinerators and boilers and industrialfurnaces, which include cement kilns. A proposed rule thataccomplishes such a goal now is being reviewed by the WhiteHouse Office of Management and Budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996BALTIMORE RESIDENTS FILE LAWSUIT OVERFORTHCOMING LEAD-PAINT REGULATIONS   Three Baltimore residents filed a class action suit thismonth in a challenge against Maryland state lead-paintregulations slated to take effect next month. The suitargues the regulation favors landlords and will result inchild poisoning.   The suit calls for an injunction prohibiting the MarylandDepartment of the Environment from implementing andenforcing its lead-paint removal and cleanup regulations,which were adopted in November 1994 and scheduled to beginFeb. 24. When passed, the law sought to prevent childhoodlead poisoning while being sensitive to the state'sdecreasing supply of affordable housing. Disputes anddisagreements between childrens' advocates and propertyowner representatives over how to implement the bill havestalled it thus far.   Joseph Espo, an attorney to the tenants who filed thesuit, said the way the forthcoming law is structured,landlords would get immunity from lawsuits in the event achild was poisoned in the lead abatement effort. Officialsfrom the Maryland Department of the Environment and theProperty Owners Association of Greater Baltimore declined tocomment on the suit. D. Robert Enten, with the PropertyOwners Association, did say, however, that the legislationin question seeks to strike a balance between the businesscommunity, the maintenance of affordable housing and theprevention of child lead poisoning.   Landlords are willing to combat the lead problem, butthey also want protection from increasing numbers oflawsuits filed by former tenants who claim their childrenwere poisoned. The property owners say this litigation willsoon drive them out of business with any controls.   Under the bill, owners of pre-1950 rental housing mustreduce lead-poisoning risks on their properties by removingand repainting surfaces that are flaking and peeling paint.In return, the landlords would be immune from lawsuits ifany children living on the property become poisoned.   The bill require landlords to follow some safetyprecautions during abatement, and tenants may be forced tovacate the unit while work is done. At issue, however, areexemptions to the safety requirements when doing electricalor plumbing work, or if repairs are performed on a paintedspace in a room less than 25 square feet.Fat Intake Could Increase Blood-LeadAbsorption in Children, Study Shows   Children exposed to lead will absorb less of it if theyeat less fat, a new study suggests. Certain nutrients havelong been known to affect the rate at which the body takesup lead, which can retard children's development, lowertheir IQs and damage their hearing, according toresearchers.   In a study of 296 inner-city preschoolers, 9 months to 3years old, the researchers found that those with high levelsof fat in their diet were more likely to have dangerouslevels of lead in their blood. Dietary calcium and iron areknown to block lead absorption, but the effects of manyother nutrients have not been explored. The researchers alsolearned that poor children are the most likely to beexposed.   The researchers said if further study supports theirfindings, it "would further strengthen the recommendation ofa low-fat diet as a healthy one for children." Federalhealth officials recommend no restrictions on fats forchildren under 2 because it might harm their growth.   Lead levels among the children ranged from 1 to 55micrograms per tenth of a liter of blood, and averaged about11. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention saysanything above 10 can cause lead poisoning in children. Thequantities of fat in the children's diets were notestimated; the researchers used only relative intakes basedon questions asked of parents.Calories May Increase Absorption   The study also found that higher levels of calories - notjust fat - were associated with higher lead absorption.However, this point is disputed by a longtime leadresearcher, who expressed doubt that higher calorie intakeis linked to higher lead absorption.   Kim Dietrich, a developmental psychologist at theUniversity of Cincinnati School of Medicine who has studiedlead for 15 years, said lead is more readily absorbed on anempty stomach. That is one reason doctors see higher leadlevels among poor children, he said. He agreed, however,that higher fat consumption is related to higher leadlevels, possibly because the fat increases absorption oflead in the intestine.   The research was led by Susan Lucas of the Department ofEpidemiology and Preventive Medicine at the University ofMaryland School of Medicine. The findings are reported inthe January issue of the journal Pediatrics, published bythe American Academy of Pediatrics.   Lucas warned children can be exposed to lead throughdust, dirt and drinking water, along with toys and housespainted before 1975, the last year lead-based paint wasused. Water can be contaminated if it flows through leadpipes, and children may eat paint flakes or inhale or licklead dust, which tastes sweet.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996BLOOD-LEAD MONITOR IN CONNECTICUTMAY BE APPLIED WITHIN OTHER STATES   A program to monitor levels of lead in blood inConnecticut that also includes worker protection measureshas been so successful in lowering blood-lead levels thatefforts are underway to expand the program to other states,according to a report in the Dec. 15 issue of Morbidity andMortality Weekly Report, published by the Centers forDisease Control and Prevention (CDC).   The program, the Connecticut Road Industry SurveillanceProject (CRISP), began in 1990 in an effort to reduce leadexposure, contamination and toxicity in bridge workers inthe state. In order to comply with the program, contractsmust carry health and safety language, and medicalmanagement of workers with centralized data reporting andintervention is required.   The CDC report shows, by contrast, that blood-lead levelscontinue to afflict bridge workers even in states withregulatory lead requirements and workplace safety and healthstandards. Among bridge workers from eight states, a quarterhad levels of blood lead above 40 micrograms of lead perdeciliter of blood.   Connecticut, however, had only 2 percent of workers withelevated blood-lead levels, which owes to the state's workerprotection measures incorporated into road constructioncontracts, the CDC report said.THANKS FOR STAYING IN TOUCH: Asbestos and Lead AbatementReport appreciates comments, news and story ideas fromreaders. Contact: Erich Shea, Editor, Business PublishersInc., 951 Pershing Dr., Silver Spring, MD 20910-4464, (301)587-6793, ext. 3050; fax: (301) 587-1081.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996DAMNING DOCUMENTS SINK OCFAS FIRM'S APPEAL FALLS SHORT   Documents are critical to successful litigation againstasbestos manufacturers. The paper trail often leads to theall-important answers to the questions of what did thecompany know of the dangers of their product and when theyknew it.   A case in point concerns asbestos giant Owens-CorningFiberglass Corp. (OCF), which recently appealed a judgmentby arguing in vain that the trial court should have excludeddamaging documents about the company. Three men who sufferedasbestos-related diseases after exposure to OCF productsreceived a total of $3 million in compensatory damages and$500,000 each in punitive damages due to the company'sfailure to warn them of asbestos' hazards.   The documents that led to the verdict included since-declassified Navy reports from World War II detailing thedangers of asbestos as well as internal OCF communications.In its appeal, OCF said the court improperly admitted thesedocuments. OCF argued the Navy reports should have beenexcluded from trial because - as classified documents - thecompany could not have known the findings they contained.   As for the company memoranda, OCF said the plaintiffs hadaltered their copies to highlight damaging statements toinflame the jury. However, the Texas Court of Appeals inHouston Jan. 4 rejected OCF's argument, saying the companyhad access to the same information in the Navy reports andknew the contents of its own corporate memoranda.Navy Documents Admitted   The court also noted that, in a failure-to-warn case,what the company knows of its product's dangers is sometimesless relevant than what other experts in the field know. "Itdoes not matter whether a manufacturer was aware ofinformation regarding the dangers of asbestos use at thetime of exposure and marketing because an asbestosmanufacturer is charged with the duty to know the dangers ofasbestos products," the court ruled. "If the dangers ofasbestos were known by other manufacturers or by the Navy ator before the time of the plaintiffs' exposure, the samerisks were scientifically discoverable by OCF."   In any event, the internal OCF documents introduced attrial indicated OCF had information - at about the same timethe Navy did - on the hazards of asbestos, the court said."As early as the 1940s, OCF had in its files documentationabout shipyard insulation workers who had developedasbestosis," the court said. "It had copies of public healthbulletins about the effect of inhalation of asbestos dust.In letters to OCF, doctors conducting tests on Fiberglassrepeatedly made reference to the dangers of asbestos."   OCF cited markings on the plaintiff's exhibit and arguedthe trial court had improperly admitted into evidencedoctored copies. However, the Texas appeals court agreedwith the trial court that the markings - if indeed theplaintiff made them - were harmless.Court Admits Photocopies   "The documents about which OCF complains arephotocopies," the appeals court said. "OCF does not assertthat the photocopies do not accurately reproduce theoriginals; instead, it complains about marks made onduplicates after reproduction .... However, we have reviewedthe documents and we agree that the markings on thedocuments are not significant."   The Navy report and OCF documents were only a sampling ofthe documents the plaintiffs brought to trial on asbestos.Much of the damning evidence that had been allowed at trialwas struck from the record before jury deliberations. Forexample, the plaintiffs introduced the testimony of a Dr.Irving Selikoff at an Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration (OSHA) hearing in 1984. "The asbestos diseasedisaster which we now face largely unsuccessfully bearswitness to our failures," Selikoff said. "We haveconsistently greatly underestimated or ignored warnings ofdisease and death."   Saying the testimony should have been excluded ashearsay, the trial judge told the jury to disregardSelikoff's testimony before OSHA. OCF urged the judge todeclare a mistrial, arguing there was no way for the jury toignore such testimony. The judge rejected the company'srequest, and the appeals court agreed that the instructionto the jury to ignore the testimony was sufficient. [Owens-Corning Fiberglass Corp. v. Malone, 1996 WL 3563(Tex.App.-Hous., 1 Dist.)]Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996NEWSBRIEFS   Paint Contamination Control - The Institute ofEnvironmental Sciences seeks voting members for WorkingGroup (WG-029) in its Contamination Control Division, whichis writing a Recommended Practice (RP) on "ContaminationControl Considerations in Paint Spray Applications." A"home-stretch" draft will be issued for discussion at theinstitute's annual technical meeting May 12-17, in Orlando,Fla. The RP is intended to provide guidelines for controlledpaint spray environments and related operations. The goal isto establish a uniform basis for describing, procuring,operating and testing as these relate to paint and coatings,air handling, surface cleaning and preparation, paint-related consumables, personnel garment systems and relatedlaundering, facility cleaning, paint-delivery systems, andenvironmental considerations. "The diversification ofbackgrounds and experience in the working group membershiphas been a key element," said Charles Berndt, working groupchair. "The cross-pollination of ideas that are brought tothe table...has led to the quick progress on this RP." Formore information, call the Institute of EnvironmentalSciences, (708) 255-1561.   Risky Appointment - S. Zack Mansdorf, Ph.D, president-elect of the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA)has been selected as the director of Liberty InternationalRisk Services for Liberty International, a subsidiary ofLiberty Mutual Group, in Boston. As director, Mansdorf'sresponsibilities involve development of technical services,technology transfer and worldwide client relations. Mansdorfwill begin his tenure as AIHA president in May at theAmerican Industrial Hygiene Conference and Exposition, whichis co-sponsored by AIHA. Mansdorf also has held industrialhygiene positions with the Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, and theMidwest Research Institute. For more information, callChristine Feheley, (703) 849-8888.   Demolishing Suit - A couple living in Arapahoe County,Colo., have filed a lawsuit in district court sayingasbestos particles were blown over their home duringdemolition of a building located next to them. KathleenCollins and Theodore Singer named FTSC Partnership,developer of the Polo Reserve now being constructed in placeof the building; Randall & Blake Inc., the demolition firm;and the city of Littleton, Colo., which the suit sayspermitted the demolition. Singer and Collins argue in theirsuit that a crew demolished the building in June duringwindy weather. The incident threatened the couple's healthand caused emotional distress, the suit said.   Lead Contract Award - Versar Inc., Sprinfield, Va., wasawarded with three contracts with a combined potential valueof $1.5 million. The contracts include a $600,000 two-yearcontract with the Federal Highway Administration to assesscontainment efficiency in environmental exposure from leadpaint removal and maintenance on bridges. The secondcontract, worth $700,000, is to provide a variety ofinfrastructure deism services to Leigh City, Utah. The thirdcontract, for $100,000, was with the state of California'sDivision of State Architect Seismic upgrade program.   Quality Control - The American Society for Testing andMaterials (ASTM) is preparing to release a draft standardfor institutions to use for certifying environmentalprofessionals. Once the standard is approved, only about 25percent of the nation's approximately 130 credentialinginstitutions are expected to pass muster. The credentialingguidelines, the result of nearly two years of work, will becirculated to members of ASTM's subcommittee onenvironmental credentialing and ultimately to all ASTMmembers. The model for the standards effort is the Councilof Engineering and Scientific Study Boards, said AnthonyBuonicore, chairman of the task force developing thestandards. The draft standard states it "does not propose toaddress any specific certification program for environmentalprofessionals." It does, however, specify criteria forcredentialing organizations. Contact: ASTM, (215) 299-5400.   Directory - The National Conference of State Legislators(NCSL) has issued a new listing of who in the states isleading various lead-poisoning prevention activities. LeadPoisoning Prevention: Directory of State Contacts costs $20plus shipping, and can be ordered through NCSL's MarketingDepartment: (303) 830-2200.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996CONTRACTS   92nd Contracting Squadron, Fairchild Air Force Base,Wash., seeks contractor for demolition of two buildings andoff-base disposal. Requirements for the removal and disposalof asbestos and lead materials will be included in thesolicitation. SOL F4561396B0007. Contact: Lt. ChristopherMcMahon, (509) 247-4871.   U.S. Coast Guard, Civil Engineering Unit, Miami, seekscontractor to furnish all labor, tools, equipment andmaterial for removal and disposal of existing built-up roofsystem, which includes removal and disposal of asbestos-containing roof flashing. SOL DTCG82-96-B-HAX024. Contact:Shirley Clayton, (205) 536-4133.   Commanding Officer, Naval Facilities Engineering Command,North Charleston, S.C., seeks contractor for repairs toMarine Corps reserve center in Montgomery, Ala. Contractcalls for some removal of asbestos-containing exteriorsiding and removal of lead-based paint. SOL N62467-94-B-1122. For more information, call (803) 820-5853.   Commanding Officer, NAVFAC Contracts Office, PortHueneme, Calif., seeks contractor to demolish asbestos-containing material and boiler at Building 19. SOL N47408-96-Q-5533. Contact: Christine Taborelli, (805) 982-5058.   Officer in Charge of Construction, NAS, Jacksonville,Fla., seeks contractor to renovate conference space andBuilding 11 at the Naval Air Station. The work includesasbestos abatement and interior demolition. SOL N62467-95-B-2512. For more information, call (904) 772-5574.   Federal Correctional Institution, Fort Dix, N.J., seekscontractor for asbestos abatement of approximately 4,700square feet of tile. SOL RFQ 441-0001. Contact: Debbie Tuno,(609) 723-1100.   ROICC, NAVFAC Contracts, NETC, Newport, R.I., seekscontractor for interior demolition and removal of lead-containing paint and asbestos. SOL N62472-96-B-6911. Forinformation, write to: Ms. East, ROICC, NAVFAC Contracts,Building 1, Simonpietri Dr., Newport, RI 02841-1712. Nophone number listed.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996CALENDAR   Feb. 20, Jersey City, N.J., Lead Abatement Budgeting andEstimating Course, sponsored by the Environmental ManagementTraining Services. Call: (201) 798-3391.   March 11-13, Pittsburgh, The Industrial Lead PaintAbatement and Removal Conference. Conference is sponsored bythe Steel Structures Painting Council. Call: (412) 687-1113.   May 7-11, Munich, Germany, IFAT'96, the 11thInternational Trade Fair for Waste Water and Waste Disposal.Conference will focus on decontamination of old sites. Formore information, call (089) 51 07-0.   Oct. 6-8, Baltimore, IAQ '96: Paths to Better BuildingEnvironments, sponsored by the American Society of Heating,Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers Inc. For moreinformation, call ASHRAE at (404) 636-8400.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-18IA059-000325-B009-72http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev60.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000055 text/html 85532HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:58:53 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:42 GMTContent-length: 85345Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev60.html Sample Issue Copyright ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNet SEPTEMBER 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INSTRUMENTATION New Instrumentation Detects Toxic Gases (145 words) Sierra Monitor Gas Sensors Employ Four Sensing Technologies (468 words) HNU Systems Uses Photoionization to Measure Gases (380 words) Air Instruments & Measurements' Model 8000 Can Measure Up to 6 Gases in Real Time (199 words) ACID RAIN Legislated Acid Rain Requirements Will Reduce Fine Particulate Emissions (242 words) ALTERNATIVE FUELS/FUEL CHANGES/OXYGENATES Liquid Fuels from Coal-Derived Synthesis Gas (206 words) Biodiesel Offers Environmental and Economic Advantages (297 words) Waste Incineration Technology Produces Syngas (204 words) Quantum Considers Increasing Methanol Production (99 words) Ceramic Engine Fueled by Methanol (113 words) CFC REDUCTION AND REPLACEMENT/OZONE DEPLETION Allied-Signal Increases the Production of CFC Alternatives (150 words) AT&T and Chrysler to Eliminate CFC Usage (225 words) Disagreement Surfaces over HCFC and Methyl Bromide Bans (238 words) U.S. CFC Users Seek Exemptions (212 words) NITROGEN AND SULFUR OXIDES REDUCTION Ceramic-Based Catalysts Reduce NOx Emissions (435 words) Air Products Unveils NOx and N2O Reduction Technologies (319 words) Technology Reviewed for Catalytic NOx Reduction (216 words) Goal Line Environmental Technologies Introduces NOx and CO Reduction Process (136 words) Catalyst-Coated Panels Can Reduce NOx Levels (186 words) Alumina Catalyst Aids Low Temperature NOx Reduction (192 words) Pulp and Paper Process Reduces Sulfur and Chlorine Emissions (172 words) German Process Cuts SO2 and HCl Emissions (184 words) Natural Gas Technology Cuts NOx Emissions (253 words) Ammonia Injection Lowers Engine NOx Emissions (170 words) Engine Modifications Lower Emissions (110 words) Gas Burner Has Low NOx Levels (154 words) SOx Removed from Flue Gas (135 words) Engine Reduces NOx Emissions Through Exhaust Gas Recirculation (134 words) Fuel Nozzle Reduces Gas Turbine Engine NOx Emissions (125 words) NGK Insulators Catalytic Converter Can Reduces Automotive Emissions (96 words) SOx and NOx Removed from Gas Streams (130 words) Patented Diesel Engine Catalyst Reduces Emission of Pollutants (101 words) GOVERNMENT EPA Delay in Implementing Air Permit Rule Causes States to Miss Program Submission Deadline (325 words) Center for Resource Economics (CRE) Report Criticizes EPA (231 words) INDUSTRY NEWS Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Allowances Auction Canceled (56 words) U.S. Leads in Pollution Control Equipment Exports (150 words) Inst. of Clean Air Companies says Smog Control Costs Exaggerated (360 words) Cost Effectiveness of Eliminating CO Vehicle Emissions Studied (326 words) VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS REDUCTION Multi-Layer Coating Reduces VOC's (91 words) VOC's Thermally Stripped from Soil (141 words) Low VOC Cleaner Used Automotive Refinishing (89 words) VOC Emissions from Glycol Dehydrators Reduced (157 words) RESOLV Vapor Recovery Systems Capture VOC's (439 words) RE-THERM VF Units Treat VOC's (278 words) Fate of VOC's in Municipal Activated Sludge Plants Investigated (183 words) ICI Paints Reduces VOC's with Water-Based Formulations (215 words) SOFTWARE, MODELING, AND DATABASES Influence of Landscape Variability on Atmospheric Dispersion (106 words) Atmospheric Sulfur Oxidation Influence by Droplet Size in Clouds and Fog (228 words) Software Models Processes and Tracks Chemical Usage (350 words) PARTICULATE REDUCTION German Technology Cuts Toxic Incinerator Residue (152 words) Vitropore Ceramic Candles Clean Hot Flue Gas (337 words) CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993New Instrumentation Detects Toxic GasesGMD Systems, Inc. (Old Route 519, Hendersonville, PA 15339; Tel412/746-3600 or 800/736-4666, Fax 412/746-1359) has commercializedits Remote Intelligent Sensor (RIS) for the detection of toxicgases such as hydrazines, phosgene, and isocyanates.  William T.Hughes, Product Manager, told us that the RIS is a highly accurate,single point, fixed position area monitor expandable into a networkof up to 120 sensors connected by a 2-way communications link, andcomputer-supervised from a central location.  Since each RIS alsoretains "stand alone" capability, the units can continue to operateduring power outages or computer failures.  The RIS employs aquick-response, microprocessor-controlled sensing system that usesa combination of colorimetric paper tape, cassettes, and electro-optics.  GMD is an affiliate of Bacharach, Inc. (625 Alpha Drive,Pittsburgh, PA 15238; Tel 412/963-2000, Fax 412/963-2091).Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Sierra Monitor Gas Sensors Employ Four Sensing TechnologiesSierra Monitor Corporation (SMC, 1991 Tarob Court, Milpitas, CA95035; Tel 408/262-6611, Fax 408/262-9042) offers 4 sensortechnologies to match the best gas sensor performance withapplication requirements.  Catalytic bead sensors are used tomonitor combustible gases.  The sensor provides reliable zerostability and a linear response to combustible gas over a widetemperature range.  The sensor consists of 2 alumina beads eachsurrounding a platinum wire operating at approximately 450 C.  Onebead is passivated so it will not react with combustible gas.  Theother bead is catalyzed to promote a reaction with combustible gas.Effects of changes in ambient temperature and relative humidity arenullified by placing the two beads in separate legs of a wheatstonebridge circuit.  When the catalyzed bead reacts with thecombustible gas, it heats up, which increases its resistance.This, in turn, increases the output of the wheatstone bridgecircuit used as the sensor signal.Stephen R. Ferree, Vice President - Marketing, told us that SMC'ssemiconductor sensors have a resistance in air which is affected byoxygen adsorbed on the surface of the sensor.  Oxygen atoms captureelectrons on the semiconductor surface, thereby increasing itsresistance.  The sensors may be impregnated with dopants such that,when the sensor's resistance changes, specific gases displace theadsorbed oxygen.  For example, SMC's thin film metal oxide sensordoes not respond when exposed to 5% methane in air.  Othersemiconductor sensors are available for combustible gases, carbonmonoxide, and ammonia.Electrochemical sensors are fuel cell-like devices consisting of ananode, cathode, and electrolyte.  The components of the cell areselected so that a subject gas allowed to diffuse into the cellwill cause a chemical reaction and generate a current.  The cellsare diffusion limited so the rate at which the gas enters the cellis solely dependent on the gas concentration.  The currentgenerated is proportional to the rate of consumption of the subjectgas in the cell.  Unlike electrochemical sensors, where gasdiffuses through membranes into the cell, SMC sensors allow gas todiffuse into the sensor through a simple capillary.  The result isa stable sensor with low pressure and temperature coefficients andthe capability to measure gas as a % by volume.In SMC infrared (IR) sensors, gas molecules absorb IR light withina narrow, characteristic wavelength.  Light is emitted from an IRsource and passed through the gas to be analyzed.  The amount ofabsorption corresponds directly to the gas concentration.SMC gas sensor modules condition the sensor signal and provide anindustry standard 4-20 mA output that can interface with single-and multiple-channel controllers and distributed control systems.Gases monitored by SMC modules include ammonia, carbon dioxide,carbon monoxide, chlorine, combustible gases, hydrogen, hydrogensulfide, nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, oxygen, and sulfurdioxide.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993HNU Systems Uses Photoionization to Measure GasesHNU Systems, Inc. (160 Charlemont St., Newton, MA 02161-9987; Tel617/964-6690 800/724-5600, Fax 617/558-0056) Model 201 continuousgas monitors allow the long term monitoring of volatile organiccompounds (VOC's).  Brian Sheppard, National Sales Manager, told usthat the instruments are suited for the continuous measurement ofprocess streams, stack gas, or ambient air.  They use thephotoionization detection principle, which provides measurementsaccurate to sub parts per million (ppm) levels.  The instrumentscan often measure over a range of 0.1 ppm to 2000 ppm, with higherranges available upon request.  An ultra-stable, sealed ultraviolet(UV) light source used as an ionization source, plus electroniccircuitry, provide instrument stability and repeatability.  Alsounusual is the mechanical simplicity of these photoionizationinstruments (the meter movement and the sampling pump are the onlymoving parts) which helps to ensure stability.  By employing thephotoionization detection principle, the Model 201 instrumentseliminate other problems common to older techniques.  There are nooptics, lenses, or mirrors involved, which eliminates periodicalignment and coating.  There are no flames that can go out nor anyflow regulators  needed, since photoionization is independent offlow, and there are no compressed gases required for operation.Photoionization analyzers can be used to monitor a wide variety oforganic and some inorganic gases.  Aromatics, ketones, chlorinatedhydrocarbons, hydrogen sulfide, reduced sulfur compounds,phosphine, ammonia, iodine, and hydrazine are among the gases whichcan be measured.  The photoionization principle of operationincludes the absorption of UV light by a molecule which leads toionization via: R + hn  = R+ + e- where R+ is the ionized speciesand hn represents a photon which has an energy greater than theionization potential of the species.  The sensor consists of asealed UV light source that emits photons which are energeticenough to ionize many trace species (particularly organics) but donot ionize the major components of air such as oxygen, nitrogen,carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and water.  A chamber adjacent tothe UV source contains a pair of electrodes.  When a positivepotential is applied to one electrode, the created field drives anyions formed by the absorption of UV light to the collectorelectrode where the current (proportional to the concentration) ismeasured.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Air Instruments & Measurements' Model 8000 Can Measure Up to 6Gases in Real TimeAir Instruments & Measurements, Inc. (AIM, 13111 Brooks Dr. SuiteD, Baldwin Park, CA 91706-7901; Tel 818/813-1460 or 800/969-4AIM,Fax 818/338-2585) has introduced its Model 8000 open-path analyzerto measure up to 6 gases in real time across an extended (100 feetor more) path length.  Raj Adani, National Sales Manager, told usthat the system is based on the company's double-pass opticalsystem which features automatic self-calibration with an internalreference mirror and sealed gas cells and/or bandpass filters fora known up-scale response.  The system is mounted in a sealed,double-ended enclosure, and the sensor assembly includes athermostatted heater for weather protection.  Optional cooling isalso available.  The retroreflector end is passive, with noelectrical or moving parts, eliminating the need for thermal orexplosion protection.  AIM says the system is particularly wellsuited for the detection of leaks and spills of hazardous, toxic,corrosive, and/or condensable gases since it measures the sample inplace in the air with no sample contact.  Measurable gases includeHF, HCl, HCOH, benzene, toluene, vinyl chloride, CH4, NO, N2O, SO2,CO, CO2, NH3, HCN, and water.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Legislated Acid Rain Requirements Will Reduce Fine  ParticulateEmissionsEPA, Congress and environmentalists will be pleasantly surprised tolearn that the scrubbers being installed to reduce acid rain willalso reduce fine particulate air pollution by 20,000 to 40,000 tonsper year.  These conclusions are contained in a new report issuedby the McIlvaine Company (Northbrook, IL) entitled  Heavy MetalRemoval from Coal-Fired Boilers .There is renewed concern that fine particulate is the most seriousair pollution problem.  The utility industry is the largeststationary source emitter.  The old coal-fired plants are notregulated as to particulate emissions by any federal laws.  The newSO2 reduction requirements for these plants allow either fuelswitching or scrubbers.  Scrubbers capture 80% of the fineparticulate (not captured by the precipitators) along with the SO2.Most utilities are fuel switching in Phase 1, so this impressivefine particulate reduction will be accomplished by only 15,000 MWof scrubbers.Scrubbers have the further benefit of removing air toxics.Scrubbers would also remove 20,000 to 60,000 tons per year ofchlorine and 7000 to 8000 tons per year of fluorine.  The scrubberswould also remove the toxic heavy metals which are measured inpounds per year instead of tons per year.  The scrubbers wouldremove 12,000 to 36,000 pounds/year of mercury and 13,000 to 42,000pounds of chromium.  Even greater quantities of lead and manganesewould be captured.  Equal or smaller quantities of arsenic,selenium, cadmium and other toxics would also be removed.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Liquid Fuels from Coal-Derived Synthesis GasCoal-derived syngas can be converted to methanol using liquid phasemethanol synthesis (LPMeOH) process.  Methanol can be furtherconverted to gasoline using the Mobil methanol-to-gasoline (MTG)process.  The combination of syngas-to-methanol technology with theMTG process thus provides a ready synthetic route for liquidhydrocarbon fuels.  Sunggyu Lee and Conrad F. Kulik (Department ofChemical Engineering, The University of Akron, Akron, OH 44325)have developed a process for one-step synthesis of dimethyl ether(DME) from syngas.  This DME process improves the reactorproductivity and syngas conversion by as much as 100% over theLPMeOH process.  One-step DME synthesis is thus an ideal front endfor further conversion to gasoline.  This substitution is justifiednot only because DME yields an identical product distribution asmethanol, but DME is also a true intermediate in the MTG process.The integration scheme has been termed the dimethyl  ether-to-gasoline (DTG) process.  The advantages of the UA/EPRI process overthe conventional MTG process are in enhanced syngas conversion,superior hydrocarbon yield and selectivity, and integrated energyefficiency.  The researchers summarized their work in a paperdelivered at the 206th American Chemical Society (ACS) NationalMeeting in Chicago, IL August 22-27, 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Biodiesel Offers Environmental and Economic AdvantagesBiodiesel fuel is produced by esterifying vegetable oils or animalfats by reacting them with methanol in the presence of a catalystto produce methyl ester.  Its major attraction, besides its reducedemissions characteristics, is its ease of use.  As opposed tonatural gas or electric power, biodiesel fuel can power existingdiesel engines with no modifications.  The Comprehensive NationalEnergy Policy Act of 1992 raised the expectations of the industrysince it redefined and broadened the term "alternative" fuel toinclude any fuel "substantially not petroleum."In May 1993, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)provisionally approved petitions to register methyl soyate andmethyl tallowate as motor fuels and fuel additives permitting theirsale in that capacity.  Final approval depends upon researchdemonstrating that methyl soyate and methyl tallowate are"substantially similar" to diesel fuel.  While biodiesel fuelreduces carbon dioxide, hydrocarbon, and particulate emissions, itis an oxygenated fuel and, accordingly, increases nitrous oxideemissions.  Some industry sources expect EPA to consider eachemissions category separately instead of evaluating it for itsaggregate emissions reduction capability.  Such a decision couldjeopardize biodiesel's "substantially similar" designation.The American Biofuels Association (ABA) expects mass transit toprovide most biodiesel activity over the next 5 or so years as EPAurban fleet emissions requirements take effect in January 1995.Since biodiesel is priced at $2.50-3.00/gallon, the ABA is pushingfor tax exemptions and credits at both the federal and state levelsto make the fuel competitive with conventional diesel fuel andethanol and bio-based methanol.  The ABA estimates that 3.4 billiongallons of biodiesel could be produced annually in the U.S., whichwould place land now idled by agricultural subsidies back intoproduction.  Excess soybean oil and yellow grease stocks would alsobe utilized.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Waste Incineration Technology Produces SyngasThe Thermoselect waste incineration process gasifies unsortedmunicipal solid waste (MSW) to produce syngas,  which is scrubbedand fired in a conventional gas engine to generate electricity.This results in significantly less waste gas emissions than intraditional MSW incinerators, claims developer Thermoselect S.A.(Locarno, Switzerland).  A demonstration plant at Verbania, Italyhas been operating at 100 metric tons/day of MSW and generating anet positive balance of 300 kW.  Emissions per metric ton of wasteburned are lower than the proposed European Community (EC)emissions standard, with actual emissions of 90 kg of hydrogenchloride and 1 kg each of dust, hydrogen fluoride, mercury, andcadmium.  The volume of unsorted waste is first reduced by a factorof 10 in a conventional press.  The compressed waste is then fedinto a 600 C coking oven, where metals and inorganic substancesform a solid matrix with the charred organics.  Following aresidence time of 1-2 hours, the solid matrix is fed directly to agasifier at 2000 C to convert the organics to syngas and to liquefythe inorganics and metals.  Each metric ton of MSW yields 30 kg ofrecyclable metal, 250 kg of vitrified slag, and 600 kg of syngas.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Quantum Considers Increasing Methanol ProductionQuantum Chemical Corp. (99 Park Ave., New York, NY 10016; Tel212/949-5000) has taken its LaPorte, TX methanol plant off themarket.  The unit, which has a capacity of 200 milliongallons/year, is operating at only 100 million gallons/year duemainly to a shortage of hydrogen feedstock.  The company says themove is unrelated to its pending acquisition by Hanson PLC (1Grosvenor Pl., London SW1X 7JH, England).  The company is studyingoptions to increase the output of the plant to respond to aperceived increase in demand for methanol stemming from oxygenatedgasoline requirements.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Ceramic Engine Fueled by MethanolA compact, low polluting ceramic engine which runs on methanol hasbeen designed by the Kanagawa Academy of Science and TechnologyFoundation (3-2-1 Sakado, Takatsu-ku, Kawasaki City, Kanagawa Pref.213, Japan; Tel +81 44 819 2043, Fax +81 44 819 2027).  It isclaimed to be about 30% more fuel efficient and to performsimilarly to a comparable diesel engine.  The prototype engine has4 cylinders and a displacement of 2000 cc.  It occupies about 20%less space than a diesel engine in the same class and weighs about150 kg.  It is air cooled and can withstand temperature differencesof 800 C between the interior and exterior surfaces of thecylinders.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Allied-Signal Increases the Production of CFC AlternativesAllied-Signal (Box 2245, Morristown, NJ 07962; Tel 201/455-2000)has completed a 6-month expansion program at its El Segundo, CAfacility as part of a $250 million investment in the developmentand commercialization of chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) replacements.The company has doubled its annual capacity to 50 million pounds,for hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC)-141b, which is used as areplacement for CFC-11 as a blowing agent in insulating foams.HCFC-141b is also used in new Allied-Signal specialty solvents.The company expects to start full-scale commercial production ofGenetron AZ-50, a mixture of hydrofluorocarbon (HFC)-125 and (HFC)-143a, at its Baton Rouge, LA facility in June 1994.  Allied-Signalhas also received Underwriters Laboratories (UL) approval of theproduct, certifying it for use with UL-approved equipment.Genetron AZ-50 is a replacement for the refrigerant R-502, amixture of CFC-115 and HCFC-22.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993AT&T and Chrysler to Eliminate CFC UsageChrysler Corporation (12000 Chrysler Dr., Highland Park, MI 48288;Tel 313/956-5741, Fax 313/956-1462) says that it will eliminatechlorofluorocarbon (CFC)-12 refrigerant from air conditioningsystems in all Chrysler-built vehicles by January 1, 1994, twoyears ahead of Federal mandates and faster than previouslyannounced.  "We've moved as aggressively as possible in removing R-12 from our product line, and we believe our rapid deployment ofair conditioning systems using R-134a is in the best interests ofour customers and the environment," said Ronald R. Boltz,Chrysler's Vice-President for Product Strategy and RegulatoryAffairs.  Chrysler reports that it is already using 134a on morethan 750,000 of its 1993 model year cars, the most of any automakerselling vehicles in the U.S.  In addition to efforts on new cars,Chrysler says that it is taking steps to help consumers with oldercars.  It is developing a CFC-free "drop-in" substitute withIntermagnetics General Corporation (Box 566, Guilderland, NY 12084;Tel 518/456-5456), which it says looks promising based onpreliminary data.Separately, AT&T (550 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10022; Tel212/605-5500) says that it has ended the use of all Class 1 ozone-depleting materials from its consumer and business manufacturingoperations.  In 1986 AT&T's manufacturing operations emitted 2.5million pounds of CFC's.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Disagreement Surfaces over HCFC and Methyl Bromide BansEuropean proposals for controlling ozone-depletinghydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFC's) and methyl bromide have provokeddisagreement from several companies and countries.  The proposals,which were finalized on June 9, 1993, are undergoing examination byEuropean experts.  These proposals stipulate the banning of HCFC'sby 2015 and a production and usage freeze on methyl bromidestarting January 1, 1996.  France, the only European Community (EC)country where methyl bromide is produced, is anxious to protect itsindustry and is unwilling to apply measures more stringent thanthose of the Montreal Protocol.The major corporate opposition in France stems from Elf Atochem(Paris, France), Europe's only methyl bromide producer.  Thecompany is participating in a $400,000 program to developtechnology to prevent emissions of the gas, which is used primarilyas a soil fumigant.  Elf Atochem's 1990 methyl bromide productionwas 5000 metric tons; European consumption of 14,000 metric tonswas met by imports from the U.S. and Israel.  Worldwide methylbromide production is about 65,000 metric tons per year.  The U.S.plans to ban methyl bromide in 2000.  Accordingly, the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is granting acceleratedreviews to methyl bromide alternatives.Southern EC member countries Spain, Portugal, and Greece alsooppose the HCFC phaseout part of the plan.  Belgium, which hasminor reservations, supports the plan, along with Italy, the U.K.,and Ireland.  Denmark, The Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Germanywant an even faster HCFC phaseout.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993U.S. CFC Users Seek ExemptionsThe U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has received about20 requests from chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) users seeking exemptionfrom the ban on the production of the ozone-depleting chemicalswhich is scheduled to take effect on January 1, 1996.  When theyvoted in November 1992 to accelerate the phaseout of CFC's, theparties to the Montreal Protocol On Substances That Deplete theOzone Layer included provisions for exemptions for essential uses.Each country must formally nominate potential exempt uses to aUnited Nations Environment Program (UNEP) technical reviewcommittee.  By its July 19, 1993 deadline, EPA had received 5requests for exemptions for medical devices and 3 for refrigerationor air conditioning uses, according to Nina Bonnelycke of EPA'sSubstitutes Analysis and Review Branch.  Other exemption requestswere for the use of CFC's in analytical tests, as leak detectorsfor nuclear submarines and power plants, in adhesives, in a waspkiller, and in the manufacture of small caliber ammunition.  TheEPA will convene an interagency review group to decide whichapplications warrant forwarding to UNEP.  In order to receive anexemption, petitioners must demonstrate that the  use of CFC's iscritical to the functioning of society; that no alternatives aretechnically, economically, or legally viable; and that no recycledCFC's are available.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Ceramic-Based Catalysts Reduce NOx EmissionsCormetech, Inc. (Treyburn Corporate Park, 5000 International Drive,Durham, NC 27712; Tel 919/620-3000, Fax 919/620-3001) producesceramic-based extruded honeycomb catalysts for nitrogen oxide (NOx)removal from coal-, oil-, or gas-fired stationary combustionsystems, such as utility and industrial boilers and gas turbines.End users include electric utilities, petroleum refiners, andchemical producers.  The homogeneous, titania-based, selectivecatalytic reduction (SCR) catalysts resist heat and chemicalattack.  In the SCR process, ammonia is injected into the flue gas,where it reacts with NOx in the presence of the catalyst to formnitrogen and water.  SCR systems have no moving parts and produceno by-products.  When used in SCR systems at 400-1000 F, they canremove more than 90% of NOx emissions.  The honeycomb structure ofCormetech's high surface area titanium dioxide catalysts maximizescatalytic activity while minimizing gas flow resistance.  Eachcatalyst element is 150 mm square and can be provided in lengths upto 1000 mm.  Variations in catalyst composition and cellularstructure are determined by the nature of each application,especially the type of fuel being burned.  Catalysts are engineeredfor each application to minimize erosion and exposure to plugging.Gerhard F. Koenig, President and CEO, says that Cormetech cansimulate flue gas conditions, including space and linear velocityrelationships, at its in-house pilot testing facilities.  Bench-scale "micro-test" reactors are part of the company's resources foruse in catalyst manufacturing process control or when limitedrepresentative sampling is needed.  Flow modeling technology isalso available from Cormetech and permits gas flow simulation ofconditions encountered in the plant, including conditions in thereactor itself.  Flow modeling options include cold flow techniquesas well as computer modeling.  The company can perform andrecommend system design modifications such as installation ofstatic mixers, vanes, and other devices to reduce gas flowvariations.  Reducing variations optimizes the efficiency of thecatalyst while preventing erosion and plugging, i.e., informationderived from the flow modeling permits "conditioning" of the fluegas before it reaches the catalyst to optimize catalystperformance.  The company delivered catalysts during the summer of1993 for the U.S.'s first large utility retrofit using SCRtechnology.  The project involved 2 power plants in southernCalifornia.  Cormetech was formed in 1989 by Corning, Inc.(Houghton  Park, Corning, NY 14831; Tel 607/974-9000) MitsubishiHeavy Industries, Ltd. (Nichimen Bldg., 2-2-2 Nakanoshima, Box 334,Osaka Central, Kita-ku, Osaka 530, Japan; Tel 6 2021231, Fax 62033400), and Mitsubishi Petrochemical Co., Ltd (Mitsubishi Bldg.,2-5-2 Marunouchi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100, Japan; Tel 3 2835574).Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Air Products Unveils NOx and N2O Reduction TechnologiesResearch scientists at Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (7201Hamilton Boulevard, Allentown, PA 18195-1501; Tel 215/481-4911)have discovered two catalytic technologies to reduce industrialpollution.  One of the technologies reduces nitrogen oxides (NOx)emissions from stationary and mobile sources, while the otherprevents nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from certain chemicalprocesses from entering the atmosphere.The NOx technology employs metal-exchanged zeolite catalysts, alongwith methane in an oxygen-rich atmosphere, to convert NOx tonitrogen gas, carbon oxides, and water.  The company says that theprocess offers an environmentally and potentially economicallyattractive alternative to currently available NOx removaltechnology that uses ammonia for reducing emissions from stationarysources, such as industrial boilers or natural gas-fueled powerstations.  Methane used in the Air Products process is alreadyavailable at many facilities which emit NOx, and their NOx-containing exhaust streams typically contain high levels of oxygen.Air Products' John N. Armor said that the technology may also leadto improved catalysts for removing NOx from mobile engineemissions.The company's technology for removing N2O emissions from off-gasesof certain chemical processes uses a different family of metalloaded zeolite catalysts that decompose N2O into its benigncomponents, gaseous nitrogen and oxygen.  These catalysts are saidto be long-lived and stable over a broad (200-800 C) temperaturerange.  In addition, some of the catalysts readily destroy N2O inthe presence of water vapor.  Air Products' Yuejin Li said thatthese characteristics make the technology especially suitable forthe clean-up of off-gases from major sources of N2O emissionsformed during the manufacture of nitric acid and nylon-66.  Sincethe "industrial revolution" began, the concentration of N2O in theatmosphere has been steadily increasing about 0.2% per year.Because the gas has an atmospheric lifetime of about 150 years, theneed exists to develop a commercially viable process for itsdecomposition.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Technology Reviewed for Catalytic NOx ReductionA large amount of equipment is in operation which uses ammonia inV2O5-TiO2-W(Mo)O2 system (the selective catalytic reduction, orSCR, method) to remove high temperature nitrogen oxides (NOx) fromgenerating sources, such as boilers and incinerators.  In thesesystems, even when oxygen of high concentration is present, ammoniareacts selectively with the nitrogen oxide (NO) and the reaction isaccelerated.  A conventional SCR process uses V2O5-TiO2 as thecatalyst.Some European systems using zeolites are in operation, with about50% applied on diesel engines.  This equipment is said to haveseveral advantages, including operation over a broad temperaturerange (300-480 C), the ability to use either 25% ammonia solutionor pure ammonia gas as the reducing agent, the use of monolithicceramic catalysts containing no heavy metals, the absence ofsulfuric acid generation due to the low oxidizing capacity of SO2,the storage capacity of NH3 and NOx is large enough to withstandpartial pressure fluctuations, and long catalyst life.All SCR processes use ammonia to react with NO.  Problems ofuntreated ammonia are being addressed by a research group atJapan's Hokkaido University.  The group is evaluating a processwhich uses hydrocarbons as reducing agents.  Their research isfully described in the Japanese High Technology Monitor, Vol. 11,No. 10.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Goal Line Environmental Technologies Introduces NOx and COReduction ProcessGoal Line Environmental Technologies (GLET, Box 58324, 2045 EastVernon Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90058; Tel 213/233-2224, Fax213/233-7428) has filed a patent application for its SCONOxtechnology.  GLET President Robert Danziger told us that the SCONOxprocess cost effectively reduces nitrogen oxide (NOx) and carbonmonoxide (CO) to below measurable levels at natural gas-fired powerplants.  The technology oxidizes nitric oxide (NO) to nitrogendioxide (NO2), which is then absorbed and recycled into the powerplant's engine.  GLET is a co-venture of Sunlaw Energy Corporation(Los Angeles, CA) and Advanced Catalyst Systems (Knoxville, TN).Sunlaw, which operates two of the ten largest power plants in theLos Angeles basin, plans to install a full-scale SCONOx system bythe end of 1993 and a second system in June 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Catalyst-Coated Panels Can Reduce NOx LevelsHigh-rise buildings and sound barriers lining highways may act asscavengers of 20% of such "greenhouse" gases as nitrogen oxides(NOx) if the walls and sidings are coated with a mixture oftitanium oxide, activated carbon, and a  small amount of iron (III)oxide.  In laboratory-scale tests at Japan's National Institute forResources and Environment (NIRE, Tsukuba, Ibaraki Pref., Japan),panels coated with such catalysts have removed more than 90% of NOxfrom a 0.05 parts per million (ppm) stream under irradiation,equivalent to conditions on a cloudy day, by near-ultravioletlight.  Nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) are oxidizedby TiO2 to NO2 and NO3-, respectively.  The activated carboncomponent serves to fix the NO-derived NO2 so that it can befurther oxidized to NO3-.  In practice, rain water will wash theNO3- off the panels.  In a country with Japan's level of rainfall(1.5 m annually), only a slight decrease in the pH of any runoff,equivalent to about 10 ppm, is expected, according to NIRE.  A 5-year project to develop a viable technology began in April 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Alumina Catalyst Aids Low Temperature NOx ReductionCosmo Oil Co. Ltd. (1-1 Shibaura 1-chome, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105,Japan; Tel 03-798-3211) has succeeded in keeping nitrogen oxides(NOx) particles from diesel engine exhaust to less than 100 partsper million (ppm) for more than 2000 hours by utilizing a honeycombalumina catalyst and alcohol as the reducing agent.  The companyconsiders this an important first step in the practical use of thetechnology for the difficult job of controlling NOx emissions inthe presence of high-concentrations of oxygen.  Cosmo plans tocontinue the research and testing in an effort to raise the under100 ppm time interval from 2000 to 4000 hours.  The company alsohas targeted the 200kW diesel engine of a cogeneration system fordemonstration testing.  The technology features low temperature(300-400 C) NOx removal to minimize the deterioration of thecatalyst due to steam.  Sakai Chemical Industry Co. (Ebisujima-cho5-chome, Sakai City, Osaka Pref. 590, Japan; Tel 0722-23-4111) andseveral diesel engine manufacturers are also participating in thetest work.  The technology was first developed by Japan's NationalInstitute of Materials and Chemical Research and its PetroleumEnergy Center.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Pulp and Paper Process Reduces Sulfur and Chlorine EmissionsFormic acid and hydrogen peroxide replace sulfur- and chlorine-based compounds in the cooking and bleaching steps of a pulp andpaper process under development by Kemira Oy (Helsinki, Finland).The driving forces behind the Milox technology have beenlegislative mandates in Europe and the U.S. to reduce chlorineemissions from wastewater and to remove sulfur compounds from wastegases.  The Milox process is in operation in a 150 kg/h pilot plantand, says the company, could be in operation in a 5000-10,000metric tons/year demonstration plant by 1995.  Lignin, the gum thatbinds the cellulose fibers in wood, is removed by reaction withhydroxonium ions (H3O+) in 3 stages.  The first and last stages arecarried out at 80 C in a solution of 80 wt % peroxyacetic acid,formed by the reaction of H2O2 and HCOOH, while the second stage isan 80 wt % solution of HCOOH at 100 C.  Milox pulp produces paperof similar quality and brightness to chlorine-bleached kraft pulp,says Kemira.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993German Process Cuts SO2 and HCl EmissionsCaldyn Apparatebau GmbH (Ettlingen, Germany) has devised a processfor cutting sulfur dioxide (SO2) and hydrogen chloride emissions to20 parts per million (ppm), well below the 100 ppm German limit.The company claims that the process consumes only 33-50% of thelime required by competitive processes.  Flue gas enters a dryer at250-1000 C where it is sprayed with 50 mm diameter lime particles.In this step, the lime is completely consumed, reducing SO2concentration by 70%.  Following de-dusting, the gases are washedin a second scrubber that combines an additional nozzle-sprayedlime slurry with a water aerosol.  At this step, the limeconcentration, 70%, is 7 times higher than in competitiveprocesses, reducing the scrubber size by 50%.  Following a finalde-dusting step, the gases are released.  In addition to thecompany's 500 m3/h mobile pilot plant, Caldyn has installed a 3200m3/h system on a chemical waste incinerator in Bonn, Germany, whichstarted in June 1993.  Negotiations are in progress for a 44,000m3/h unit for an incinerator at an animal feed plant in easternGermany.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Natural Gas Technology Cuts NOx EmissionsInstitute of Gas Technology (IGT, 3424 South State Street, Chicago,IL 60616; Tel 312/949-3650, Fax 312/949-3700) in tests at theAnchor Glass plant in Huntington Park, CA  confirmed that anadvanced glass melting technology is effective in reducing nitrogenoxides (NOx) emissions.  Hamid A. Abbasi, IGT's Assistant Director- Applied Combustion Research, told us that the technology usesstaged natural gas combustion with oxygen enrichment to lower NOxlevels below 3 pounds of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) per ton of glassproduced.  A consortium of gas utilities led by Southern CaliforniaGas Company and the Gas Research Institute is supporting thedevelopment of this technology.  The process does not increasenatural gas consumption, and oxygen requirements are low (less than5% of stoichiometric) for operating conditions that reduce NOxremissions below the Southern California regulation of 4 pounds ofNO2 per ton of glass produced.  To demonstrate the stating concept,IGT and its commercial partners, Combustion Tec, Inc. (Box 607693,Orlando, FL 32860; Tel 407/299-7317) and Air Products and Chemicals(7201 Hamilton Blvd., Allentown, PA  18195; Tel 215/481-4911), madeonly minor modifications to a 165 ton/day glass melter.  Glenn C.Neff, President - Combustion Tec, said that the changes aretransparent to furnace operators, and no adverse effects on thequality of container glass have been observed.  According to BuddyEleazer, Air Products' Technology Manager - Glass Applications,three months of additional testing are now under way to acquiredesign data for the commercial introduction of the technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Ammonia Injection Lowers Engine NOx EmissionsJames W. Davis (277 Kavenish Dr., Rancho Mirage, CA 92270) has beenassigned a patent for a method of reducing engine pollutants,particularly nitrogen oxides (NOx).  The process described in USPatent 5,224,346, issued to Lester P. Berriman, John M. Zabsky,James W. Davis, and William M. Hylton on July 6, 1993, involves theinjection of ammonia into a conduit between the cylinder exhaustvalves and the catalytic converter.  Ammonia injection occurs farenough downstream of the exhaust valves to avoid burning of theammonia and at a location where the exhaust gases are at atemperature of at least 1200 F.  The ammonia reacts with the NOx inthe exhaust gases prior to the gases reaching the catalyticconverter, which eases the load on the catalyst.  To minimizeammonia use, it is injected only one minute or so after cold enginestartup when the catalyst is too cold to be effective and duringoperation of the engine at high power levels, when the greatestamounts of NOx are produced.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Engine Modifications Lower EmissionsFord Motor Company (Box 1899, Dearborn, MI 48121; Tel 313/322-3000)has been granted a patent for engine modifications which improveefficiency, power, fuel economy, and emission control.  Thebenefits described in US Patent 5,224,460, issued to Peter H.Havstad and Rodney J. Tabaczynski on July 6, 1993, are obtained byphase shifting of both the intake and exhaust valve timing events.Also, reed valves restrict the backflow of exhaust gases into theintake ports.  The phase shifting and use of intake reed valvesoptimize the intake and exhaust event timing at the four majorengine operating conditions: idle, part load, wide open throttlelow speed, and high speed.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Gas Burner Has Low NOx LevelsOsaka Gas Co., Ltd. (4-1-2 Hirano-machi, Chuo-ku, Osaka 541, Japan;Tel 6 2022221, Fax 6 2261681) has a patent for a gas burner whichhas low nitrogen oxides (NOx) generation and combustion noiselevels and improved combustion load and  ignition performancecharacteristics.  The gas burner described in US Patent 5,224,855,issued to Hajime Toyonaga, Toshio Nishida, Yasuo Takeishi, andMasao Shiomi on July 6, 1993, uses two sets of flame openings.  Thefirst set discharges stable, self-combustible, high-concentrationgas; and the second set of flame openings discharges unstable, non-self-combustible, low-concentration gas.  The two sets of flameopenings are arranged in an alternate pattern.  The stable flameformations at the first set of flame openings assists stabilizationof flame formations at the second set of flame openings.Consequently, the gas burner may have a high air excess ratio toreduce its NOx generation and to prevent incomplete combustion.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993SOx Removed from Flue GasMichigan State University (East Lansing, MI) researchers appliedfor a patent for clay materials to remove sulfur oxides (SOx) fromgas streams.  US Patent 5,225,384, was issued to Thomas J.Pinnavaia, Christine A. Polansky, Jayantha Amarasekera on July 6,1993  and describes a composition which includes a smectite clayand a base or base precursor which reacts with SOx in hot flue gas.The composition is formed by dissolving sodium carbonate in asuspension containing a smectite clay in water.  A soluble alkalineearth metal salt is added in a stoichiometric amount for reactionwith the sodium carbonate to form an alkaline earth metal carbonateprecipitate in the suspension with the clay.  The suspension isthen dried to provide the composite material.  When the compositematerial is heated, it can remove SOx from flue gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Engine Reduces NOx Emissions Through Exhaust Gas RecirculationCaterpillar, Inc. (100 NE Adams St., Peoria, IL 61629-2325; Tel309/675-1000, Fax 309/675-1342) has a recent patent for thereduction of nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions from engines throughexhaust gas recirculation.  The engine described in US Patent5,226,401, issued to John M. Clarke and James J. Faletti on July13, 1993, operates with at least part of its combustion chambers ina four-stroke, reverse flow mode.  The remaining combustionchambers are operated in a normal, four-stroke mode.  In the four-stroke, reverse flow mode exhaust gas is inducted into thecombustion chambers and then compressed and expanded.  Cooling ofthe exhaust gas is achieved during the compression and expansionstrokes.  The cooled exhaust gas is then expelled from thecombustion chambers and mixed with fresh charge air.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Fuel Nozzle Reduces Gas Turbine Engine NOx EmissionsGeneral Electric (Schenectady, NY 12345; Tel 518/385-0230) has apatent for equipment to reduce nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions ingas turbine engines.  US Patent 5,228,283, issued to Michael B.Sciocchetti on July 20, 1993, describes a breech-loaded fuel nozzlecartridge assembly for use with gaseous or distillate fuels.  Thecartridge assembly includes an elongated water delivery pipe.  Theforward end of the cartridge pipe has an interior water swirler andan exterior distillate fuel swirler, and the forward end of thefuel nozzle body has an air swirler.  At the fuel nozzle tip, anouter conical air spray, an intermediate distillate or gaseous fuelspray, and an inner conical water spray combine to provide ahomogenous mixture at the point of combustion.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993NGK Insulators Catalytic Converter Can Reduces Automotive EmissionsNGK Insulators, Ltd. (2-56 Suda-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467, Japan;Tel 52 8727171, Fax 52 8727103) has patented a catalytic converterfor use in automotive exhaust emission control.  US Patent5,229,079, issued to Takashi Harada, Fumio Abe, and HiroshigeMizuno on July 20, 1993, describes a catalytic converter with ahoneycomb heater located downstream of the main monolithic catalystor between main monolithic catalysts.  The heater includes ahoneycomb, catalyst-carrying structure and at least two electrodesto supply a current.  It also includes a monolith catalyst forignition located downstream of the honeycomb heater.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993SOx and NOx Removed from Gas StreamsInstitut Francais du Petrole (Rueil Malmaison, France) and BabcockEnterprise (La Courneuve, France) have patented a method ofreducing emissions of sulfur oxides (SOx), nitrogen oxides (NOx),and unburnt combustible compounds while generating heat.  Theprocess described in US Patent 5,230,871, issued to Gerard Martinand Jean-Louis Bouju on July 27, 1993, generates heat whilecleaning effluent with fine particles of absorbent in an entrainedbed.  The gas stream and particles of a fresh absorbent are fedinto a turbulent zone upstream of an adiabatic desulfurizationunit.  The mixture produced is passed into a heat recovery unit.Part of the absorbent is recycled to the desulfurization unit, andthe flow rate of fresh and recycled absorbent is adjusted so thatthe temperature in the unit is 750-1000 C.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Patented Diesel Engine Catalyst Reduces Emission of PollutantsNippon Shokubai Co., Ltd. (5-1 Korabashi, Higashi-ku, Osaka 541,Japan; Tel 6 2239111, Fax 6 2013716) has been assigned a patent fora diesel engine catalyst that reduces emissions of sulfur dioxide,particulates, uncalcined hydrocarbons, and carbon monoxide.  Thecatalyst described in US Patent 5,208,203, issued to MakatoHoriuchi and Koichi Saito on May 4, 1993, includes titaniadeposited on a three-dimensional refractory structure.  At leastone noble metal (palladium, platinum, and/or rhodium) and anotherelement (scandium, yttrium, rare earth elements, alkali metals,alkaline earth metals, gold, silver, copper, or zinc) are dispersedand deposited on the titania.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993EPA Delay in Implementing Air Permit Rule Causes States to MissProgram Submission DeadlineTitle V of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA) charged theU.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) with issuing a permitrule that would identify minimum elements of state permit programsand govern the implementation of state efforts.  Disagreement amongEPA, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and the Council onCompetitiveness delayed the rule's issuance for 8 months.  This hashindered implementation of the Title V permit program since somestates have waited for the final rule to be issued beforedeveloping their own programs.  Similarly, certain statelegislatures waited for the final rule before enacting legislationauthorizing agencies to fully implement programs and assess fees tocover their costs.  Because the final rule was issued after manystate legislatures adjourned in 1992, many state agencies had towait until 1993 to obtain legislative authority.  As a result, somestates doubt that they will be able to submit their program plansto EPA by the November 1993 deadline.Cost estimates by some states indicate that they will face problemsin funding their permit programs.  Although many state agencieshave adopted the $25 per ton of emissions presumptive fee set byCongress in Title V because of political and economic pressure tokeep fees low, many state officials do not consider this feeadequate to fund their programs.  For example, Texas' permitprogram costs are expected to increase by nearly 300% when Title Vis fully implemented, from the current level of about $15 millionto about $42 million, or $30 to $35 per ton of emissions.  NorthCarolina's Clean Air Act Advisory Council has determined that thestate's cost of meeting Title V will be $12 million, or $36 per tonof emissions.  Wisconsin has estimated that Title V will increaseits needs from $9 million to $18 million.  Wisconsin officialsbelieve that the state's permit fees should be set between $35 and$40 per ton to generate the necessary revenue.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Center for Resource Economics (CRE) Report Criticizes EPAThe U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is failing to carryout its mission because of gross under-funding and skewedpriorities, according to a study by the Center for ResourceEconomics (CRE), a Washington, DC-based nonprofit environmentalresearch organization.  EPA needs a budget increase of at least 13%"to provide even minimally adequate environmental protection," thereport says, but instead is facing an 8% cut in its 1994 budget.The CRE report found that EPA has a 22% budget shortfall in itscore operating programs and, as a result, is unable to fullyenforce a single environmental protection statute.  EPA spends 80%of its funds on pollutants ranked as relatively low risks by theagency, with 20% going to high risk pollutants, charged CRE.Inactive toxic waste sites and point source discharges to surfacewater, two of the low risk categories, receive 54% of EPAresources, while high risk air pollutants receive only 6%.  Workerexposure to chemicals, radon, wetlands destruction, and globalclimate change - all high risk areas - receive less than 1% each ofEPA's resources.  "More than 2 decades after its creation, EPAcannot guarantee the safety of pesticides and other toxicsubstances widely used in the U.S.," CRE said.  EPA officials saythat their priorities are largely determined by laws passed byCongress and that the agency's budget is constrained by the federalbudget deficit.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Allowances Auction CanceledThe Chicago Board of Trade (CBT) canceled its scheduled June 1993auction of sulfur dioxide emissions allowances because the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has not implemented acomputer-based allowance tracking system.  CBT successfully ranEPA's March 1993 auction.  EPA says that the tracking system isunnecessary for companies to trade the allowances privately.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993U.S. Leads in Pollution Control Equipment ExportsThe U.S. was the world's leading exporter of pollution controlequipment in 1991 with a trade surplus of $1.1 billion according toa report released by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency(EPA).  Germany led in 1990, but U.S. companies took the lead in1991 with $188 million more in exports than Germany.  U.S.environmental exports increased 70% from 1989 to 1991, whileimports increased 45%.Financial WatchCompany                  Stock Price               Recent high    Recent low      Recent closeAllied Signal  74 3/4         50        74 3/4Calgon         20             10 1/2    11 3/4Du Pont        53 7/8         44 1/2    48 5/8W.R. Grace     41 1/4         34        39 3/8Millipore      38             25 7/8    31 7/8Osmonics       21 1/2         13 1/4    18 3/8Perkin Elmer   39 3/4         28 1/2    32 7/8Teledyne       25 3/8         17        24 3/4Varian         54             33 3/4    51 3/4Wheelabrator   23 1/2         14 3/8    18 1/4  TechnologiesBack to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Inst. of Clean Air Companies says Smog Control Costs ExaggeratedThe Institute of Clean Air Companies, Inc. (ICAC, 1707 L Street NWSuite 750, Washington, DC 20036-4201; Tel 202/457-0911, Fax202/331-1388), the national association of air pollution controlsuppliers, has released cost figures for high efficiency control ofnitrogen oxides (NOx) that are only 20-50% of the costs assumed bystate regulators in determining reasonably available controltechnology.  ICAC released the figures in comments on a report,Evaluation and Costing of NOx Controls for Existing Utility Boilersin the NESCAUM Region, (Evaluation Report) prepared by AcurexEnvironmental Corporation for the Northeast States for CoordinatedAir Use Management (NESCAUM) and the U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency (EPA).  ICAC's cost figures show that much more NOx can beremoved for a given level of investment than air quality regulatorshave assumed.  For example, the Evaluation Report pegs capitalcosts for retrofitting hot-side selective catalytic reduction (SCR)technology on a 200 MW pulverized coal boiler at about $150/kW.ICAC says that current market transactions show that this cost is$30-70/kW, depending on the difficulty of retrofit.  Costs for oil-and gas-fired retrofits, as well as for new installations, are evenlower.States are revising their Clean Air Act implementation plans tofurther cut NOx emissions, which contribute significantly to urbansmog and acid rain.  "Clean air policy depends on assumptions aboutthe cost of air pollution controls.  In the case of NOx, relianceon inflated cost estimates is leading decision makers to establishunnecessarily loose standards based on controls that can remove nomore than half of a boiler's NOx emissions, when SCR technology isavailable to achieve 80-90% emission removal," stated Jeffrey C.Smith, ICAC's Executive Director.  "The market  history of SCRtechnology exemplifies the path of most air pollution controlscommercialized in the U.S. over the past 30 years.  Competitionpushes costs significantly lower and raises performance andreliability dramatically," Smith added.  A copy of ICAC's writtencomments is available from the organization, which has preparedcomments highlighting what it claims are inaccuracies in thetreatment of selective non-catalytic (SNCR) reduction of NOx in theEvaluation Report.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Cost Effectiveness of Eliminating CO Vehicle Emissions StudiedThe cost effectiveness of identification and repair of vehicleswith excessive carbon monoxide emissions was investigated over the1991-1992 winter period in Provo, UT.  This pilot program used on-road remote sensing at two locations to identify repeat grosspolluting vehicles.  The owners of gross polluters observed at oneof the locations were solicited for a free repair program carriedout under the direction of the Utah Valley Community College, Auto-Diesel Division.  The same two locations were revisited after therepair program had terminated and the vehicle emissions wereremeasured.  Gary A. Bishop, Donald H. Stedman, James E. Peterson,Theresa J. Hosick, and Paul L. Guenther (Chemistry Department,University of Denver, University Park, CO 80208-0179) obtained morethan 17,000 measurements on over 10,000 individual vehicles.  Asobserved elsewhere, half of the total carbon monoxide was emittedby only about 10% of the vehicles.  Solicitation letters were sentto 114 owners, and 47 vehicles were recruited and repairsattempted.  Of the 47 vehicles, 28 were remeasured when the sitewas revisited at the end of the program.  They had improved theiron-road emissions by more than 50%.  The vehicles which wereidentified as gross polluters at the second location, but notnotified of their status, were used as the control group.  Theiremissions were also reduced, but only by 14%.  This pilot programdemonstrated carbon monoxide emissions reduction at a costeffectiveness of $200 per ton, not including the cost benefits ofgas mileage improvement.  $200 per ton is lower than many currentor proposed mandatory programs.  The owner's repair cost would morethan pay for itself in terms of improved fuel economy.  The programwould also generate the on-road fleet emissions data necessary toevaluate its effectiveness.  Without such data, a program is forcedto rely on computer modeling with its known limitations.  Theresearchers published the results of their work in Air & Waste,Vol. 43, July 1993, 978-988.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Multi-Layer Coating Reduces VOC'sDu Pont (Wilmington, DE 19898; Tel 302/774-1000) has been assigneda patent for a low volatile organic compound (VOC) multi-layerclear coating.  The process described in US Patent 5,227,201,issued to Lee R. Harper on July 13, 1993, forms multiple coats offinishes on a substrate by first applying a color basecoat layer ofpigment-containing acrylic polymer latex.  Before the basecoat iscured, a clear coat acrylic polymer having crosslinkable groups anda crosslinking agent in a volatile organic solvent is applied.  Thelayers are cured simultaneously.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993VOC's Thermally Stripped from SoilRichard and Junior L. Crosby (7819-105 Calibre Crossing, Charlotte,NC 28227) has  a patent for a process which thermally stripsvolatile organic compounds (VOC's) from soil using a recirculatingcombustible gas.  The transportable system described in US Patent5,228,803 was issued on July 20, 1993 and includes a vessel inwhich contaminated soil is placed in contact with a hot gas.  Thegas is discharged from the vessel, and ambient air is introducedinto the gas to ensure that it remains combustible.  A blowercirculates the gas to a cyclone separator, where fine soilparticles and ash are removed.  The VOC's in the gas are removed bycombustion in a burner fired with a supplemental fuel.  A portionof the combusted gas is exhausted to the atmosphere, and theremainder is recirculated to the vessel where the process isrepeated.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Low VOC Cleaner Used Automotive RefinishingDu Pont (Wilmington, DE 19898; Tel 302/774-1000) has  a patent fora low volatile organic compound (VOC) cleaner.  The compositiondescribed in US Patent 5,230,821 was issued to John C. Larson andGary L. Horton on July 27, 1993.  It includes an aqueous emulsionof a non-aromatic organic phase stabilized with a blend ofsurfactants.  The emulsion is characterized by a low content ofVOC's and superior cleaning properties.  It is particularly usefulfor removing water- and organic solvent-soluble materials fromautomotive surfaces being refinished.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993VOC Emissions from Glycol Dehydrators ReducedThe Gas Research Institute (Chicago, IL) has been assigned a patentfor a system to control volatile organic compound (VOC) emissionsfrom glycol dehydrators.  The system described in US Patent5,209,762, issued to Philip S. Lowell on May 11, 1993, places aglycol in contact with a natural gas stream to extract water fromthe gas.  The glycol is regenerated by heating it to vaporize theabsorbed water.   The vented steam VOC contaminants flow from theglycol regenerator to the bottom of a steam stripper column.  Thevapors from the top of the steam stripper column are condensed toproduce a water stream with a relatively high concentration ofVOC's.  The water stream is passed to the top of the steam stripperand then through the stripper counter-currently to the vented gasesand steam.  The condenser water stream is thereby stripped of mostof its organics content and emerges from the bottom of the strippercolumn.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993RESOLV  Vapor Recovery Systems Capture VOC'sNew chemical vapor recovery systems developed by Air Products andChemicals, Inc. (7201 Hamilton Boulevard, Allentown, PA 18195-1501;215/481-8451, Fax 215/481-5431) are helping the chemical processindustries (CPI) meet volatile organic compound (VOC) emissionregulations mandated by the Clean Air Act Amendments (Air Toxicsemissions) while reducing costs through the recovery of valuablechemicals.  RESOLV  chemical vapor recovery systems can remove 95-99% of the VOC's by using liquid nitrogen to cool process ventstreams to targeted temperatures, condensing, and capturing theVOC's in liquid form.  The VOC's are captured before they are mixedand diluted by other waste streams, thereby significantly reducingdisposal costs.  The recovered chemicals can then be sold orrecycled in the manufacturer's operation.  Additionally, furthercost savings can be achieved, since the required quantity ofnitrogen to operate a RESOLV system is often already available on-site.In a typical RESOLV installation, liquid nitrogen and VOC emissionstreams pass through an indirect condenser.  In the condenser, thecold liquid nitrogen condenses the VOC's and captures them inliquid form, while the liquid nitrogen simultaneously converts togaseous nitrogen.  The clean, VOC-free vent stream exits therecovery system, and the clean, gaseous nitrogen is then usedelsewhere in the chemical manufacturing process such as in inertingprocessing or storage vessels.  The purity of the nitrogen remainsintact, since it does not come into direct contact with the VOC's.As a result, Air Products' RESOLV systems permit chemicalmanufacturers to realize both the cryogenic and inerting benefitsof their nitrogen supply without the cost and performancedisadvantages associated with freeze-thaw systems.Air Products says that RESOLV systems offer several advantages overalternative technologies for meeting VOC regulations.  AirProducts' systems are flexible and can accommodate changes in VOCregulations without re-engineering the system.  The amount of VOC'srecovered with a RESOLV system can be adjusted simply by reducingthe  temperature of the indirect condenser.  In addition, capitalcosts are less; permitting of flares, incinerators, or catalyticcombustion equipment is avoided; and there are no environmentalproblems associated with nitrogen oxide and small amounts of non-combusted VOC's.  RESOLV systems also eliminate the disposalproblems created by adsorption technology or scrubbers.Air Products' Dr. Bud Dalton, Commercial Development Manager forthe technology, stressed that "RESOLV systems are more than end-of-pipe solutions; they can be integrated upstream into manufacturingprocesses to achieve additional savings."  Air Products customizesthese systems to cost effectively address each customer's VOCstream composition and recovery/compliance targets.  In someinstances, the CPI customer may only require supplemental coolingto meet current emission standards.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993RE-THERM VF Units Treat VOC'sResearch-Cottrell Reeco, Inc. (Box 1500, Somerville, NJ 08876; Tel908/685-4000, Fax 908/685-4181) is marketing its RE-THERM VF systemto oxidize volatile organic compounds (VOC's) and other airbornepollutants.  Nicholas Coppola, Senior Vice President - Sales, toldus that the technology offers destruction efficiencies of 96-99%.During operation of the RE-THERM VF system, contaminated processair enters the unit through an inlet manifold.  Flow control valvesdirect the exhaust into those regenerative chambers that have justswitched to the "inlet" mode.  These chambers contain hot ceramicstoneware that has absorbed most of the heat energy from a previousbatch of exiting cleaned air.  When the incoming, contaminatedexhaust is drawn through the hot stoneware bed, its temperatureincreases.  This causes many pollutants and odor-causing compoundsto auto-ignite even before they reach the main purificationchamber.  Gas or oil burners in the main chamber maintain therequired purification temperature.  If the incoming gas streamcontains enough VOC's, the unit can self-sustain, keeping fuelcosts very low.  The purified air is channeled out through astoneware bed that has switched to the "outlet" mode.  There, itdeposits most of its heat energy which is transferred to yetanother batch of incoming, contaminated process exhaust.  In mostapplications, warm, clean air is then vented to the atmosphere.Another option is the return of the warm exhaust to the plant toheat dryers, ovens, or other equipment.  In some units, wastesolvent can be used as auxiliary fuel, further reducing operatingcosts and alleviating the plant's solvent disposal problem.  Singleunits with a horizontal flow design can treat up to 500,000ft3/minute.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Fate of VOC's in Municipal Activated Sludge Plants  InvestigatedThe fate of volatile organic compounds (VOC's) in municipalactivated sludge plants has been investigated at pilot and fullscale.  Wayne J. Parker, Doug J. Thompson, John P. Bell, and HenrykMelcer found that more than 80% of the mass flow of non-chlorinatedcompounds was biodegraded while less than 20% was removed bystripping.  Conversely, 46% of the mass flow of chlorinatedcompounds was biodegraded and 47% was removed by stripping.Adsorption of VOC's onto waste sludge was not a significant removalmechanism.  The pilot plant used effectively emulated the liquid-gas phase partitioning and overall compound removals of a full-scale plant.  There was little difference in liquid-gas phasepartitioning for coarse and fine pore diffusers in spite ofdiffering mass transfer characteristics as demonstrated by oxygen-transfer measurements.  This implies that equilibrium between theliquid- and gas-phase concentrations was achieved with bothdiffuser types.  Stripping of VOC's increased with air flow, butthe extent of stripping increased at a declining rate.  Theresearchers summarized their work in a paper published in WaterEnvironment Research Vol. 65, No. 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993ICI Paints Reduces VOC's with Water-Based FormulationsIn an effort to reduce volatile organic compound (VOC) emissionsfrom paint solvents, ICI Paints (Slough, UK) has developed what itssays is the first water-based metallic paint for automotiverefinishing.  About 15% of the 800 million liters/year of paintsold by ICI goes to the auto refinishing market.  The product isscheduled for introduction in both Europe and the U.S. later in1993.  The company estimates that European auto repairs account forabout 117,000 metric tons/year of VOC emissions.  ICI has beenactive in the Canadian auto refinishing market for many years andentered the U.S. arena in September 1992 with its existing organicsolvent-based product line.  The new water-based product, whichadapts a microgel latex paint system used in car manufacturingsince the early 1980's, contains only about 15% organic solventsinstead of the 85% or so contained in conventional metallic paints.ICI hopes to reduce the organic solvent content below 10% by 1994.The price of the new paint will be 5-30% higher than the existingproduct line, but ICI points out that users will be able to avoidthe installation of VOC emissions control equipment.  The companyis manufacturing the new paint at Stowmarket, UK and is undecidedabout U.S. manufacturing plans.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Influence of Landscape Variability on Atmospheric  DispersionUsing idealized distributions of surface moisture, Roger A. Pielkeand Marek Uliasz (Department of Atmospheric Science, Colorado StateUniversity, Fort Collins, CO) have shown that with a significantsynoptic prevailing flow over regions of surface variability,dispersion is generally enhanced over heterogeneous surfaces ascompared to horizontally homogeneous conditions.  The importance ofheterogeneity becomes less as the large-scale wind speed increasesand/or the spatial scale of the heterogeneities become less.  Thework demonstrates that the use of Gaussian regulatory models inareas of landscape variability is inappropriate.  The researcherspublished the results of their work in Air & Waste, Vol. 43, July1993,989-994.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Atmospheric Sulfur Oxidation Influence by Droplet Size in Cloudsand FogCloud and fog have traditionally been assumed to be composed of achemically homogeneous population of droplets.  Model predictionsand experimental investigations by Xin Rao, Aaron Bator, and JeffCollett, Jr. (Institute for Environmental Studies, University ofIllinois, 1101 West Peabody Drive, Urbana, IL 61801) indicate thatthis assumption may not be correct.  Variations in chemical dropsizes across the drop size spectrum have been predicted andobserved in a number of environments.  The researchers examined theinfluence of such variations on aqueous phase oxidation of S(IV) inthe atmosphere.  Measurements of the composition of various dropsize fractions in clouds and fog often reveal differences in pH.Measurements of S(IV) and H2O2 concentrations in radiation fogs inCalifornia's central valley revealed a dependence on drop size aswell.  Simultaneous variations of pH, S(IV), and H2O2concentrations across the drop size spectrum complicate predictionsof net rates of sulfur oxidation.  The researchers believe that itis unlikely that the average rate of sulfur oxidation across thedrop spectrum will be equal to the rate predicted based on averagecloud or fog drop compositions.  They summarized their work in apaper, Chemical Variations Across the Cloud Drop Size Spectrum andTheir Influence on Sulfur (IV) Oxidation in the Atmosphere,delivered at the 206th American Chemical Society (ACS) NationalMeeting in Chicago, IL August 22-27, 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Software Models Processes and Tracks Chemical UsageModelVision Software, Inc. (13186 Trail Hollow, Houston, TX 77079;Tel 713/461-0043) has commercialized a process modeling and toxicchemical tracking system.  The software, Visual Chem Track ,provides both integrated process simulation and lifetime trackingfor more than 1100  chemicals.  "PC-based simulation and accountingwithin individual processes and facility-wide meets the criticalneeds of managers," said John Shaffer, ModelVision President, whoadded, "Federal, state, regional, and local environmental, health,and safety regulations mandate precise documentation and reporting.At the same time, good management practice calls for constantanalysis and revision, both of individual operations and entireprocesses.  Since businesses must keep accurate information forcompliance, our software builds on that base by means of a dynamicmodel."Shaffer said that the software is user-friendly and that the on-line "help" feature allows users to master the software at theirown learning pace.  Each engineer or process manager describes indetail the facility, production unit, and component operationsincluding the names and quantities of chemicals involved.  Once themodel is built, the system provides continuous, accurate trackingof all chemicals, showing where efficiencies can be obtained inboth chemical use and by-product generation.  Using Visual ChemTrack, engineers and process managers describe facility andindividual production units in visual, process flow diagrams; enterchemical substances involved in each step of facility operation;track chemical consumption, processing, and by-product generationat both the production unit and total facility levels; fine tuneoperations using a mass balance transfer function to automaticallytabulate and balance chemical inputs and outputs; track more than1100 compounds by CAS number, usage, or generation threshold,regulation, and/or type of operation; provide a basis for comparingoperations with plans, assuring that both the total facility andindividual production units and sub-units operate optimally.Visual Chem Track prepares federal and state environmental forms,and produces reports tailored to management's specifications toanalyze trends and aid decision making.  The software requiresMicrosoft Windows 3.1, an 80386 or higher microprocessor, and atleast 2 megabytes of RAM.  Visual Chem Track is priced at $2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993German Technology Cuts Toxic Incinerator ResidueGSB mbH (Munich, Germany), a waste disposal company, has pilottested a process to cut the amount of toxic residue from 4500metric tons/year to 3900 metric tons/year at a 70,000 metrictons/year incinerator in Ebenhausen, Germany.  In the process,fluegas from the incinerator first passes through an electrostaticprecipitator (ESP) to remove the dust.  Sulfur dioxide is thenremoved from the fluegas in a 2-step washing process.  Bydissolving the dust from the ESP in the acidic wash water from thefirst step of the fluegas cleaning process, GSB can transfer up to80% of the dust  collected by the ESP to the wastewater stream,which is then neutralized with calcium hydroxide or calciumcarbonate.  The undissolved material, including the metalhydroxides, is filtered and vitrified in 2 stages at 500 C and1000 C, respectively.  The dissolved salts, mainly calciumchloride, go to a wastewater treatment plant.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Vitropore Ceramic Candles Clean Hot Flue GasPall Corporation (2200 Northern Boulevard, East Hills, NY 11548;Tel 516/484-5400 or 800/645-6532, Fax 516/621-3976) Vitroporeceramic filter candles are intended for hot gas solid separationprocesses.  Hot combustion gas is too corrosive and contaminated tobe filtered by any media other than ceramics.  If not adequatelyfiltered, solid particles and acid gases will cause erosion andfouling of energy recovery system components.  Vitropore ceramiccandles combine high burst strength and thermal shock resistancewith high permeability, high filtration efficiency, and corrosionresistance in a rigid silicon carbide medium.  They can removeand/or recycle catalysts from any catalytic reaction.The candles are made of finely-ground silicon carbide grains.During manufacturing, grain size is carefully controlled to achievean even pore size distribution throughout the candle's length.After blending the grains, the candles are isostatically pressedand machined to specific dimensions.  Porosity and permeability areuniform throughout the entire length of the candle, which providesconsistent filter performance during blowback operations.  Pallclaims that its Vitropore candles collect more than 99.9% ofinfluent solids on the surface of the filter medium.  The companysays that this high removal efficiency is due to the candle's topsurface layer which is a thin, du rable, fine-pore membranecomposed of one or more layers of bonded ceramic material.  Thissurface membrane is supported by a thicker, coarser substrate whichenables the candles to function as barrier filters.  They areespecially suited to pulse cleaning or blowback operations, sinceparticle penetration of the filter body is minimized.  The resultis quantitative solids separation, free of migration or unloadingof particulate matter and consistently good effluent quality.  Poresays that a major advantage of Vitropore candles is their abilityto withstand heat up to 1000 C due to a proprietary bindingmaterial highly tolerant of thermal shock.Vitropore candles remove contaminants and/or recover product inhalogenated hydrocarbon, petrochemical, catalyst activator, fluidcatalytic cracking (FCC), hazardous materials incineration, andfluid bed coal gasifier applications.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-19IA059-000325-B009-110http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev36.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000143 text/html 41887HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 23:59:38 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:34 GMTContent-length: 41700Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev36.html Sample Issue Copyright BUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet September 1, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *** FOCUS REPORT *** The Changing Climate of Collaboration (1283 words) *** INVESTMENT WATCH *** European Environmental Venture Fund Reaches First Round Funding Goal; Will Make Commitments By Year's End (384 words) Internal, External Forces Affect Earnings at Big Waste Collectors (415 words) Regulatory Uncertainty Whipsaws a New Public Company (397 words) *** REGULATORY AND POLICY TRENDS *** Taxes on Carbon Proposed on Two Continents (218 words) EPA Announces Stringent Sulfur Reduction Rule for Diesel Fuel (384 words) Superfund Changes Put EPA (and Taxpayers) Between Banks and Environmental Groups (371 words) *** BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES *** California Firm Ready for Expanded Pollution Rights Sales, But Some Companies Won't Sell (323 words) Regional Center Will Build Foundations for Environmental Action in Central and Eastern Europe (518 words) *** COMPANIES AND CASES *** European Automakers Lead in Recycling (242 words) Du Pont Paired with Industry Council to Reduce Delaware Waste (209 words) Trans-National Corporate Progress Against Ozone Depletion (464 words) Flakt Will Retrofit Taiwanese Power Plant for $115 Million (275 words) *** HOTLINE *** State judges in New England will get training in (113 words) CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990The Changing Climate of Collaboration     One dividend of our exploration of space has been thatseries of photographs of earthrise over the moon -- of ourblue-green planet, fragile and entire in space.  As part of itscopyrighted series of op-ed ad pieces in the New York Times andWall Street Journal, Mobil Corporation (MOB-NYSE) last monthinvoked the earthrise image to call for a new era ofcollaboration between the camps of business and environmentalism.Mobil says business "gets the picture."  That we are indeed allin it together on spaceship earth and that changing times havebrought business to an understanding of environmentalresponsiveness and activism.     Mobil isn't alone.  A rising tide of collaborative studies,initiatives, and projects large and small indicate a trend awayfrom confrontation and toward cooperation.     Jim Middaugh, spokesman for the US Environmental DefenseFund (EDF), told BATE "After twenty years of litigating, we'refinding that the carrot of improved profits is as compelling asthe stick of legal action."  And, true to that promise, EDF isworking with McDonald's Corp. (MCD-NYSE) in a major study to findways to reduce, reuse, recycle, and compost the solid waste fromthe 11,000 McDonald's around the world.     The EDF-McDonald's joint task force, a first between a majorenvironmental group and leading fast food retailer, will spendsix months looking at every step in McDonald's business.  Thejoint announcement lists redesign and reduction in use ofpackaging and shipping materials, increased use of materials withless environmental impact, increased recycling and use ofrecyclable packaging, composting of organic wastes, increased useof reuseables shipping containers and foodware, and increased useof recycled materials as possible areas of examination.     The consultancy is distinctive because of the potentialleverage from its findings and the nature of the relationship.In addition to the 11,000 McDonald's stores, there are another130,000 fast food outlets and 330,000 restaurants in total in theU.S. that stand to gain  from what is learned.  And every day,McDonald's serves 22 million customers.   That's 22 millionchances every day to implant an environmental responsibilitymessage in the public mind.     The agreement is carefully structured.  The study will bemade public and the feasibility of the recommendations assessed.McDonald's says that, where feasible, they will implement therecommendations.  If EDF and the hamburger maker disagreematerially, each has the right to issue a dissenting or separateopinion.  Either party can end the project if no agreement lookspossible, and each is paying its own share to ensureindependence.     So . . . within a week of one another, we have US$50 billionMobil saying "We don't see two camps.  Energies that ought to bejoined in collaborative efforts are far less productivelyemployed when slinging gibes or lawsuits.  When we work in tandem-- or at least pull in the same direction -- a lot gets done."And we have Fred Krupp, executive director of EDF, saying hisorganization is "hopeful that this process (with McDonald's) willillustrate ways in which business and environmental groups thathave significantly different perspectives can nevertheless worktogether to achieve environmental improvements that are in thepublic interest."     Mobil's public call for conciliation and the EDF-McDonald'sventure are both discrete news events and points in a growingtrend.Changing the Minds of Utility Regulators     Other examples of corporation-environmental organizationcollaboration are beginning to produce measurable results.  Inthe summer of 1988, the US Conservation Law Foundation (CLF) andNew England Electric (NES-NYSE) agreed to work cooperatively onconservation and load management programs and the attendantregulatory and rate adjustments in the face of reduced sales.     The transition from an adversarial to a cooperativerelationship has had an appreciable impact.  Armond Cohen, asenior attorney on the CLF staff told BATE that in 1990, "NewEngland Electric will spend US$56 million on conservation,exclusive of load management.  Over the life of that investment,the NES outlay will yield savings to customers of $154 million incurrent dollars."  Cohen reports that of the net $98 million poolof savings, $80 million will be returned to the ratepayers, $10million will cover costs, and $8 million will be returned to theshareholders -- a .5% addition to the stockholders' return onequity.  Cohen calls that an "attractive incentive to encouragecontinued investment in conservation.  And," the Boston lawyercontinues, "those numbers don't reflect the reduced societalcosts of fewer dirty windows, less air pollution, fewerrespiratory problems."     In 1991, says Cohen, the utility's conservation investmentwill jump to $80 million, with $180 million in resulting savingsover the life of the investment.  The success of the CLF-NEScollaboration, particularly with state regulatory commissions,has now been extended to 12 retail electric companies in NewEngland and New York and the development of a nationalelectricity conservation program for Jamaica.  $40 million wasinvested across New England in conservation in 1987.  That figurejumps to $200 million for this year, in part the result of theinitiative between New England Electric and CLF.  And theinvestment will rise to $250 million in 1991.  The result?  Inwhat Cohen calls a conservative estimate, one third of otherwiseneeded power plants in the region out to the year 2010 won't haveto be built, freeing that capital for other uses.     At the National Audubon Society, Senior Scientist Jan Beyeareminds that the Coalition of Northeast Governors (CONEG) hasbrought together representatives of environmental organizations,the various states' agencies and most importantly, 12 corporatemembers in an extended collaborative effort to hammer outstandards and definitions of environmental terms -- leading to anenvironmental seal for consumers.  In addition to his CONEGparticipation, Beyea says he is often consulted informally bycorporations seeking Audubon's advice or opinion on new packagingor product introductions.European, Pacific Examples Surfacing     While BATE's sources in Europe and Australasia all concedethat they are not aware of collaborative examples as remarkableas the lion and lamb union of McDonald's and EDF, new initiativesare surfacing.  In the United Kingdom, 30 non-governmentenvironmental organizations have formed a coalition to fosterco-operation and environmental advocacy.  The Environment Councilcalls its Business and Environment Programme "a major element" ofits work.  Steve Robinson, Chief Executive of the EnvironmentCouncil, numbers more than 300 corporations on the program'smembership rolls.  In an interview, Robinson told BATE the aim ofthe Business and Environment Programme is "to promote the conceptthat environmental sense is commercial sense."     Robinson cites a recent exercise with 3M U.K. PLC duringwhich "50 environmental practitioners from our memberorganizations sat down with 3M to talk about the benefits of acomplete corporate environmental policy -- how to prepare,formulate, and most important, implement a company-wideenvironmental policy.  As a result," said Robinson, "3M has justadopted and made public a comprehensive environmental policy."     On the Pacific Rim, Phil Noyce of Australia's Commission forthe Future (and soon to head Greenhouse Action Australia) advisesthat his agency has been advising the international accountingand management firm of Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu on a potentialexpansion from financial to environmental auditing.     David Stephenson, an environmental strategist and seniorcounsel at the Boston marketing communications firm of Agnew,Carter, McCarthy, sees more strategic collaborative alliancesahead.  "There are probably thousands of saplings out there thissummer dying from neglect.  They were planted by companies whowanted or needed an Earth Day press release, and then forgotten."McCarthy thinks one-shot environmental gestures are fading.  Assenior managers incorporate environmental considerations intoevery step of planning, budgeting, producing, and selling, theexpertise and experience of environmental groups will offer anattractive opportunity for synergy.  Measurable new profits andimmeasurable public benefits can result.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990European Environmental Venture Fund Reaches First Round FundingGoal; Will Make Commitments By Year's End     A European venture capital fund based in the United Kingdomhas exceeded its first round funding goal and is already in duediligence on a variety of startups aimed at solving Europeanenvironmental problems.  The fund, the first of its kind inEurope, is called the TR ECOTEC Environmental Fund.  The venturefund is a limited partnership combining the skills of Touche,Remnant & Co. in London and ECOTEC Investment Service Limited ofBirmingham.  ECOTEC is an independent corporate strategy,economics, and marketing group specializing in the environmentalprotection and waste management industry.  Touche, Remnant'sspecialist technology investment team is seven years old and hassome 190 million pounds under management.     The fund's objective is to secure high total returns throughcapital growth, by investment in emerging companies engaged inthe environmental protection and waste management industry in allof Europe.     Richard Haines, Director of ECOTEC, told BATE the fund has16 million pounds in hand, 1 million pounds more than theirinterim goal.  "Within two years, we seek to have raised 30million pounds," said Haines.  The fund is an unrecognizedcollective investment scheme under the UK's Financial ServicesAct.  Which means investment by private individuals isprohibited.  Haines says "pension funds and blue chipcorporations predominate among the subscribing institutionalinvestors."     Asked to characterize the proposals the fund has gotten sofar, Haines called them "all over the lot as to technology,strategy, and polish -- as you might expect.  The greatest numberare water and waste water treatment schemes, tertiary processesin membranes and other advanced filtration processes where thetechnology is just emerging.  Next in quantity," Hainescontinued, "are the land remediation companies.  And we're seeinga lot of joint ventures between Northern European and UScompanies on the one hand and Southern European companies on theother.  An example is proposal by a Danish air pollutionmanagement company and a Spanish engineering firm for a jointventure in Spain."     No investments have yet been made, but, says Haines, "We'redown to a dozen or so in due diligence and we expect to make twocommitments by the end of the year."     For more information -- Richard Haines, ECOTEC InvestmentServices Limited, Tel: +44 021 616 1010, or Peter Wolf, ToucheRemnant Investment Management Limited, Tel: +44 071 643 0281Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Internal, External Forces Affect Earnings at Big WasteCollectors     The New York-based Value Line investment service ranks theUS environmental companies first among 97 sectors for relativeshare price performance over the next 12 months.  In an era ofrising environmental awareness and expectation, these growingcompanies can count on continued public and private scrutiny --on operations and on stock performance.     Houston-based Browning Ferris Inc. (BFI-NYSE) posted thirdquarter sales of US$767.562 million and operating income of$82.378 million, up 18.5% and 8.8% respectively over the similarperiod last year.  Analysts said BFI had reduced the out-of statewaste it accepted at its big Ohio landfill to appease regulators.Diminished volume there and eroding margins as competitionheightens abroad accounted for results below expectation.     For Waste Management Inc. (WMX-NYSE), it wasn't the secondquarter results -- earnings up 26%, to $178.872 million -- butrather how an article in Barron's looked at Waste Management'saccounting that created ripples.  An article by Abraham Briloffcites the booking of a non-taxable gain of $70.8 millionresulting from the unrealized appreciation of shares of itsChemical Waste Management after Chemical's initial publicoffering as an example of "liberal accounting."     Rollins Environmental Services (REN-NYSE) saw quarterly netgo from red to black ink as the Wilmington, Delaware company sawbig new incinerators begin to operate at close to capacity.Rollins netted $7,224,000 on $52,486,000 for the quarter ended 30June.  That compares to a loss of $33.5 million on sales of $39.6 million for the comparable quarter in 1989.  Rollins is ontarget for a $200 million year with earnings of $19.179 millionon sales of $146.492 million for the first three quarters of itsfiscal year.     The addition of used oil recycling and waste fluid recoveryto Safety-Kleen's (SK-NYSE) core business of automotive andindustrial parts and tool cleaning is producing steady gains.From Elgin, Illinois, Safety-Kleen reports second quarterearnings of $11,995 million -- 15% better than the same periodlast year.  Sales were $132.885 million for the quarter and$258.488 for the first six months of 1990.  Net earnings rosefrom 31 cents to 35 cents per share quarter to quarter over '89.     Chemical Waste Management (CHW-NYSE), 78% of which is stillheld by Waste Management, added four cents to its per-shareearnings for its second quarter.  The largest of the US hazardouswaste handlers booked earnings of $43.081 million on revenues of$270.446 million for the period ended 30 June, lifting earningsfrom 17 cents to 21 cents per share over 1989.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Regulatory Uncertainty Whipsaws a New Public Company     Even after the worldwide dip in equity markets brought on bythe Iraqi crisis, U.S. shares of pure environmental companies areperforming better than other sectors.  Of five environmentalcompanies that have gone public this year, four are trading abovetheir IPO prices.  The shares of Mid-American Waste Systems Inc.(MAWS-OTC), Environmental Elements Corp. (NLCO-OTC), SanifillInc. (FIL-AMEX), and Tetra Technologies (TTRA-OTC) are allshowing gains.  Sanifill, which closed at US$25 as we went topress, was offered in April at $9.50, up over 150%.     The laggard is Horsehead Resource Development Company(HHRD-OTC) whose experience underscores the changing, expandingregulatory climate facing environmental remediation companies andthe need for investors and businesses to be both nimble anddiligent.  Horsehead, offered at $14.50 a share in July, rose to$22, but closed as we went to press at $13.75.  The companyrecovers zinc in steel mills in western Pennsylvania that recoversteel from scrap metal.  Horsehead resells the zinc and alsorecovers lead and cadmium from the steelmaking dust and sellsthat to other processors.  The recycling produces a slag and theslag is the problem.  The US Environmental Protection Agency(EPA) doesn't regulate the slag, and indeed the PennsylvaniaDepartment of Transportation is a Horsehead client and uses theslag on icy roads.  Because the process isn't regulated, thecosts are low compared to regulated landfills and other wastetreatment and recovery operators.     The trace lead, cadmium, and chromium in the slag hasproduced an unusual alliance.  Environmental groups and theHazardous Waste Treatment Council, the waste treatment operators,have joined to challenge the EPA to regulate the slag.  A federaldistrict appeals court in Washington, D.C. said last month thatthe EPA does indeed have the power to regulate the slag and askedthat it begin to do so.     Only in its final offering document did Horsehead mentionthe federal court case, saying even then that the ruling wasimmaterial.  Horsehead contends that its recovery technology isthe industry standard and that the EPA accepted that notion.     The company is at work on a process to use the slag toreclaim more heavy metals from waste water, but the regulatorypressure is there.  Reports on all these developments by DebraCoy, an analyst for County NatWest subsidiary Washington AnalysisCorp. and the volatile price of zinc have combined with marketvolatility to move Horsehead's shares lower.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Taxes on Carbon Proposed on Two Continents     Businesses operating in the European Community may soon besubject to a carbon tax.  The notion is part of a position paperon potential economic and fiscal instruments of EC environmentalpolicy.  Action may come as soon as next month.  The paper callsgreenhouse gases "one of the most pressing problems of the energysector."  The carbon tax would be based on the amount of carbondioxide produced by each kind of fuel.  And presumably wouldreduce greenhouse emissions by increasing efficiency and spurringconservation and non-carbon based alternative energy research.Depending on the array of conservation measures and energyperformance standards for buildings and appliances, a carbon taxcould increase fossil fuel prices by 20-30%     The ideas raised in the EC paper will be on the agenda of aninformal meeting of EC environmental ministers in Rome next monthand may be acted on in formal session in October.     The carbon tax idea is surfacing on the other side of theAtlantic as well.  In an op-ed piece in the New York Times onAugust 6, David Doniger of the Natural Resources Defense Counciland Alan Miller of the University of Maryland's Center for GlobalChange, the authors urge President Bush to adopt a carbon tax,saying the measure "would yield billions while sharply reducinggreenhouse emissions."Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990EPA Announces Stringent Sulfur Reduction Rule for Diesel Fuel     In 1988 US petroleum refiners and diesel enginemanufacturers prepared a joint proposal to the EPA for on-highwaydiesel fuel modification.  That landmark collaboration is thebasis for an EPA measure to reduce sulfur by 80% in diesel fuel.Earlier rules resulting from the industry initiative limit heavyduty particulates.  This new standard, to be met by 1 October1993, reduces sulfur content of diesel fuel from 0.25 percent to0.05 percent by weight.     The rule will add as much as 2.3 cents per gallon to dieselprices.  The EPA estimates annual costs to refiners betweenUS$380 and $910 million in 1995, and as much as $1.3 billion by2010.  The measure will reduce the cost of emissions controldevices, saving buyers $60 to $325 per vehicle.  Fuel savingsfrom the newer more efficient catalytic technology will amount to$200 million in 1995 and $465 million in 2010.  The measure maycut engine wear, bringing the direct economic benefit above theincreased cost per gallon.  Nevertheless, expect the fuelincreases to be passed on by transit authorities and everyshipper using diesel trucks to virtually all of the nation'scommuters and consumers.     The US measure is projected to reduce sulfate particulatesby 196,000 tons by 1995 and reduce sulfur dioxide levels by580,000 tons annually.  Sulfur dioxide further oxidizes in theatmosphere to form sulfuric acid and ammonium sulfates,components of acid rain.     European pressure to match the US standards has prompted acost study by CONCAWE , a consortium of 36 petroleum companiescontrolling 90% of Western European refining capacity.  CONCAWEfinds, depending on diesel demand and the availability of lowsulfur crude, that to produce 0.05% sulfur content diesel fuel,the 12 EC countries could expect to make an additional capitalexpenditure of between US$3 billion and $4.3 billion; that thecost per ton of sulfur removed would range between $6,000 and$9,000; and that the total manufacturing costs would reach tobetween $12 and $18 per ton of diesel fuel.  (These are metrictons, which equal 1.102 US tons.)     For more information on the EPA rulemaking, the contact isMartha Casey at +1 202 382 4378.  Information on the CONCAWEstudy can be gotten from Denis Lyons, CONCAWE, Madauplein 1,B-1030, Brussels Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 2203111; Fax: +32 2 2194646Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Superfund Changes Put EPA (and Taxpayers) Between Banks andEnvironmental Groups     The US Superfund is a two-pronged federal tool to clean uptoxic sites.  The law sets a standard of liability for those whopollute that is strict, joint, and federal.  That means a personor corporation can be liable regardless of fault, and that thegovernment can go after cleanup costs from any one defendant.The other prong is the pool of money, Superfund itself.  Thosedollars can be used to clean orphan sites where thoseresponsible cannot or will not pay.     Although Superfund can cast a wide net, lenders havetypically been protected from the law's reach.  Merely holdingcollateral or other security interest, typically a mortgage, in acontaminated property will not set off Superfund liability.     In return for this protection, banks and savings and loaninstitutions are obliged to exercise due diligence in evaluatingenvironmental risks as part of their lending.  That has souredsome deals, but more importantly produced heightened awarenessand environmental protection, possibly staving off some futureSuperfund sites.  In the Senate, S.2827 exempts lenders "from anylaw imposing strict liability for the release . . . of hazardoussubstances from property (1) acquired through foreclosure; heldin fiduciary capacity; or (3) held, controlled, or managedpursuant to the terms of an extension of credit."     That, says William J. Rogers of the Environmental DefenseFund, guts Superfund's powers and preempts state laws.  Lenders,the environmental groups testify, will look the other way,avoiding the diligence current law mandates.  A similar bill,with 273 co-sponsors, awaits the House Transportation andHazardous Waste subcommittee when Congress returns.     Bankers, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC), and theResolution Trust Corp. (RTC) all say they need the safe haven ofthe new law's protection.  FDIC chairman William Seidman told theSenate panel pollution liability is a major impediment togovernment sale of properties acquired in the S&L bailout, withthe delay raising costs to taxpayers.   The EPA has recently saidthat the banks and federal agencies have legitimate concerns.And taxpayers, in framing advocacy, must decide whether they wishto pay higher taxes for more Superfund relief or higher taxes forincreased costs in the S&L bailout.  The economics will bethrashed out in September when the Congress reconvenes.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990California Firm Ready for Expanded Pollution Rights Sales, ButSome Companies Won't Sell     On the list of market-based incentives against acid rain,one of the wildest is pollution rights.  The US EPA hasestablished a practice of creating and granting rights to pollutethe air.  Robert Beck of the Edison Electric Institute inWashington, DC told BATE power plants are assigned a fixed numberof allowances.  "Allowance" in this case means a ton of sulfurdioxide that the plant is allowed to emit annually.  "They'reassets," says Beck.  "Companies can lease them, trade them, buyand sell them.  They can only be used forward in time and they'rerecognized on a calendar year."     Markets crave efficiency; pollution rights are no different.Enter AER*X,  a pollution rights brokerage firm in Los Angeles,the brain child of John Palmisano, who started the system whilehe worked for the EPA.     AER*X has just been sold by WPL Holdings to NaTec Resources(NATC-OTC), which in turn is 44.8% held by CRSS Inc. (CRX-NYSE).The $1.4 million company may benefit from expanded pollutionrights in the clean air bill that will move out of conferencewhen the US Congress returns in the fall.     But there are uncertainties.  Tom Zosel, manager ofpollution prevention at Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing(MMM-NYSE), cautions that "the EPA is tightening its marketmechanisms in non-attainment areas.  Companies that use thecredits are essentially going forward and modifying as they go.For a time, the EPA was making policy in response to specificinstances, so the initiators were ahead of the curve . . . buteveryone learned to live with a high degree of ambiguity."     Zosel reports that 3M is no longer selling emission credits,but is buying.  "3M has spent $160 million to implementsubstantial emissions reductions.  If we turn around and sell therights to what we've gained, we've done nothing for theenvironment.  We're keeping the rights for future growth or toreturn to state and local agencies as improvement in airquality."Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Regional Center Will Build Foundations for Environmental Actionin Central and Eastern Europe     That the governments of Eastern Europe did not provide cleanair and clean water contributed in part to their overthrow.  Now,as these new governments move away from command economies, theyare inundated by sellers of environmental remedies.  Because theproblems are so large, so are the opportunities to profit.     One international initiative on the environment that standsto rationalize the process is the Regional Environmental Centerfor Central and Eastern Europe in Budapest.  The center's charterwas signed earlier this summer by the US, The Netherlands,Hungary, and the European Community.  Other nations in the regionare expected to sign on.     The Center will operate as an independent, not-for-profitnon-governmental organization under a 15-member internationalboard.  BATE asked Helen Petrauskas, vice president forEnvironment and Safety Engineering at Ford Motor Company and oneof three US board members, where the board will begin.     "We're starting from scratch," said the Ford executive,"defining the kinds of institutions and the level of democraticparticipation.  You must remember those nations must draft wholenew sets of environmental laws and create and staff environmentalministries."     "I hope we can create a credible neutral meeting place forgovernment, industry, and the environmental NGOs to cometogether," Ms. Petrauskas continued.     The Center's charter calls for work in four areas:collection and dissemination of data; development ofinstitutions; education; and matching available resources withregional needs -- a clearing house.  Asked whether this functioncould be viewed as a trade mission, Ms. Petrauskas said, "There'sno doubt we're in the role of exporting economic expertise,getting help on what's worth buying.  Poland, for instance isbesieged by environmental vendors and is trying to sort out theclaims.  But we have to be careful not to assume our way is thebest way."  Asked what she meant, Ms. Petrauskas said that aregional model similar to the European community might offer thebest solutions.     Philip Warburg, director of the Central and East EuropeanEnvironmental Program for the Environmental Law Institute inWashington, DC, echoed Ms. Petrauskas's observations. "First,credible environmental protection regimes must be put in place,and that raises issues of appropriate public involvement, thepublic right of access to information, citizen suits, and therole of the judiciary."     Warburg cautioned environmental businesses that would go tothe region to be aware of "considerable differences inreceptivity in different countries.  Where the Hungarians areentrepreneurial, Czechoslovakia, for instance, is emanating acertain ambivalence to industrial perspectives.  In their vision,they don't feel the need for a carbon copy of western values.But," continues Warburg, "that skepticism shouldn't be penalized,but understood."     In succeeding issues, BATE will look at the public andprivate initiatives under way in the region, identifying what andwho is working and why.  The US contact for the regional centeris Stephen Wassersug, the newly appointed program director.  Hisphone number at the EPA office in Philadelphia is +1 215 5978131.  In Budapest, the contact is Peter Hardi, ExecutiveDirector, Regional Environmental Center for Central and EasternEurope, Budapest III, Miklos Ter 1, Budapest, Hungary.  Tel: +361 168 6284.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990European Automakers Lead in Recycling     For decades, rebuilt parts were an example of Yankeeingenuity -- the reuse of durable, well-designed parts.  But U.S.OEMs are struggling to catch their competition, particularly inEurope, where a longer look at the lifecycle of all the materialsin cars is yielding interesting innovations.  Cars are beingdesigned to be reused and recycled, from bumper to bumper.  Inthe face of stiffened recycling rules pending for EC members, theGerman automakers are especially active.  BMW is building arecycling plant in Wackersdorf.  Volkswagen is recyclingthermoset plastic sheet molding from its front ends on Golfmodels and using it on engine shields in the same car.  Thethermoset technology is particularly interesting because thethermosets, unlike the easily meltable thermoplastics, arecreated from strong interlocking compounds, and therefore resisteasy handling.  Grinding and pyrolysis -- high heat (760 degreesC) and no oxygen -- are beginning to produce results.  MercedesBenz has built a demonstration car with all its recyclablecomponents in green.  Mercedes is recycling excess plastics fromtrunk floor production, reprocessing thermoplastic andpolyurethane panels to fabricate cable wrappings and wheel wells,extracting and reusing the "noble" metals -- platinum, rhodium,palladium, and cerium -- from catalytic converters.     VDA, the German automobile manufacturing association, hasdeveloped a labeling program for automotive plastics.  The planis designed to ease sorting and recycling.  Volvo, perhaps themost environmentally proactive car maker, has joined the Germansin adopting the VDA standards.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Du Pont Paired with Industry Council to Reduce Delaware Waste     In another public-private partnership, Du Pont (DD-NYSE) andthe Council for Solid Waste Solutions are each giving the stateof Delaware grants of US$20,000 to fund a computer softwaresystem for the statewide reduction of solid waste.  The software,called WastePlan, was designed by Tellus Institute, a publicinterest consulting firm.  The system is in place as a statewideplanning tool in Michigan and New York and as a municipalplanning tool in Boston.  The system helps state and localplanners assess the economic and environmental impacts ofcollection and disposal systems.     Du Pont's share will pay for the software license.  Thecouncil's half will go for training and continuing technicalsupport.  Du Pont's Paul Wyche put the Delaware initiative incontext, telling BATE "Du Pont has pilot solid waste projects inFlorida, Tennessee, Texas, and Illinois.  In Illinois, we'reworking with the state department of transportation to makehighway safety barriers from high density polyethylene.  Thatproject is up and running."     Asked whether the money for the Delaware and other solidwaste initiatives came from a corporate giving budget or a linebudget, Wyche said the grants came from operating funds, and thatthe set-asides for such projects were growing as Du Pont's andthe communities' awareness grew.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Trans-National Corporate Progress Against Ozone Depletion     Company by company, CFCs and other ozone-depleting compoundsare being eliminated around the world.  Some recent developments:     Intel Corp. (INTC-OTC), the Santa Clara, Californiasemiconductor maker, has plants in Ireland, Israel, Singapore,Penang, Puerto Rico, the Philippines, and the USA.  Intel says itwill eliminate chloroflourocarbons (CFCs) from its worldwidemanufacturing processes by 1992.  The company began tracking CFCuse in 1987.  Using conservation and alternate technologies,Intel has reduced its CFC usage some 30% to date.  Intel hassubstituted an aqueous-based cleaner for CFC-113 on its circuitboards and targets not only CFC-113, but also CFC-11, 12, 114,115, TCA, and carbon tetrachloride for elimination by the targetdate.  The company announcement calls the program "one of themost aggressive in the industry."     The Big Three Japanese carmakers are making inroads onCFC-12, the automotive air conditioning refrigerant.  Honda hasbegun a worldwide program to get cfc recycling units in the handsof its authorized dealers.  The units capture CFC-12 from the carsystems for purification and reuse.  Each unit will cost 260,000yen or some US$1,700.  In Japan, Honda says 2,000 of its 2,600dealers will have the units by this fall.     Toyota set up its CFC Action Committee in April 1989.Toyota says it will have CFC recovery and recycling units in itsservice shops worldwide by next summer.  Toyota targets theelimination of CFC-based foaming agents in its upholstery by theend of 1991, and like every car manufacturer, is testingsubstitute refrigerants and reconfigured A/C systems using HCFCand other more ozone-benign compounds.     Nissan says its CFC recycling hardware will be in place atall its dealerships and service centers worldwide by March of1992.  And Nissan will phase out CFCs in its autotomotive airconditioners by the end of 1995.     Lockheed, (LK-NYSE), the aeronautics and space manufacturer,was stung in June by a Greenpeace allegation that the company wasa "laggard, failing to halt its use of ozone-destroyingchemicals."     Lockheed's internal timetable calls for elimination ofozone-depleters by the year 2000, a policy it points out isconsistent with Montreal Protocol targets.  In the last twoyears, Lockheed has reduced its CFC-113 emissions 39% and TCA(1,1,1 trichloroethane) emissions by 43%.     Lockheed's government relations manager, Katherine Strehl,pleads that the company's requirements "are often more stringenttechnically and operationally . . . because ours frequentlyinvolve spacecraft that must function for years without repair orreplacement of parts."     In Toronto, Northern Telecom (NT-NYSE) says it has reducedCFC use by half in the last 18 months.  The communications gianthas saved US$1.5 million in CFC-113 reduction and another $1million in US CFC consumption taxes avoided.  The company hasjoined with the US EPA to publish a manual on CFC managementpractices for small and mid-sized CFC-113 users.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Flakt Will Retrofit Taiwanese Power Plant for $115 Million     The ABB Environmental Systems Division of Flakt, Inc., a USsubsidiary of Asea Brown Boveri, will design, engineer, and builda wet flue gas desulfurization (FGD) system for Taiwan PowerCompany's Lin Kou station near Taipei.     Robert A. Agonis, vice president -- FGD systems for theABB/Flakt unit, is the project manager and just back from Taipei.Agonis told BATE that a rising tide of democracy after thelifting of martial law in Taiwan has produced a vocal, involvedpopulace with environmental concerns a high priority.  "With airpollution going wild in Taipei," said Agonis, "the prime ministeris under considerable political pressure to make a success ofthis plant."  Agonis's division won the job in competitivebidding with contractors from Japan and West Germany.  Flakt Inc.is the world leader in installed capacity for FGD systems.  TheUS division accounts for US$500 million of the Stockholm-basedcompany's $2.8 billion in sales.  And Flakt's volume in turn ispart of ABB's $20.56 billion in global sales.     The Taiwanese contract calls for the retrofit of two 350 mwgenerating units -- the delivery of a turnkey FGD system.  Thetechnology will reduce sulfur dioxide emissions by 90% in aprocess that combines limestone and a water spray with the fluegas from the coal-fired plant.  As a by-product, the systemproduces a commercial grade of gypsum for use in construction,road building and concrete manufacture.     The contact comes as the Republic of China's EconomicsMinistry is launching a nation-wide energy conservation campaign.Add the Republic of China to the list of countries, many of themin Eastern Europe, where environmental technology vendors canfind new markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990     State judges in New England will get training in     State judges in New England will get training inenvironmental law.  A series of seminars beginning early nextyear responds to what Andrew Savitz, general counsel of theMassachusetts Office of Environmental Affairs, calls "tidal waveof environmental litigation about to break over the courts."  Theprogram is being developed by the Environmental Law Institute,the Massachusetts Office of Environmental Affairs, and theFlaschner Judicial Institute, an arm of the state barassociation.  The initiative is funded by a $46,500 grant fromthe Jessie B. Cox Charitable Trust.     Contact the BATE Hotline for more information on any newsitem covered in this issue.  Tel: +1 617 641 5123; Fax: +1 617648 8707.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-20IA059-000325-B009-153http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev23.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000304 text/html 68342HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:01:11 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:28 GMTContent-length: 68153Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev23.html Sample Issue Copyright CALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LOCAL PLANNING RESEARCHERS CALL FOR CEQA REFORM (1419 words) ADELANTO PAYS PRICE FOR BASE, WATER FIGHTS (1454 words) SACRAMENTO FINALLY GETS OUT OF HYATT HOTEL DEAL (1014 words) ENVIRONMENT WATCH FISH & GAME FEE TO BE REINSTATED (928 words) BASE WATCH PACKARD BELL DEAL LOOKS GOOD--BUT COMES AT A PRICE (1141 words) LEGAL DIGEST LISTING OF SPECIES STALLED (625 words) STATE SUPREME COURT LAYS DOWN CC&R RULE (1203 words) APPELLATE COURT STRIKES DOWN FRESNO-AREA ARTS TAX (585 words) SUPP EIS NOT NEEDED FOR DOPPLER WEATHER STATION (730 words) NUMBERS ECONOMYUS UP, BUT CONSTRUCTION ISNUT (639 words) PLACES REMAKING DOWNTOWN FRESNO (495 words) CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996RESEARCHERS CALL FOR CEQA REFORM  The California Environmental Quality Act should permit wide-ranging discussion of environmental issues at the planningstage but provide tightly focused analysis at the project level,according to a new report from a team of researchers at theUniversity of California, Berkeley.  "Fixing CEQA," a report published by the California PolicySeminar, is the latest in a long series of documents suggestinghow CEQA might be reformed. It comes on the heels of a recentpolicy report by the Little Hoover Commission, which alsoproposed some changes to CEQA. But the Berkeley report alsocontains a great deal of data on how CEQA is used by planningpractitioners in California.  Underlying both reports is the ongoing question of what therelationship should be between CEQA and the planning process.Comparing CEQA to the National Environmental Policy Act and17 other "mini-NEPAs" around the country, the research teamconcluded that CEQA is much more widely used at the projectlevel than its counterparts P a fact that often makes it the"driver" on many planning issues. Only the mini-NEPAs inWashington and New York are used in so wide a range ofsituations, but development activity in those states is a fractionof what it is in California.  Like the Little Hoover Commission report, the Berkeley teamrecommends greater involvement of state and regionalagencies in the CEQA process and incentives to provide greatercertainty all along the line. "The fundamental problem withCEQA," the researchers report, "is that it fails to encouragefairness and consistency in the review process or in therequired impact mitigations." This problem is reflected in whatBerkeley planning professor John Landis, the lead researcher,calls "the 90%/10% problem." "For 90% of the projects whichare not controversial, CEQA works fine," he said. "For the other10%, it falls apart."  Unlike the Little Hoover Commission report, however, theBerkeley report does not recommend that CEQA be used as theprimary tool for environmental decision-making on a regionaland state basis. (For more information on the Little HooverCommission report, see CP&DR, December 1995.) "They want toregionalize CEQA," Landis said. "I'm not sure that's the rightthing to do." Landis acknowledges that four regional issuescontinually pop up in CEQA analyses: air quality, water, wildlifehabitat, and traffic. Instead of using CEQA as a regional tool tosolve these problems at the project level, the Berkeley teamrecommends using CEQA in a different way at the plan leveland the project level. The Berkeley researchers alsorecommended a series of improvements to cumulative impactmonitoring to handle regional issues.  "At the planning stage," concluded the research team, "CEQAshould encourage a broad and open-ended discussion ofalternatives and environmental impacts. This discussion shouldbe integrated with ongoing local, regional, and state planningprocesses. Environmental review of specific projects, bycontrast, should focus on the impacts of that project in relationto all underlying adopted plans, still attempting to establishfeasible mitigation measures for all significant adverseimpacts."  The Berkeley team's five specific recommendations are:  1. Improving the involvement of state and regional agenciesin the CEQA process. This is similar to the Little HooverCommission's recommendations and it draws from the researchteam's observation that state and regional agencies areunpredictable players in the CEQA process.  2. Increasing the certainty and consistency of local CEQAreview. Like the Little Hoover Commission, the Berkeleyresearchers noted that a lack of consistent thresholds and otherstandards makes it difficult for applicants to know how theprocess is going to move forward. Among other things, theBerkeley researchers propose that localities be forced to adoptstandardized thresholds and standardized mitigation measuresto be used in mitigated negative declarations.  3. Improving mitigation and monitoring of cumulativeimpacts. To overcome CEQA's chronic project-orientedapproach, the research team recommended such steps as anexpanded use of tiered environmental impact reports,standardized mitigation measures to deal with regionalcumulative impacts, and greater use of pro-active regionalplanning and conservation efforts.  4. Making alternatives analysis better or else eliminating it.The researchers characterized current alternatives analysis aslittle more than a "scaling exercise" that shows howenvironmental impacts can be reduced if the scale of theproject is reduced. The researchers proposed expandedalternatives analysis at the plan level and a more fine-grainedalternatives analysis at the project level. But if these cannot beachieved, the researchers concluded, the alternatives analysisis not worth keeping.  5. Creating more consistency and predictability in CEQAlitigation. The research team concluded that CEQA currentlycontains few incentives to mediate disputes and/or avoidlitigation. The team recommended that the Governor's Office ofPlanning and Research create a series of guidebooks toestablish "best CEQA practices" in areas where judicial directionhas not been clear or consistent.  "Fixing CEQA" is available by contacting the California PolicySeminar at (510) 642-5514.  What distinguishes the Berkeley study from previous CEQAanalyses is the huge amount of data collected by theresearchers. Among other things, the researchers surveyedlocal governments in California and quantified their use ofCEQA; did an in-depth comparison between CEQA and the other"mini-NEPAs" around the country; and a case study analysis ofCEQA use in 14 local jurisdictions ranging from CalaverasCounty to Rancho Cucamonga. (Some of the survey data,analyzed by University of Illinois planning professor RobertOlshansky, was discussed in the October 1994 issue of CP&DR.)  Here are some of the research team's most interestingfindings:  CEQA Is More Widely Used Than Comparable Laws Elsewhere.  The researchers compared the use of CEQA in California to theso-called "Mini-NEPAs" in other states. Mini-NEPAs exist in 15other states plus Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia. YetCEQA is more widely used in California than in any other state Pand, in fact, it's more widely used than NEPA, the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act.  Whereas California undertook some 1,300 environmentalimpact reports in 1990, the equivalent figure (in 1992) wasonly 364 in New York, 126 in Washington, and 69 inMassachusetts. Connecticut undertook no environmental impactreports/statements in 1992. Even the federal government,operating under NEPA, initiated only 456 EIS's in 1992.Similarly, while California processed more than 25,000negative declarations in 1990, the equivalent figure (for 1992)was 1,800 in New York, 7,500 in Washington, and only 12 inConnecticut.  Part of the reason for the difference is that the breadth ofCEQA's application is greater. But part of it is simply thatCalifornia's construction activity is so much greater than anyother state. When adjusted for the amount of constructionactivity, the researchers found that only Washington and NewYork have approximately the same amount of CEQA-typeactivity. Hawaii and Minnesota lag far behind, while all otherstates are barely even on the radar screen.  EIRs and EIR Litigation Is Rare In Statistical Terms  The researchers found that, statewide, well over 90% of allCEQA actions result in negative declarations. Only about 6% ofCEQA cactions lead to EIRs in cities and 3.5% in counties. Andonly one in every 354 CEQA reviews (less than 1/3 of 1%)results in a lawsuit. But because CEQA is so widely applied, theraw numbers are high even though the percentages are low.The Berkeley numbers indicate that somewhere around 1,300EIRs were being undertaken in 1990, while more than 400CEQA lawsuits were filed in the five-year period between 1986and 1990.  The case studies revealed large variations in these numbers,however. In Santa Barbara County, for example, 21% of allCEQA reviews led to an EIR P a figure almost three times higherthan any other case study jurisdiction.  The researchers also discovered that EIRs are far morecommonly used on residential projects than on commercial orindustrial projects. On a per-capita basis, more than twice asmany EIRs are initiated for residential as opposed tocommercial projects, and this finding holds true for both citiesand counties.  Thresholds Are More Common for Counties Than Cities.  The Berkeley researchers found that 80% of counties usedstandardized thresholds in CEQA review compared to only 12%of cities.  Mitigated Negative Declarations Are Commonly Used  The researchers found that mitigated negative declarationsare used more than half the time in CEQA reviews, though theynoted this includes a wide variety of different situations. Thisfigure was considerably higher for counties (66%) than forcities (48%). More than 70% of all jurisdictions reported thatthey have a mitigation monitoring program in place.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ADELANTO PAYS PRICE FOR BASE, WATER FIGHTSBy Morris Newman   The City of Adelanto in San Bernardino County finds itselfisolated and on the brink of municipal bankruptcy, partly as aresult of longstanding fights with its Victor Valley neighborsover control of a closed military base and the regional watersupply.  The city is running a $4 million deficit and, until recently,appeared in danger of defaulting on its bond payments.Adelanto is also facing a $5 million settlement on a lawsuitwith San Bernardino County, and must borrow money from thecounty to make its debt payments on redevelopment bonds.The financial problems have also forced Adelanto to abide by aregionwide water allocation that the city initially resisted.  The story of this High Desert city is a worst-case example ofwhat happens when one city decides to resist regionalcooperation. It is also an extreme example of the trend inCalifornia for jurisdictions to conduct business with each otherthrough the courts, and the consequences of doing so. Whilemost of the blame seems to lie squarely with the city's electedleadership, recent news reports suggest that San BernardinoCounty, the City of Victorville, and the Mojave Water Districteach played a role in chastening the maverick city.   Currently, Adelanto is desperately trying to avoid defaultingon its bonds. In October, the city's bond underwriter, TonyWetherbee, disclosed at a council hearing that the city wasrunning a $4 million deficit after having spent more than $9million in lawsuits againstneighboring jurisdictions. As of December, the redevelopmentagency was $760,000 short of a $2.4 million payment on abond issue of $46 million.  Wetherbee is refinancing the redevelopment agency's bondsby structuring a new issue of $55 million that would allow thecity to make its bond payments while allowing enough extra topay off the hefty settlement to San Bernardino County.  Adelanto's path to near-ruin began in 1989, when the federalBase Realignment and Closure Commission listed George AirForce Base on its closure list. Adelanto, which borders the base,wanted to annex the entire base and rejected the option ofjoining the local reuse authority, the Victor Valley EconomicDevelopment Authority (VVEDA), which includes SanBernardino County and the neighboring cities of Victorville,Hesperia, and Apple Valley.  At one point, Adelanto offered the Air Force $25 million tobuy the base outright. The Air Force, however, recognizedVVEDA as the local reuse authority, and Victorville eventuallyannexed the former base in 1994.   Refusing to take the decision lying down, Adelanto foughtback with a host of lawsuits challenging the environmentalimpact report for the reuse of George. At the height of the courtbattle, there were a total of 34 lawsuits that cost the parties atleast $11 million in legal fees, according to the Base ReuseReport, a Sacramento-based newsletter. Adelanto'slitigiousness, however, ultimately backfired by dragging thecity through a series of costly legal defeats. In 1994, aRiverside Superior Court judge ruled that Adelanto could notuse redevelopment money in its effort to acquire George. Andin a court-ordered settlement conference in January, 1995,Adelanto finally stood down and relinquished its claim onGeorge.   At the same time, however, Adelanto got into another disputewith its neighbors over the water rights at George. WhenGeorge was an operational military base, the state created aspecial arrangement for the city and the base to share acommon allocation of water. However, last fall, at theinstigation of the Mojave Water Agency, a Riverside Countyjudge issued a comprehensive settlement of all water rightsclaims in the area. Under the agreement, all water users wererequired to reduce their water use and the Mojave WaterAgency, which sells water to 250,000 residents in the HighDesert, was named special master. (CP&DR, November 1995.)  Adelanto did not agree to the settlement, continuing to claimit had a "prior and paramount" right to the waters of theMojave River. At this point, however, the Mojave Water Agencyshrewdly used Adelanto's financial troubles on theredevelopment front as a lever to get the city to buy into thewater agreement.  Adelanto's redevelopment troubles began in 1993, when theSan Bernardino County Grand Jury audited the city's attempt toacquire George. The Grand Jury found that the city wasborrowing money from its well-funded redevelopment agency(most of Adelanto is carpeted in redevelopment project areas)while the redevelopment agency attempted to keep itself afloatby issuing new bonds with interest rates higher than the citycould afford. In its report, the Grand Jury found that theredevelopment agency had "exhausted all available resourcesfor operations," while lacking "any financial plan detailing itsprojected expenditures, bond proceeds and other revenuesover the next several years."  Based on the Grand Jury's findings, San Bernardino Countysued Adelanto in November 1993. The suit alleged that the cityhad spent more than $4.2 million to acquire George, and hadillegally dipped into redevelopment funds for city operations.The suit requested a group of city officials, including then-Mayor Mary Scarpa, five city councilmembers and CityManager Patricia Chamberlayne to pay the redevelopmentagency $6.34 million for the tax increment used to pursueGeorge and other non-redevelopment purposes. The settlement,signed in October, required Adelanto to pay the county $5million by the end of 1995, while allowing the AdelantoRedevelopment Agency to borrow $100,000 of the county's"fair-share" cut of the city's tax increment revenues to make itsbond payments. The settlement also authorizes Adelanto tofloat the $55 million bond issue, which would enable the city torestructure its existing bond portfolio and raise the additional$5 million to pay off the county.  Adelanto city officials were angered, however, when newsreports revealed that the City of Victorville had quietly lent thecounty $800,000 to fund the lawsuit against Adelanto.Victorville's role was surprising, because it appeared to violatea January 1995 settlement agreement between the two citiesnot to engage in further litigation. But Mike Rothschild,Victorville Mayor Pro Tem, said in an interview Adelanto hadbroken the peace by prosecuting the water issue, which he saidwas part of the "total settlement package."   The final humiliation for Adelanto, however, came inNovember, at the hands of the water agency. The city clearlyneeded to move ahead as quickly as possible on the new bondissue. But the city could not move forward without theapproval of the Mojave Water Agency. The water purveyor,however, threatened to sue Adelanto over a crucial part of therecovery plan P the merger of two redevelopment areas in thecity P unless the city agreed to the regional water-sharing plan.Advisers to the city pleaded with the mayor andcouncilmembers to give into the water agency, and avoidcatastrophe.  "Adelanto is insolvent," bond underwriter Tony Wetherbeetold the council. Said City Attorney Robert Corrado at the samemeeting: "Municipal bankruptcy is an ugly, ugly thing. We'regoing to be in litigation forever." Later, when the councilappeared adamant against the water deal, he pleaded, "This is amistake of cosmic proportions and it means the end ofAdelanto as we know it."  Notwithstanding those pleas, Mayor Judy Crommie and twoother council members voted against accepting the water plan.Almost immediately after the meeting, according to local newsaccounts, Crommie changed her mind, and scheduled anemergency meeting for the following Thursday, when sheswitched her vote.   Adelanto had attempted to complete the restructuring of itsredevelopment bonds by December 31, 1995, which was thedeadline for the $5 million payment to San Bernardino County.Because Standard & Poor rated the issue (BBB-) P an importantprecondition of the bond sale P only in the closing days of theyear, the county granted the city an additional 10 days to thecity to make its payment; the new bond issue was scheduled toclose on January 9, according to the Victor Valley Daily Press.Michael Sakamoto, acting city manager and the only Adelantoofficial who would agree to be interviewed for this story, wasreluctant to comment on whether he thought the city had donewisely in spending so much of its treasury fighting for Georgeand the Mojave River. "I don't want to comment on theappropriateness or inappropriateness of any city action. TheCity Council has instructed me to look for, and try to fashion, aplan for the city to go forward," he said.  Contacts:  Michael Sakamoto, acting city manager, City of Adelanto (619)246-2300.  Larry Rowe, general manager, Mojave Water District, (619)240- 9201.  Tony Wetherbee, Chilton & O'Connor Inc., (714) 717-2000.  Michael Rothschild, Mayor Pro Tem, City of Victorville, (619)955-5000.  Robert Corrado, contract city attorney, (310) 908-7800.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SACRAMENTO FINALLY GETS OUT OF HYATT HOTEL DEAL  The City of Sacramento has finally cut all ties to the HyattRegency Hotel, a 15-story luxury hotel across the street fromthe State Capitol that the Sacramento Housing andRedevelopment Agency helped subsidize. The deal releases theredevelopment agency from its obligations without laying outany cash.  In December, the city agreed to surrender title to the landunder the hotel and the adjacent parking garage (of which theredevelopment agency owned 48%) to Mutual Life InsuranceCo. of New York, the hotel's current owner. In exchange, theredevelopment agency has been released from its obligation toprovide a $1.5 million annual subsidy to the hotel's owners forthe next 68 years.  The Hyatt opened in 1988 as part of a public-privatepartnership between the redevelopment agency and severalprominent private developers in Sacramento including JoeBenvenuti and Gregg Lukenbill. It was designed as acenterpiece project for downtown Sacramento. The Hyatt is themost luxurious hotel in downtown Sacramento by far, and itsmeeting room facilities are located close to the downtownconvention center. The city invested $13 million in the projectand agreed to the annual subsidy for 75 years, retainingownership in the land and part ownership in the parkinggarage.  But Benvenuti and Lukenbill ran into financial trouble whenthe real estate market went sour in the early '90s, and MONY Pthe primary lender on the project P assumed ownership in1992. Ever since, MONY and the city have sought to reach anagreement that would take the city out of the projectaltogether.  In 1991, on the eve of MONY's foreclosure, the city offered$11 million in order to be released from its obligations butMONY rejected the offer. Earlier this year, one consultantsuggested that the city offer MONY $7.7 million and the hotelland. But Mayor Joe Serna and some other members of the CityCouncil were reluctant to agree to a deal that called for theredevelopment agency to turn cash over to MONY.  Under the deal as agreed, the redevelopment agency will notbe required to provide any cash to MONY. In fact, MONY willactually pay the redevelopment agency $196,000 for a smallparcel of land at the southwest corner of the hotel. And ifMONY seeks to sell the property, the city could profit. Underthe deal, the city will receive 25% of any sales price over $62million. MONY officials said they have not decided whether tosell the hotel.ACCORD REACHED ON VERMONT AVENUE  Los Angeles's leading politicians have reached an agreementwith First Interstate Bank to reduce the city subsidy on thecontroversial mixed-use project proposed for the corner ofVermont Avenue and 81st Street.  A city loan to buy the property was approved by the CityCouncil in November but vetoed by Mayor Richard Riordan.(CP&DR, December 1995.) Subsequently, however, the councilpassed a unanimous override of Riordan's veto. In the ensuingweeks, Riordan, Councilman Mark Ridley-Thomas, and FirstInterstate agreed to a new financial agreement which calls forthe bank to put more money into the project so the city'ssubsidy will drop from $90,000 per housing unit to $70,000per housing unit.  Riordan opposed the project for two reasons: opposition froma nearby homeowners association and the high subsidy perunit. Riordan became interested in the project afterneighboring homeowners P U.S. Rep. Maxine Waters amongthem P said they are opposed to any housing developmentalong the commercially zoned Vermont Avenue corridor. Healso questioned the $90,000 subsidy, which is close to doublethe typical subsidy in a city-assisted housing project.  Under the agreement with Riordan, the project still retains 35moderate-income townhomes. Yet Riordan claimed victory forthe neighborhood, saying that he, unlike other politicians, hadlistened to a group of residents who have traditionally beendisenfranchised.  The Vermont proposal arose from a design/build competitionfor affordable housing sponsored by First Interstate after the1992 riots. The project is to be built on a mostly vacant 1.7-acre site that served as the original location of PepperdineUniversity. As currently designed, the project will include 35townhomes (selling for between $88,000 and $130,000 each),six small retail storefronts, and a satellite office of the USCBusiness Expansion Network, to be located in an historic art-deco building on the site. The project was strongly embracedby Councilman Mark Ridley-Thomas, who represents the area.MALIBU PASSES GENERAL PLAN  Facing a deadline from the Governor's Office of Planning &Research, the City of Malibu has finally approved a generalplan that many council members claim is not restrictive enougheven though outside critics call it too restrictive.  Approval of the general plan came more than four years afterthe city's incorporation. The city has been engaged in a highlypolitical dispute with OPR last year over a time extension forapproving the plan. OPR denied a time extension after claimingthe plan does not provide affordable housing choices. Propertyowners are likely to challenge the city's general plan in courton housing element grounds.  The plan calls for one-acre lots (or lower density) on 95% ofthe undeveloped residential property in the city. A fewresidential properties will be permitted to build four to sixunits per acre. The plan also prohibits construction in areaspreviously designated by Los Angeles County as"environmental sensitive habitat areas" (about 9% of the cityaltogether) and discourages development of sidewalks, streetlights, and other typical suburban infrastructure.  The plan calls for permitting the construction of one hotelnear Pepperdine University, which city officials hope willproduce enough revenue to keep the city solvent.  Property owners and state officials were not the plan's onlycritics. Officials in nearby Santa Monica also complained aboutthe plan, which says Malibu's homeless will probably have tofind shelter in Santa Monica. Mayor Paul Rosenstein told theLos angeles Times: "There have been rumors for yers that othercities have been sending their homeless people to SantaMonica. This is the first time I have seen a city admit it."Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FISH & GAME FEE TO BE REINSTATED  After a new legal challenge, a Sacramento judge has orderedthe state Department of Fish & Game to resume collection of theFish & Game environmental review fee. But the state has notyet begun collection of the fee and the judge has not yetdecided whether to make collection retroactive.  However, Fish & Game may seek a legislative solution byasking the legislature to repeal the law that instituted the feein the first place. Fish & Game General Counsel Craig Mansonsaid the agency has spoken to some legislators and legislativestaff members but no bill has been introduced yet.  The latest set of developments are the most bizarre yet in thecontroversial history of the fee. On the one hand, SacramentoSuperior Court Judge Jeffrey Gunther has ordered Fish & Gameto start collecting the fee once again even though he hadpreviously ruled the fee unconstitutional. And on the otherhand, Fish & Game has taken an official position against the fee,even though the agency benefits financially from it.  Last summer, Fish & Game agreed to stop collecting the fee aspart of a legal settlement with several plaintiffs whochallenged the fee as an illegal tax. (CP&DR EnvironmentalWatch, July 1995.) The legal settlement came after Gunther hadinitially ruled against the fee. But the settlement wassubsequently challenged by the California Association ofProfessional Scientists (CAPS), the union that represents mostof the biologists who work for Fish & Game.  CAPS argued that a state department cannot stop enforcing astate law unless ordered to do so by an appellate court.Gunther agreed and ordered the state to begin collecting thefee again. However, in early January, the Fish & GameDepartment had not yet begun to collect the fee becauseGunther had not issued a final written ruling.  The Fish & Game fees were instituted by a bill that passed thelegislature in 1990. Local development applicants subject to theCalifornia Environmental Quality Act must pay $850 for Fish &Game to review environmental impact reports and $1,250 forthe department to review negative declarations.  As Fish & Game's revenue from hunting and fishing licenseshas declined, the fees have provided a new source of revenue,bringing the agency approximately $3 million per year, orabout 2% of its total budget. The fees have always beencontroversial because no other state agency has statutoryauthority to collect such fees and because local governmentswere required to collect the fees for Fish & Game.  The fee was originally challenged in 1991 by Reddingproperty owner Albert Mills. Mills claimed that the fee was nota fee for service and therefore constituted a tax. He furtherargued that as a tax, the fee was invalid because it did not passthe Legislature by a two-thirds vote. Mills later formedCalifornians for Fair Government Fees, representing 112 otherapplicants who had paid the fees. Mills's lawyer, Walter McNeillof Redding, filed a separate suit because of a Fish & Game feehe had paid personally.  Last March, Gunther ruled in favor of Mills, saying that thefees were really taxes because the state had never determinedthe actual cost of reviewing environmental documents beforepassing the law. Pessimistic about the chances of success onappeal, the agency agreed to a settlement which called forrefunds to Mills, McNeill, and members of Mills's group, as wellas a ban on further collection of the fees.  Craig Manson, Fish & Game's general counsel, said thatcollection of the fees would not begin until Gunther issued hiswritten ruling. He also said Gunther's ruling would address thequestion of whether Fish & Game should collect feesretroactively from applicants who had not paid the feesbecause of the legal settlement.  Contacts:  Craig Manson, general counsel, Department of Fish & Game,(916) 654-3821.  Dennis Moss, attorney for California Association ofProfessional Scientists, (818) 246-0629.ORANGE COUNTY NCCP RELEASED   A wildlife habitat plan calling for preservation of 39,000acres of undeveloped property has been released in draft formby Orange County.  About half the preserve will consist ofcoastal sage scrub, the habitat of the controversial Californiagnatcatcher. The Orange County Planning Commission is now inthe process of reviewing the plan and the Board of Supervisorsis expected to act on the plan in March.  The plan is part of the "Natural Communities ConservationPlanning" program undertaken by local, state, and federalagencies in 1991 when the gnatcatcher was first proposed forlisting under state and federal endangered species laws.  Called the Central/Coast NCCP/HCP (habitat conservationplan), the plan calls for preservation of almost 20% of allproperty in a 325-square-mile portion of Orange County thatstretches from Cleveland National Forest south and west to thePacific Ocean near San Juan Capistrano. Much of the land to bepreserved is owned by The Irvine Co. The plan is designed toprotect a total of 42 species, most of which are not currentlylisted under the state or federal endangered species laws. Partof the plan's purpose is to provide property owners withassurance that they will have met their legal obligations if anyadditional species are listed in the future.  The Central/Coast plan is the first of three "sub-regional"plans dealing with different areas of Orange County. An NCCPplan for south Orange County is expected to be released laterthis year, and a third NCCP for north Orange County is also inthe works. Three NCCP plans are also under way in San DiegoCounty.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PACKARD BELL DEAL LOOKS GOOD--BUT COMES AT A PRICE  One year after the conversion of the Sacramento Army Depotinto a regional headquarters for Packard Bell, the deal isshaping up as one of the most successful conversions of amilitary base in California. Part of that success can be creditedto extraordinarily high subsidies provided by the City ofSacramento. Also sharing the credit is a base-conversionmethod known as an "economic development conveyance,"which allowed local authorities to acquire the base at no cost inreturn for sharing the profits of base reuse with the military.  To date, the conversion of the Army Depot has far surpassedinitial expectations of both job creation and tax revenues.Packard Bell had projected employment for 1,000 jobs at theend of its first year; the company currently employs 5,000people at the former depot, which is now an assembly plant forpersonal computers. In addition, the new plant has spurred thecreation of an additional 2,500 to 3,000 jobs in the communityat large. The payroll, initially projected at $60 million to $80million, is currently about $200 million. The plant alsogenerates about $1 million annually in local taxes. City officialsclaim that enterprise zone tax credits have encouraged agreater level of hiring and have taken several hundred localresidents off the welfare rolls.  The Army Depot is the first closed military base to use theeconomic development conveyance. Without it, Sacramento andthe Army might still be arguing about the value of the Depot,according to Bill Farley, the city's economic developmentmanager. "When we first met Army officials, it was clear in afew hours that we would never be able to agree on the value ofthis real estate," he said. Army officials based their valuationsof the Depot based on the money they had poured into the baseover the years. City officials saw a group of outmoded buildingsthat had to be rehabbed and marketed in a depressed realestate market. Although he would not disclose the Army'sasking price for the Depot, Farley acknowledged that "we weretens of millions of dollars apart. We could not even agree onhow to approach the method of valuing the property." Incontrast, "the economic development conveyance and theprofit-sharing provisions really took that extremelycontentious issue out of the equation," Farley said. Under theplan, the city can sell portions of the base to private businesses,and will eventually pass along $7 million to the Army in salesand/or lease proceeds.  Sacramento's initial reuse plan called for confining the Armyto a single portion of the base, while finding new uses for the2.5 million square feet of buildings on the site. The cityplanned to spend $19 million to clear out or refurbish oldArmy  buildings ("These buildings were built to very highstandards, and they cost a fortune to demolish," Farley said.) Tomarket the Depot to private businesses, the city wouldsubdivide the base into individual parcels of 40 to 80 acresapiece, and eventually to sell the parcels to private businessesfor a total of $15 million.  Sacramento's great stroke of luck was the Northridgeearthquake of January 1994, which dislodged Packard Bellfrom its plant in Northridge and sent the company looking forpotential new sites in less seismically active areas. In July,Packard Bell officials asked Sacramento officials to identifypossible locations. The strongest selling point for the depot  wasthe inclusion of the Army Depot in a State Enterprise Zoneprogram, which allows employers to take a tax credit of $6,000for every disadvantaged worker hired, according to DebraNyland, an assistant economic development director for thecity. The credits enabled the company to save between $2 and$4 million annually, according to Nyland.  The agreement between the city and the computer maker wasa 20-year lease for 2 million square feet of rehabbed space for$50 million. Annual lease payments began at $5 million anddrop to $2.5 million after the fifth year. In the tenth year thecompany has an option to buy the property for $7 million, orextend the lease for 35 years at $1.25 million annually. For itspart, the city provided a $17 million loan for tenantimprovements, plus a $9 million loan as a moving allowance.The rents are higher in the first five years, so the city canrecoup the moving loan, which "was fairly risky because it wasunsecured," Farley explained. The tenant improvement loan isbeing amortized over 12 years of lease payments.  The city also indemnified Packard Bell against any costsrelating to environmental issues. Although the military clearlyhas the responsibility for any environmental clean-up issuesunder CERCLA, the federal Superfund law, the companyapparently wanted additional assurance.  (Separate from the deal, the city also paid $800,000 torelocate Vietnam Veterans of California, which was using thesite under the McKinney Act. The city has also requested otherpublic agencies, which have priority to take space in formermilitary bases, to forego the depot.)  The Packard Bell lease negotiation was remarkable for itsspeed. The company and the city struck a deal in less than twomonths, and in September 1994 the deal was approved bystate lawmakers in 18 days. Packard Bell took occupancy of thebuildings in November, almost a month before it signed thelease in December.  The deal is all gravy to the Army, which spends nothing andactually saves $1 million annually in maintenance costs for thePackard Bell facility.  Farley describes the economic development conveyance as "agreat tool" for local governments. Cities, he said, are "in thebusiness of redeveloping properties through various programsthe state has created. We never had a tool to accomplish thesame tasks with military bases, so this really makes the cityinto a player in the redevelopment of the base."  Despite the national publicity on the success of the depotconversion, Farley was quick to add that the city's work is notdone. "As you start to build new facilities, and add onto theexisting infrastructure of the base, it leads to certain problems."One problem is a $1 million "catch up" fee that the SacramentoCounty regional sewer plant is attempting to charge the base.(When the Depot was a military base, it was exempted fromsewer fees. Now that the depot is under local control, thesewage plant is attempting to bill the depot for all the fees ithad not paid while it was still under military control.)  Listed for closure in 1991, the 480-acre Depot officially closedin March. The Army remains on 80 acres of the facility.  Contacts:  Bill Farley, economic development manager, City ofSacramento, (916) 264-7730.  Debra Nyland, business development coordinator, City ofSacramento Economic Development Office, (916) 264-7145.  Tish Kelly, Packard Bell spokesperson, (916) 388-0101.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996LISTING OF SPECIES STALLED  A Republican attempt to block new endangered specieslistings by denying appropriations for the listing process hasbeen upheld by the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. Thedecision is likely to hold up attempts to list more than 100species in California alone.  Overturning a district court judge's ruling, a three-judge panelof the Ninth Circuit acknowledged that Interior Secretary BruceBabbitt missed the statutory deadline for making a decision onwhether to list the California red-legged frog as endangered.But the court found that Babbitt "is unable to comply with hislisting duty under the Act" because Congress rescinded listingfunds in last year's appropriation and has continued the ban onnew listings in the continuing resolutions during this fiscal yearas well.  The ruling came even though the statutory deadline for listingthe frog occurred before last year's appropriation bill waspassed.  The ruling, written by Judge Betty Fletcher, contained a sternwarning against legislation by appropriation and stated thatthe Endangered Species Act is still in full force despite theappropriation bill. Quoting TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (the so-called "snail darter" case), Fletcher said: "Repeal of legislationby implication is disfavored," especially when "the claimedrepeal rests solely in an Appropriations Act."  Ultimately, however, Fletcher concluded that Babbitt wasprohibited from making a final determination by the terms of arider to the 1995 appropriation bill. "The use of anygovernment resources P whether salaries, employees, paper, orbuildings P to accomplish a final listing would entailgovernment expenditure," she wrote. "The government cannotmake expenditures and therefore cannot act, other than byappropriation."  The red-legged frog case was widely watched because thelisting process has been halted on 120 species in California and240 nationwide.  The 1995 appropriation bill specifically rescinded $1.5 millionallocated for listing and determination of critical habitat andalso stated that the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service cannot use anyother funds for this purpose. Originally passed on April 10,1995, this rider has been contained in the continuingresolutions passed to keep the government operating duringthe recent budget negotiations.  At the time the rider was passed, the Fish & Wildlife Servicewas already engaged in lengthy litigation with theEnvironmental Defense Center of Santa Barbara over the listingof the red-legged frog. Under the Endangered Species Act,Babbitt should have made a final determination on whether tolist the frog by July 19, 1993. When Babbitt missed thedeadline, EDC sued, but the two parties eventually agreed to asettlement agreement requiring a final decision by November1, 1993.  Babbitt missed that deadline also, however, and EDC suedagain. Finally, the Fish & Wildlife Service published a proposedlisting on the Federal Register on February 2, 1994. Under theEndangered Species Act, Babbitt then had one year P untilFebruary 2, 1995 P to make a final decision on the listing.Babbitt missed the deadline again, and EDC sued in May of1995. By then, however, the appropriations rider was in effect.  U.S. District Court Judge Manuel Real in Los Angeles issuedsummary judgment in favor of the EDC and ordered Babbitt totake a final action by September 15, 1995. However, the U.S.Supreme Court issued a stay of this order and the Ninth Circuitheard the case on an expedited schedule.  In Fletcher's ruling, the Ninth Circuit ordered the final listing"delayed until a reasonable time after appropriated funds aremade available" and ordered Real to establish the time frame.  The Case:  Environmental Defense Center v. Babbitt, No. 95-56255, 95Daily Journal D.A.R. 16341(December 12, 1995).  The Lawyers:  For EDC: Neil Levine, Environmental Defense Center, (805)963-1622.  For Interior Secretary Babbitt: Lynn Penman, U.S. Departmentof Justice, Washington, D.C.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996STATE SUPREME COURT LAYS DOWN CC&R RULE  The California Supreme Court has ruled that CC&Rs(covenants, conditions, and restrictions) in two Woodsidesubdivisions should be enforceable even though they are notmentioned in the subdivisions' property deeds. In the process,the court majority laid down a sweeping new rule to governthe enforceability of private property covenants: If restrictionsare recorded before the sale of property, "the later purchaser isdeemed to agree with them."  The controversial ruling may be the first step toward clearingup a complicated real property law issue and is likely to havean important impact on private land-use restrictions. "It's agood decision," said UCLA law professor Susan French, one ofthe leading scholars in the area of private covenants.  But it may also lead to further confusion, because the courtdeclared that the new rule should be applied retrospectivelyand because it declares that all information about a piece ofproperty need not be included in the deed. In a strong dissent,Justice Joyce Kennard wrote that the ruling will transformdeeds "that on their face are unrestricted conveyances of thelandowner's entire interest into deeds conveying only a portionof the landowner's interest." (French disputed Kennard's view,saying that the restrictions will turn up in title reports.)  The case drew the attention of many outside groups, includingthe California Association of Realtors, the California BuildingIndustry Association, and the Coastal Commission, all of whomintervened on behalf of the neighbors seeking to enforce theCC&Rs. The Coastal Commission argued that if all CC&Rs must beincluded in deeds, the agency's many not be able to enforceconditions it imposes on new development projects along thecoast.  The role of CC&Rs in land-use planning and regulation isgrowing. Especially in California, more and more plannedcommunities are created with a "private" municipalgovernment made up of homeowner associations that enforceprivate deed covenants.  However, as CC&Rs have grown in number they have alsogenerated a lot of complicated litigation about how, when, andby whom they can be enforced. French has called the lawsurrounding CC&Rs "the most complex and archaic body ofAmerican property law remaining in the 20th Century." Severalrecent appellate court rulings have dealt with CC&Rs. LastSeptember, the Court of Appeal ruled that a homeownerassociation may record a notice of violation with the countyrecorder even though such actions are sometimes takenbecause they are cheaper than suing the homeowner.(California Riviera Homeowners Association v. Superior Court,CP&DR Legal Digest, October 1995.) The Supreme Courtdecertified this case shortly before issuing its ruling in theWoodside case.  The new case involves Jared and Anne Anderson, who boughttwo parcels of property in Woodside and obtained a conditionaluse permit from the city to operate a winery. The two parcelswere originally part of two separate subdivisions, each ofwhose subdividers had recorded CC&Rs restricting the propertyto residential use. Claiming that the Andersons had violated theCC&Rs, a group of neighbors organized as the Citizens forCovenant Compliance and sued the Andersons. However, theAndersons claimed they had no knowledge of the CC&Rsbecause there was no reference to them in the deeds of eitherparcel they had purchased.  San Mateo Superior Court Judge Harlan K. Veal ruled that theCC&Rs were not enforceable, and the First District Court ofAppeal affirmed. But on a 6-1 vote, the Supreme Courtoverturned the lower ruling and declared the covenantsenforceable despite the defects in the deed, establishing thenew rule in the process. "The CC&Rs of this case were recordedbefore any of the parcels were sold ... they state an intent toestablish a general plan for the subdivisions binding on allpurchasers and their successors; and they describe theproperty they are to govern," wrote Justice Armand Arabianfor the majority. "...Therefore ... the fact that the individualdeeds do not reference them is not fatal to their enforceability."  To arrive at the new rule, Justice Arabian's majority opinionreached deep into the legal history of easements, covenants,and equitable servitude (sometimes known as restrictivecovenants), all of which seek to govern the enforceability ofprivate land use restrictions. Traditionally, a covenant is arestriction that "runs with the land" because it affects the useof the land in some way.  Beginning in the 19th Century,English and then American courts adopted the doctrine ofequitable servitude, which permits enforceability of covenantsthat would not be strictly enforceable under the doctrine ofcovenants. Because the Woodside covenants impose a burdenon the property P rather than simply a benefit P and becausethey are agreed to between grantor and grantee P rather thanbetween landowners P they fall under the doctrine of equitableservitude and not covenants.  Legal scholars have noted that legal doctrines surroundingcovenants and equitable servitude are similar and perhapsshould be combined. California law treats them similarly, andin the majority opinion Arabian stated that the SupremeCourt's new rule should apply equally to both doctrines.  In reaching his conclusions on the Woodside case, Arabiansaid that the basic issue was not whether the restrictions runwith the land but whether they ever took effect in the firstplace given the fact that they are not mentioned in the deeds.The Andersons argued that the CC&Rs never took effectbecause they were not mentioned in the deeds. But Arabiansaid that accepting this argument would lead to "byzantine"results. What if some deeds included the CC&Rs and others didnot? According to case law, he concluded, any property soldsubsequent to the first property whose deed mentioned theCC&Rs would be subject to the CC&Rs P even if the particulardeed in question did not mention them. Claiming that thisgreatly complicates title searches, Arabian said the resultwould be a "crazy-quilt pattern of uses."  In laying down the new rule, Arabian stated: "The overallplan, and not individual deeds, should determine whatrestrictions are in effect, and between whom." He alsoconcluded that the rule should apply retrospectively.  In her dissent, Justice Kennard wrote that the new rule "blastsa gaping hole through the structure of real property law thathas been painstakingly erected by the Legislature and by thecourts over the past century." She said that the rule will allow"for the unilateral creation of enforceable land use restrictions,contrary to established law," and that it will deny constructivenotice to land purchasers under state law. She also stated thatretrospective application of the new rule will wreak havocthroughout the state. Noting that land subdivision in Californiadates back to the 1860s, she said: "If the subdivider of any ofthese thousands of lands recorded a plan of commonrestrictions for the lots but conveyed the lots by unrestrictedgrant deeds, retroactive application of the majority's new rulewill now bring those restrictions to life no matter how longthey have lain dormant."  The Case:  Citizens for Covenant Compliance v. Anderson, No. S043578,96 Daily Journal D.A.R. 79 (January 3, 1996)  The Lawyers:  For Citizens for Covenant Compliance: Debra Summers, Wilson,Sonsini, Goodrich & Rosati, (415) 493-9300.  For Anderson: Roger Bernardt, Cooley, Godward, Castro,Huddleson & Tatum, (415) 666-3343.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996APPELLATE COURT STRIKES DOWN FRESNO-AREA ARTS TAX  Fresno's so-called "Arts-to-Zoo" tax violates the Californiaconstitution because the organization that administers the taxis a private entity, the Fifth District Court of Appeal has ruled.  The Fresno Metropolitan Projects Authority was created bythe state legislature in 1993 as a vehicle for administering a1/10-cent sales tax in the Freno area for cultural facilities.Fresno-area voters approved the tax by a 57% majority in1993. Under the Government Code, half of the tax proceeds aredistributed to the local zoo, the philharmonic orchestra, andtwo museums, 25% are distributed for cultural programs, and25% are distributed for a variety of other purposes includingcapital improvements for cultural facilities. The authority isgoverned by a 13-member board. As specified in the law, thecity and the county each choose one board member. The other11 members are selected by such organizations as the ParentTeachers Association, the Chamber of Commerce, the localtaxpayers association, the Farm Bureau, the Fresno-MaderaCentral Labor Council, the League of Mexican-AmericanWomen, the West Fresno Ministerial Alliance, and the localdivision of the California Retired Teachers Association.  The Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association sued and claimedthat the state law creating the authority was a violation ofArticle XI, section 11 of the state constitution, which prohibitsthe legislature from delegating the power to tax to a privateentity. Fresno County Superior Court Judge Stephen J. Kaneruled in favor of the Jarvis group and the Fifth District affirmedhis ruling.  Before the Fifth District, the Metropolitan Authority made aseries of arguments, including the argument that it is a publicbody because it performs public functions. But the courtpointed out that only two of its 13 board members areappointed by public bodies. "The electorate cannot removethose who are chosen as director of the Authority and theelectorate cannot remove those who choose," wrote PresidingJustice James Ardaiz for the court. "But the electorate mustbear the consequences of the decisions of those who composethe authority. ... As we see it this is a distinction that marks theAuthority as a private body."  The Metropolitan Authority also argued that the tax waslevied by the people and not by the Authority, but the courtrejected that argument, stating that the law specificallyauthorizes the Authority to levy the tax. The court alsoconcluded that voter approval did not render the constitutionalprovision inapplicable to this particular tax, as the Authorityclaimed.  "The voters have no say in the matter of fund distribution forthe next 20 years short of repeal of the entire tax," wroteArdaiz. "This appears to us to be precisely the type of situationthe framers sought to avoid by prohibiting the delegation to aprivate body of the power to tax."  Finally, Ardaiz rejected the Metropolitan Authority'sargument that its "regional" nature exempts it from theconstitutional provision in question. The court's review of caselaw, he concluded, "leads us to conclude that the present articleXI, section 11 means just what it says: that the  Legislaturemay not delegate to a private person or body the power to levytaxes. The section does not contain any exception for anyparticular type of tax, 'regional' or otherwise."  The Case:  Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association v. Fresno MetropolitanProjects Authority, No. F023727, 95 Daily Journal D.A.R. 16419(December 13, 1995).  The Lawyers:  For Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association: Jonathan M. Coupal,(916) 444-9950.  For Fresno Metropolitan Projects Authority: Gene Livingston,Livingston & Mattesich, (916) 442-1111.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SUPP EIS NOT NEEDED FOR DOPPLER WEATHER STATION  The federal government did not need to prepare asupplemental environmental impact statement for a Dopplerweather radar tower atop Sulfur Mountain in Ventura County,the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals has ruled.  Environmental review of the weather station was challengedby the Environmental Coalition of Ojai and two individual Ojairesidents including actor Larry Hagman. Among other things,the Environmental Coalition claimed that the federalgovernment should have prepared a supplemental EIS just forthe Ojai site and that other environmental documents shouldhave been updated to reflect new research about theenvironmental health dangers of radiation from the weathersystem. However, the Environmental Coalition has lost the caseall the way down the line and the Sulfur Mountain facility isnow in operation.  The Sulfur Mountain station is part of the National WeatherService's national modernization program known as NEXRAD(for Next Generation Weather Radar). The system is beingconstructed jointly by the Commerce, Transportation, andDefense departments. Doppler radar systems must be locatedaway from "electronic pollution" contained in metropolitanareas.  The Environmental Coalition originally asked U.S. DistrictCourt Judge Terry Hatter to enjoin construction of the projectbut he refused and eventually he granted summary judgmentin favor of the government. The Court of Appeals affirmed hisruling.  The NEXRAD system has been the subject of a long series ofenvironmental documents, including a programmatic EIS and asupplemental environmental assessment, which examined theenvironmental impact generally and the radiation issuespecifically. Based on this information, the government chosenot to produce a supplemental EIS for the NEXRAD programand instead filed a finding of no significant impact, or FONSI, in1993. (A FONSI is the equivalent of a negative declarationunder the National Environmental Policy Act.)  With regard to the Sulphur Mountain site, the governmentproduced an initial environmental assessment in 1986 and anin-depth site survey in 1987 and as a result of thosedocuments issued a FONSI for the site in 1989.  The Environmental Coalition's case contained two keycomponents. First, the Coalition argued that the governmentshould have prepared a site-specific EIS for the SulfurMountain site. And second, the Environmental Coalition arguedthat the government should have done a supplemental EIS forthe whole NEXRAD program after new research on the radiationbecame known.  In ruling for the government, the Ninth Circuit relied heavilyon the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in Marsh v. Oregon NaturalResources Council, 490 U.S. 360 (1989). In that case, the courtconcluded that the federal government need not prepare a site-specific EIS for every federal project. In the Sulfur Mountaincase, Judge Arthur Alarcon, writing for the Ninth Circuit, said:"In its 1986 and 1987 site-specific EAs (environmentalassessments), the Government considered the environmentalimpact of the NEXRAD installation on Sulfur Mountain. Havingdetermined that the Sulfur Mountain NEXRAD installationwould have no significant local environmental impact, thegovernment reasonably issued a FONSI in 1989 instead ofpreparing a site-specific EIS."  On the question of a supplemental EIS on the radiation issues,Alarcon listed a long set of materials reviewed by thegovernment in its supplemental environmental assessment. "Ineach instance," Alarcon wrote, "the Government found thatalthough initial studies suggested an association between RFR[radar radiation] and ... diseases, more rigorous subsequentstudies either failed to confirm the initial results or yieldednegative findings." Based on this review the governmentconcluded that the radiation would not be an environmentalhealth hazard. "Accordingly, its previous conclusion that theweather stations would have no significant adverseenvironmental impact (published in the preliminary EIS)remained valid," Alarcon wrote. "Therefore, the Governmentdetermined that it was not necessary to prepare asupplemental EIS."  The court also rejected the Environmental Coalition'sargument that the government had failed to provide adequatenotice for the environmental documentation on both the radarsystem generally and the Sulfur Mountain facility. The NinthCircuit concluded that Ojai citizens were not required to receivespecific notice on the nationwide system issues, and that thegovernment had satisfied notice requirements on the localissues by filling documents  with state and local clearinghouses.  The Case:  Environmental Coalition of Ojai v. Brown, No. 94-56164, 96Daily Journal D.A.R. 40 (January 2, 1996).  The Lawyers:  For Environmental Coalition of Ojai: Dale G. Givner, (805) 485-4454.  For the federal government: Patrick J. Walsh, Assistant U.S.Attorney, (213) 894-2451.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ECONOMYUS UP, BUT CONSTRUCTION ISNUT  After showing signs of a rebound in 1994, California'sconstruction industry slid back into decline in 1995, reviving afive-year dip in building activity in California. The renewedslump confirms the break in relationship between building andthe rest of the economy here, and draws into question a rangeof community development dictums that revolve aroundgrowth.  Two years ago, we announced that the sector that once set thecourse of economic trends had instead become a follower(CP&DR Numbers, January 1994). Last year, we reported thatconstruction experienced its first growth year in the last six(CP&DR Numbers, January 1995.) All three sectors (residential,non-residential, and heavy) experienced increases in totalconstruction dollars in 1994 relative to 1993, indicating that, atlong last, the building industry had rebounded.  As it turned out, 1995 was the year that entertainment andbio-tech replaced a goodly portion of the jobs lost in theaerospace/defense industry, the year that home prices actuallybegan to climb in some of the state's zip codes, and the yearwhen even aerospace/defense saw some job growth linked to arevival of some B-2 and  McDonnell Douglas passenger jetorders. But the building industry took a dive again. With 10months of data in hand, the Construction Industry ResearchBoard is forecasting a retraction year in total constructiondollars, led by slides in residential and heavy construction.  If there is any economic bright spot, it is that the $29.9 billionspent last year did not drop to the 13-year record low year of1993, when only $28.8 billion were spent. The other positivestatistic is the employment data: though total constructiondollars are down, construction jobs enjoyed a second straightyear of growth.  This is all quite confounding for industry watchers such asBen Bartolotto of the CIRB. After all, a year ago he hadpredicted an 11.8% increase, rather than the 1.7% drop he nowestimates. (Final numbers will be available in March. ) "All ofthe dynamics were in place: job growth, drops in vacancy P thedrop is frustrating," Bartolotto said. The job growth dataapparently reflects ongoing reconstruction or renovation thatdoes not show up in regular construction figures.  Bartolotto suspects that the disconnect between employmentand housing demand may be resulting from lower levels of realpersonal income compared to, say, 10 years ago. And this time,L.A. cannot be blamed for holding the state back: of the 25markets surveyed by CIRB, Los Angeles-Long Beach, along withSan Francisco and Santa Barbara County, were the only housingmarkets that increased housing construction from 1994 to1995. Rates from other types of construction varied widely beregion, but one thing has emerged as constant: the buildingindustry is not a reliable indicator of economic health inCalifornia. And a healthy economy does not necessarilytranslate into a booming building industry.  The lesson may be an important one for planners, who shouldP now more than ever P think about implementing communitygoals in ways that do not rely on new construction activity.  Which brings us to the forecast for building in 1996: Doesanybody still care? Once again, the CIRB calls for a comebackyear, with an 11.9% increase in overall dollar spent. This isexpected to be paced by a strong surge in housing construction,with a 29.8% increase in activity over 1995. Cynical as one istempted to become about such forecasts, it is true that thehousing industry seems to be poised for some kind ofturnaround. Analysts have been saying that the pent-updemand for housing may find an outlet as potential buyerscome to market in order to avoid the 2.5% increase in pricesexpected in 1996. But one thing we have learned: We won'tdraw any conclusions about the larger economy based on theconstruction industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996REMAKING DOWNTOWN FRESNO  The Fulton District in Downtown Fresno has much in commonwith other aging city centers across the state: high vacancyrates in older buildings, out-of-date infrastructure, inadequateparking, a perception of crime, and a general lack of vitalpedestrian activity. The district also has a number of positiveattributes, including a number of existing cultural institutions,most notably the Fresno Metropolitan Museum, which attracts250,000 visitors annually.  The "Met," as it is known locally, is in an expansion mode, andmuseum directors have acknowledged that a bigger and betterMet needs to be supported by other institutions in theimmediate area. The notion of a cultural district was alreadysuggested in the downtown master plan created in 1993 bydeveloper Wayne Ratkovich, and some city officials view thearea as the cultural center not only for the city but for a 125-mile radius of the San Joaquin Valley. A team of consultants,made up of Keyser Marston Associates, Barry Howard Limited,and RTKL Associates Inc., have proposed a cultural district,with the Met serving as the nucleus, surrounded by at least sixother museum or museum expansion sites, including newlocations for the Afro-American Museum and Arte deAmericas.  The cultural district would be buttressed by anentertainment/retail district immediately southwest, anchoredby that tried-and-true generator of urban foot traffic: a multi-plex cinema, which is expected to bring in 1 million peopleannually. The pedestrian quality of the cultural district couldbenefit from another proposal to convert one-way streets totwo-directional traffic. Neo-traditional designers favor two-way traffic as a means to slow traffic and make streets morecomfortable for pedestrians, although few cities have had thegumption to convert one-way streets P a favorite of trafficplanners P back to two-way traffic.  A strength of the plan is the high number of existing andproposed museums oriented on Van Ness Avenue. The planidentifies at least two vacant lots on important thoroughfaresas parking sites, which could blight the experience forpedestrians, unless the parking structures incorporate street-level retail. The plan has been approved by the museum'sboard of directors, and is awaiting a vote by the Fresno citycouncil.  1. The Fresno Metropolitan Museum. This well-attendedinstitution is the anchor of the area, and seeks to expand intoneighboring buildings (2) and (3).  4. A multi-plex theater is the "traffic generator" of the FultonDistrict, and is hoped to attract up enough visitors to activate"the downtown district. To handle the parking, the museumsand other buildings would make parking available to thetheater on evenings and weekends.  5. Multi-plex parking.  6. Proposed future site of the Asian Museum.  7. Proposed future site of the Afro-American Museum.  8. Proposed future site of Arte de Americas.  9. Fulton Street. Two-way traffic is proposed for this one-waystreet.  10. Van Ness Avenue.  11. Existing theaters: the Wilson and the Warnor.  12. Proposed museum/museum expansion sites.  13. Proposed surface parking.  14. Fulton Street.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-21IA059-000325-B009-180http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev50.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000330 text/html 6741HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:01:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:38 GMTContent-length: 6553Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev50.html Sample Issue Copyright CLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES --------------- Group Says Agriculture Helped by RFG Increases (267 words) ----------------- Higher Speeds May Increase Smog Potential in CA (293 words) -------------------- Europe Reduces Duty on Imported Methanol (298 words) CopyrightCLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Group Says Agriculture Helped by RFG IncreasesA correlation between increased ethanol usage and the reformulated gasoline (RFG) program is clearly shown in the most recent gasolineutilization numbers made available by the U.S. Department of Transportation.States where RFG rules have been in effect show that the market percentage for ethanol blends has increased compared to the sameperiod in 1994, said Gary Goldberg, American Corn Growers Association president.In traditional farm states, demand for ethanol has dropped, but ithas increased in midwestern states that are part of the RFG program.While usage has dropped in Iowa, Kansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio and a whopping 46 percent in Oklahoma, it has increased by even larger amounts in Illinois, Kentucky, Minnesota and Wisconsin.Nationally, RFG use is credited for a nine percent increase inethanol demand.  Said Goldberg, "To those in the ethanol industrythat have tried to downplay the importance of the Reformulated Gasoline program, these numbers speak for themselves...[and] clearly show that increased demand for ethanol and increased market penetration is driven by access to the RFG program."Earlier in the year, the Energy Information Agency predicted thatyearly ethanol demand will increase from 1.6 billion gallons todayto 3.03 billion gallons by the year 2010.  The increase could mean a 700 million bushel increase in yearly corn use.  But the increase will only occur if RFG programs remain in place, ACGA predicts.Goldberg said different ways are suggested to expand ethanol's role,but it is clear that "the RFG program is the most logical andcost-effective means to grow the market."(ACGA RELEASE: 12/18)Back to Headline List CopyrightCLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Higher Speeds May Increase Smog Potential in CAWith increased speed limits in California -- from 55 mph to 65 mph -- the California Air Resources Board (CARB) is predicting that increased tailpipe emissions will cause the amount of ozone forming pollutants in the air to rise from one percent to three percent almost immediately.But stronger regulations appear unlikely, since "We already have the nation's most effective motor- vehicle control," according to Jerry Martin, air board spokesman.  He agreed new regulations were possible, but were not being planned at the moment.Worst hit would be the Los Angeles basin, which ironically had justcelebrated the cleanest air in more than two decades.  Two keypollutants -- volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and nitrogen oxides -- are expected to create the increase in ground level ozone.The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) said itexpects that between 12 and 18 tons of VOCs will be addded daily tothe 588 tons projected for 1996, and that nitrogen oxides would add 14 tons daily to the projected 466 tons.In the state capital, Sacramento, itself a bastion of bad air,discussions are under way on whether the state will drop itsrequirement that all cars sold in the state in 1998 be zero-emissions (electric) vehicles.  Another 14 tons could be added to pollutants if the requirement is dropped, the Coalition for Clean Air lamented.All of the estimates, however, are based on the premise that alldrivers will ratchet up the speed they drive.  The California Highway Patrol (CHP) reports that since the new limits went into effect people continue to drive much as they had before -- at around 70 mph.  A "creep" may manifest itself in time, CHP concedes.(ORANGE COUNTY REGISTER: 12/26)Back to Headline List CopyrightCLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Europe Reduces Duty on Imported MethanolA recent European Union (EU) announcement said the first million metric tons of methanol to come through customs in EU countries willonly require duty of less than half the normal amount.Not much impact is expected on the amount of methanol imported, nor on exporting countries, industry analysts say.Users of methanol in the industrial sector wanted a duty-free quotafor methanol, as was permitted last year, but the EU chose insteadto cut the tariff to four percent rather than 8.1 percent on the first million metric tons.Judith Speed, international methanol manager for ICI IndustrialProducts, Inc., a European methanol producer, said that "Duty-freeand reduced duty quotas were designed to work in specific, abnormal situations."  She added that "If quotas are continually allowed, they set a precedent and then you may as well have them all of the time."Speed said that last year's quota was regarded by European methanolproducers as "quite reasonable," but noted that by the time thequota went into effect, prices had begun to drop and "there really wasn't any need for the duty-free shipments."One methanol producer who ships to Europe said "A four percentreduction in the European duty is not enough for us to divert ournormal export patterns."Added Jim Thomas, vice president of market analysis for Houston'sBonner & Moore Associates, "You can get all the methanol you want inEurope right now."Speed says that European producers are not worried about the quota,but nonetheless the European Methanol Producers Association isasking for an investigation into the quota on principle because "There is a lot of 'horse-trading' going on between countries, and we think that should be looked into," said Speed.(OXY-FUEL NEWS: 12/18, p.1)Back to Headline List WT03-B36-22IA059-000325-B009-218http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev44.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000418 text/html 54993HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:02:27 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:37 GMTContent-length: 54804Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev44.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet November 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ***MEXICO*** Mexico Is Undergoing Environmental Protection Revolution (534 words) ***BRAZIL*** Brazil Awaits Financing to Clean Up Sao Paulo's Polluted Tiete River (445 words) ***THE SOUTHERN CONE*** Argentina to Create Environment Secretariat by Early 1992 (614 words) Argentine Leather Processor Threatens Public Health (336 words) Spanish Bank Funds Santiago Air Pollution Study (425 words) Chilean Officials Review Environmental Laws and Plan New Ones (254 words) Chilean Salmon Farmers Oppose Planned Aluminum Foundry (424 words) ***THE ANDEAN NATIONS*** Venezuela Takes Steps to Clean Up South America's Biggest Lake (510 words) Peruvian Officials Push US Copper Mining Company to Cut Emissions (574 words) Environmentalists Force Texas Oil Company to Scrap Exploration Plans in Peruvian Nature Reserve (437 words) Peruvian Green Law Faces Uncertain Future (352 words) Environmental Articles Included in Colombia's New Constitution (392 words) Columbian Salt Plant Shut Down for Polluting the Rio Bogota (293 words) Texas Petroleum to be Fined for Polluting Colombia's Waters (406 words) Bolivia to Enact Sweeping Environmental Legislation by Year's End (576 words) ***CENTRAL AMERICA*** Central American Nations to Ban Toxic Waste Imports (362 words) "Chemical Prospecting" Unites Costa Rica and US Pharmaceutical Firm (333 words) Hotline: (93 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Mexico Is Undergoing Environmental Protection Revolution     The Mexican government, headed by President Carlos Salinas deGortari, is starting to seriously address a myriad of severeenvironmental problems that 40 years of uncontrolled industrialdevelopment have created.  Salinas' speeches, including his 1November "State of the Nation" address, sound more like speechesfrom "Green" conventions than those of a president of a thirdworld country, say political analysts.  Until recently theenvironment had not been much of worry for Mexicans and theirgovernment -- economic growth, illiteracy, and malnutrition werethe top priorities -- but Mexico's environmental problems --especially in Mexico City -- are beginning to wake people up, sayobservers.  For example, television programs, radio reports, andbanner headlines about the environment are commonplace in Mexicotoday.  Mexico's intellectuals are also putting pressure ongovernment and industry to clean up and protect the environment."We have a silent disaster under way that is threatening Mexico'sdevelopment," Homero Aridjis, Mexican novelist and president ofthe Group of 100, a group of prominent Latin Americanintellectuals working to protect the region's environment.     Mexico's environmental problems include Mexico City'spermanent blanket of brown smog -- the result of five million tonsof pollutants spewed into its air yearly by three million cars and36,000 factories -- rivers and lakes polluted with untreated humanand industrial waste, rapid deforestation, and the pollutedUS-Mexican border area littered with "maquiladoras," or inboundassembly plants.     The country's first environmental legislation controllingemissions was passed in 1988, and the Ecology and UrbanDevelopment Secretariat (SEDUE) showed industry it meant businessby conducting spot checks in April and May.  Two-thirds of theindustries inspected failed, resulting in hundreds of factoriesbeing temporarily shut down and fined.  SEDUE kicked off thecampaign in March by closing a major state-owned oil refineryoperating in Mexico City.  "Industry didn't think it would happen;they didn't believe we would enforce the law," said SEDUEspokesman Eduardo Garcia.  The crackdown involved not onlyMexican firms, but also such multinationals as German chemicalgiant BASF AG and US-based Dow Chemical Co.  "The law is beingenforced, and it's causing Mexican companies to run around likechickens looking for help with and information on cleaning updirty emissions," said Alfonso Cipres of the Mexican EcologicalMovement.     The Mexican government is also working closely with USEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA) authorities to develop waysto clean up and protect the Mexico-US border area from furtherenvironmental contamination, which some critics fear is apossibility if trade and industrial activity are allowed to flowfreely across the border.  President Salinas has acknowledged thatMexico's border area needs cleaning up, but has steadfastly vowednot to allow Mexico's environment to deteriorate further and"become a haven for polluters" when, and if, trade barriers areremoved.  Mexico -- out of necessity -- is undergoing anenvironmental protection revolution that promises to radicallychange how things are done in Mexico, particularly the waybusiness is conducted.  In coming issues, EWLA will examine indetail how environmental protection laws and regulations in Mexicoare affecting industrial operations.     For more information: Eduardo Garcia, SEDUE, AvenidaConstituyentes 947, Colonia Belen de las Flores, Mexico, D.F.0110, Mexico.  Tel: +525-271-8765; Fax: +525-271-6614.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Brazil Awaits Financing to Clean Up Sao Paulo's Polluted TieteRiver     The state of Sao Paulo is preparing to start a US $1 billionproject to clean up the state's most important -- and polluted --river, the Tiete, by the year 2005.  On 4 October, Sao PauloGovernor Luiz Antonio Fleury, accompanied by other Brazilianofficials, discussed the cleanup plan and possible financingarrangements with the president of the Inter-American DevelopmentBank (IDB) in Washington, DC, USA.  Brazilian officials hope theIDB will finance about half the cost of the project, or about US$500 million.  According to IDB officials, the bank is studyingthe request and putting it through the normal review process,which could take up to several years, before any decision is made.However, one IDB official told EWLA that the bank feels it's aworthwhile project that should be funded.  The rest of the fundsneeded for the project are slated to come from Brazil's federalgovernment, Sao Paulo's state government, and private groups.     The Tiete River runs from the Atlantic highlands in easternSao Paulo through the Sao Paulo metropolitan area, where itbecomes highly polluted from 3.5 billion liters of mostlyuntreated domestic (two-thirds) and industrial waste (one-third)dumped into it daily, and then feeds into the river Parana.Brazilian officials say that only about 16% of the wastedischarged into the river is currently treated.  Discharginguntreated waste in Brazil isn't illegal yet, but governmentofficials say that is about to change.     The project's initial goal, according to Fleury, is to cut by50% to 60% the amount of untreated effluent entering the river by1994.  The funds are to be spent on constructing water-treatmentplants along the river to treat domestic waste.  The plan willalso require the more than 1,000 industries operating along theriver to clean up their own effluent; many industries plan to worktogether and build common water-treatment plants to save money.When the project is completed in the year 2005, "it will bepossible to fish once again in the river," said the governor.     Despite Fleury's optimism, it appears the project may alreadybe heading for problems.  According to the state's constitution,the first water project in the state of Sao Paulo must be thecleanup of the Billings Dam area, a seriously polluted reservoirthat provides much of metropolitan Sao Paulo's water.  Inaddition, environmentalists have criticized the governor's planbecause they say he will simply use the money to giveantipollution equipment to private industries to clean up theireffluents.     For more information on the project's technical aspect:Companhia de Tecnologia de Saneamento Ambiental, Praca R.A.Cortez, 67, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.  Tel: +5511-246-4411.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Argentina to Create Environment Secretariat by Early 1992     Argentina plans to have its first ministerial-levelenvironment secretariat in place and operating by early 1992.President Carlos Menem, seeking to be Argentina's "environmentpresident," recently created the secretariat by presidentialdecree because the current constitution allows for only eightministries, and the environment had never been one of them.  "Weare in the process of amending the constitution to allow for asecretariat of the environment at the highest level," said AlbertoBarbuto, president of the National Commission for EnvironmentalPolicy.  The presidential decree allowed the Menem government tolegally circumvent the constitution until it's changed;administration officials are working with legislators in bothhouses of Congress and expect routine passage of the proposedconstitutional amendment when it is brought before Congress.     The new secretariat, which will employ approximately 200people, will be in charge of national environmental policy, helpCongress write modern environmental laws, and ensure that the newlaws are enforced, Barbuto told EWLA.  The secretariat will workwith the country's 23 provincial environment ministries onenvironmental matters of overlapping jurisdiction.  Committees arenow writing coordinated environmental laws that will carrypenalties for offenders.  "Today, for example, there is no penalcode in Argentina for contaminating water, only for deliberatelypoisoning it," said Barbuto.  A general environmental law willoutline basics, such as a requirement that all constructionprojects conduct environmental impact studies.  More specific lawswill protect natural resources and establish toxic waste penalcodes.     Critics charge, however, that in reality the Argentinegovernment has no real environment policy and is simply trying toimprove its "green" image by creating another government agency."If this government really wanted to come up with a nationalenvironmental policy, it would be consulting with nongovernmentalorganizations and industry, and would not be picking Maria JuliaAlsogaray, a person with no environmental protection background,to head up the new secretariat," said Patricia Gay, executivedirector of Friends of the Earth Argentina.  Environmentalists saythat instead of creating more agencies, the government shouldconcentrate on enforcing environmental laws and regulations, whichare now being "totally ignored by industry in Argentina."  PedroTarak of the Foundation for Natural Resources and the Environmentdoubts this new secretariat will ever write any environmental laws -- or enforce them -- because the existing agency, he said,doesn't write laws or enforce them now.     "The private sector in Argentina is starting to takeenvironmental protection more seriously, although the topic isn'tas intense here as it is in other parts of the world," saidindustrialist Federico Zorraquin, president of Grupo Zorraquin, agroup of large industrial companies.  According to Jorge Rivara ofDuPont Argentina, there is indeed a group of industries --especially chemical and petrochemical -- that are starting toworry about the changes to come.  "However, they are waiting tosee how this new environment secretariat will operate and, aboveall, how much power it will have," he told EWLA.  Zorraquin isalso a member of the Business Council for SustainableDevelopment, an international group of business leaderscoordinating industry's contribution to the United NationsConference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in1992.  He said the reason environmental protection isn't very highon the business agenda in Argentina is because "Argentina'senvironmental problems aren't very visible."  For example,environmental degradation in Buenos Aires is mainly a problem inthe poorer sections of the city and doesn't directly effect themajority of the population, according to Zorraquin.  Nevertheless,he does believe that the government needs to strengthen itsability to enforce environmental regulations.     For more information: Alberto Barbuto, National Commissionfor Environmental Policy, Corrientes 1302, 1 piso, Buenos Aires1043, Argentina.  Tel: +541-406-721; Fax: +541-451-817.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Argentine Leather Processor Threatens Public Health     The Argentine leather processing factory Inducuer, located inthe city of Florencio Varela (30 km southeast of Buenos Aires), isthreatening the local population's health as it continues toallegedly discharge chromium illegally into nearby streams andland.  (Chromium is a toxic metallic chemical element.)     Although Florencio Varela officials have occasionally fined -- recently US $25,000 -- and temporarily closed down the plantseveral times over the past two decades for local environmentallaw violations, they have not closed down the plant permanentlydue to economic considerations.  Company sources say privatelythat they would prefer to close down permanently, putting 180people out of work, before investing US $2 million needed toremove chromium from its wastewater and properly dispose of thewaste material.  The federal government has not been involved withthis case because there is no federal law in Argentina prohibitingthe discharge of chromium, but this may soon change (see previousstory).     Since the plant opened in 1974, many of the city's 6,000residents have suffered from skin infections and lung and kidneyproblems due to high levels of chromium in the water and air.  Inearly October, two newborn infants in a neighborhood close to thefactory died from chromium poisoning.  The neighborhood's drinkingwater, recently tested by local water officials, was determined tobe highly contaminated with chromium.  "The water even came of thespout green, the color of chromium," said one water official.Carlos Bralo, a lawyer representing the affected community, toldEWLA that new tap water standards are beginning to improve thequality of water somewhat, but the air continues to be pollutedwith chromium.  "We are breathing in chromium," he said as hepointed to deteriorating metals on houses in the area.  Bralo hasfiled a suit against Inducuer on behalf of the families who losttheir children, but observers say it will be years before there isany justice.     For more information: Martin Drozzo, Director General ofInspections, Municipality of Florencio Varela, Buenos Aires,Argentina.  Tel: +541-255-1003.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Spanish Bank Funds Santiago Air Pollution Study     The Banco Santander, a Spanish bank with subsidiaries inChile, is currently assembling a team of internationalenvironmental experts who will collaborate with localenvironmental officials and scientists at the University of Chileto study Santiago's severe air pollution problem and come up withviable solutions.  The bank initiated and is funding the year-longproject, which will cost an estimated US $250,000.     Bank President Emilio Botin expressed the bank's desire toorganize and fund such a team to work on this problem whilevisiting Chilean President Patricio Aylwin on 2 September inSantiago.  Sources say Aylwin was appreciative and pointed out toBotin that Banco Santander was the first and only privateenterprise in Chile to donate economic support to help fight theair pollution problem.  At the meeting, Botin said: "I amconvinced that Santiago will resolve this problem, and we at theBanco Santander will be very proud to have actively participatedin it."  According to Federico Ysart, corporate communicationsmanager with the bank in Madrid, Spain, the idea came from bankemployees in Santiago, "who live with the smog daily."  "Thebank's management in Spain saw this as a good opportunity to sharesome of the benefits the bank has been enjoying from itsoperations in Chile recently," he told EWLA.     The environmental team, which begins work in November, willconsist of about 10 people.  "Although the team will principallystudy sources of air pollution, it will also look at sources ofwater and noise pollution," said Ysart.  Currently a steeringcommittee with members from the three institutions involved in theproject -- Banco Santander, University of Chile, andDecontamination Commission for the Metropolitan Area -- areselecting team members.  By this time next year, the team is topublish its findings and recommendations in a so-called "WhiteBook," which will be presented to government authorities and thegeneral public for review and comment.     According to Urban Air Pollution in Latin America and theCaribbean, a report published in September by the Pan AmericanHealth Organization, Santiago is the third most polluted city inLatin America, just behind Mexico City and Sao Paulo, Brazil.According to the researchers, the air pollution problem inSantiago, while exacerbated by geographic and climatic conditions,is primarily caused by mobile sources.  Mobile sources areresponsible for 83% of the total nitrogen dioxide emissions, 78%of the hydrocarbons, and 98% of the carbon monoxide."     For more information: Federico Ysart, CorporateCommunications Manager, Banco Santander, Castellana 75, 28046,Madrid, Spain.  Tel: +341-581-3700; Fax: +341-581-3633.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Chilean Officials Review Environmental Laws and Plan New Ones     The National Commission for the Environment (CONAMA), Chile'sgovernmental agency responsible for coordinating environmentalpolicy, is currently preparing an inventory of existing envi-ronmental laws.  The objective is to better organize current lawson the books, and find out where more laws are needed.  CONAMAofficials say many of the environmental laws on the books in Chileare unknown, due to a lack of past enforcement.  Rafael Asenjo,executive secretary of CONAMA, estimates that the inventory willcome up with about 2,000 existing environmental regulations.     So far, CONAMA has found that current environmentalregulations do not adequately assure the protection of publicwaterways from industrial or municipal waste, nor do they requirethat toxic waste be treated and disposed of safely.  Asenjoconcedes that his agency has no information on how or where thecountry's toxic waste, mainly from industry and hospitals, is nowbeing disposed.  CONAMA officials have also discovered that thereare no laws requiring that environmental impact studies beundertaken before major projects are approved.  This will changeshortly.  Asenjo told EWLA that CONAMA expects to propose many newenvironmental laws by the end of the year, including one thatwill require such environmental impact studies.  Althoughenvironmental impact studies are not currently required, amajority of the large firms operating in Chile reportedly alreadyconduct environmental impact and feasibility studies on their own.     For more information: Rafael Asenjo, Executive Secretary,National Commission for the Environment, Av. Alameda BernandoO'Higgins 280, Santiago, Chile.  Tel: +562-222-2903; Fax: +562-222-2717.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Chilean Salmon Farmers Oppose Planned Aluminum Foundry     La Cooperativa de Salmoneros de Aysen (COSA), an associationof salmon producers, is alarmed at the prospect of having analuminum foundry built near salmon farms in the Aysen region insouthern Chile, about 1300 km south of Santiago.  Proyectos deAysen SA, a Chilean company, and Noranda Inc. of Quebec, Canada,want to construct an aluminum foundry and a 360 megawatthydroelectric facility in the Aysen region, which would cost US$1.2 billion.     Salmon farmers argue that the pristine fjords in the Aysenregion, where most of the salmon farming is done, wouldundoubtedly become contaminated, hurting both salmon harvests andthe environment, with an aluminum foundry operating nearby.  TheAysen fjords are one of the few ideal places in the world forraising Coho salmon.  The region is expected to produce 4.5million tons of Coho salmon next season, worth approximately US$140 million.     COSA officials point to instances in Canada and Argentinawhere aluminum foundries have contaminated waters and damagedsalmon farms.  Alcan Ltd. in British Columbia, Canada, is runningan aluminum foundry similar to the one Projectos de Aysen intendsto construct in Chile.  Alcan's foundry has been discharging 400metric tons annually of fluorine gases into the atmosphere.  COSAsays tests conducted on the Columbia River in Canada in the early1980s indicated the presence of fluorine in the water.   Fluorineis the principal chemical associated with the production ofprimary aluminum, and adversely affected the health and survivalof salmon there.  A similar situation occurred in Argentina.  Inthe early 1970s, Aluar SA built an aluminum plant in PuertoMadryn, which has needed more than US $70 million worth ofenvironmental protection equipment installed in recent years.Salmon producers also say that even with the best purificationsystems only 98% of the fluorine produced can be removed fromwaste effluents, and typically the percentage is much lower.  Morealumina and chemicals are also lost to the environment in theloading and unloading of ships at the docks, they warn.     Proyectos de Aysen, however, is trying to assure the salmonproducers that they plan to take every precaution to protect theenvironment.  For instance, they intend to use a closed circularsuction system to load and unload materials to avoid anythingescaping to the environment.  In addition, Proyectos plans toconduct a comprehensive environmental impact study, and says itwill be in "constant contact" with salmon producers.     For more information: Hernan Contreras, Director, LaCooperative de Salmoneros de Aysen, Casilla 309, Puerto Aysen,Chile.  Tel: +56-67-332-967.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Venezuela Takes Steps to Clean Up South America's Biggest Lake     After years of studying the problem, it appears that theVenezuelan government is now taking concrete steps to begin thecleanup of South America's largest -- and possibly dirtiest --freshwater lake, Lake Maracaibo located in northwestern Venezuela.Venezuela's Ministry of the Environment and Renewable NaturalResources (MERNR) recently contracted with Delcan InternationalCorp., a Canadian environmental engineering firm, to design andmanage the construction of two sewage treatment plants and sixpump stations for the lakeside cities of Cabimas and Ciudad Ojeda,at a total cost of about US $52 million.  The cities, which have acombined population of approximately one million people, have beendischarging untreated sewage into the lake for decades.  Inaddition, an Israeli firm is currently building two sewagetreatment plants at the lake's biggest city, Maracaibo, which hasmore than a million inhabitants.     According to Pablo Emilio Colmenares, president of MERNR'sInstitute for the Control and Conservation of Lake Maracaibo, theVenezuelan government began looking into the need to clean up thelake as early as 1977.  The government spent years conductingstudies, coming up with grand plans and writing environment laws,but in essence accomplished nothing concrete until now.  "The lakeshould be healthy and cleaned up to international standards by theyear 1999 with the installations of municipal sewage treatmentplants, and new, tough environmental laws in the works that willstop industry from polluting the lake," Colmenares told EWLA.Government officials concede that industry has found it easy topollute the lake over the years because the weak environmentallaws on the books haven't been enforced much.  Governmentofficials say that will change soon.  (EWLA will examine in thenext issue the new penal environmental law the Venezuelan Congressis drafting.)     Environmentalists are very skeptical of the government'splan.  "For 30 years we have been hearing about projects to cleanup the lake, and so far we have seen nothing," said AldemaroRomero, executive director of the Venezuelan Foundation for theConservation of Biological Diversity.  Romero said that becausenothing has been done, the lake is "a complete disaster, filledwith mercury, sewage, agrochemicals, and oil."  As far as he isconcerned, the government is all talk and no action.  "I don'tbelieve that the government is going to sanction or close downstate-owned enterprises, and I will have to see these sewagetreatment plants up and running -- not plans on paper -- before Ibelieve it," he told EWLA.  Meanwhile, business leaders say thatalthough the program has been delayed for years, they believe thatgrowing public pressure on government and industry is gettingthings moving.  Said Guillermo Cardenas of PetroquimicasVenezuela, a state-owned petrochemical firm: "Environmentalconsciousness is growing in Venezuela, especially around theMaracaibo lake, and industry realizes it has to take steps toclean up."     For more information: Pablo Emilio Colmenares, President,Institute for the Control and Conservation of Lake Maracaibo,Calle 72 con Ave. 2B, Urbanizacion Virginia, Edificio San Jacinto,Sector del Lago, Maracaibo, Estado Zulia, Venezuela.  Tel: +58-61-913-873; Fax: +58-61-914-089.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Peruvian Officials Push US Copper Mining Company to Cut Emissions     Peru's Ministry of Energy and Mines recently ordered theSouthern Peru Copper Corporation (SPCC) to completely clean up itssulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions and other pollutants within thenext five years by building sulfuric acid plants and taking otherenvironmental remediation steps at its main site in the southerncoastal city of Ilo.  Such action will cost the company anestimated US $90 million.  (Sulfuric acid plants capture SO2emissions from smelters and turn them into sulfuric acid -- amarketable commodity itself -- resulting in less atmosphericpollution.)  SPCC, 52% of which is owned by the North Americancopper giant ASARCO Inc., mines 60% of Peru's annual copperproduction, making it the country's largest copper mining outfit.     SPCC officials say, however, they were involved in initiatingthis project as well and therefore are not being "ordered" toclean up emissions.   "When the government of Peru issues anorder, it does so only after things have been agreed to," said anASARCO official.  But the same official admitted that "LatinAmerican countries are all becoming much more environmentallyaware, and this whole effort is an outgrowth of that."     A multisectoral commission was convened in 1989 to study thepollution problem at SPCC and develop a solution.  The commissionissued a report, which then became a supreme decree in 1989,outlining short-, medium-, and long-term steps that SPCC needed totake to rectify the situation at Ilo.  SPCC cooperated andoutlined steps it would take, including construction of a 140,000ton-per-year sulfuric acid plant, at a cost of US $76.6 million,which will treat 35% of the SO2 emissions produced at its Ilofoundry.  SPCC will also pipe the tailings from the Cuajone andToquepala mines offshore at the bay of Ite, at a cost of US $16.93million plus yearly operating costs of US $500,000.  The companyhas also promised to build a water-treatment plant to treat thesewage from its camp, Ciudad Nueva, in Ilo.  The commissiondetermined that a 140,000 ton-per-year sulfuric acid plant wouldnot be enough to clean up the emissions, and told SPCC that itwould have to double the capacity of the plant to 300,000 tonswithin five years to take care of all the emissions.  "SPCC wasn'tplanning to use all the emissions from its smelters to producesulfuric acid," said Manuel Pulgar Vidal, an environmental lawyerat the Peruvian Environmental Law Society.     SPCC has appealed the commission's decision.  The coppercompany is reluctant to increase the sulfuric acid plant'scapacity to 300,000 tons per year because, company executives say,the domestic market for sulfuric acid isn't large enough to absorball of the sulfuric acid that would be produced by such a largefacility.  They also say SPCC isn't well-positioned to compete inthe international sulfuric acid market.  However, SPCC is comingup with uses for their sulfuric acid.  Sources told EWLA that SPCChas begun working on a heap leaching project, which will requirethe use of sulfuric acid to exploit several million tons of copperoxides and secondary sulfates that have accumulated at theirToquepala and Cuajone mines.  Officially, however, government andcompany officials are currently negotiating to resolve theirdifferences.     For more information: John J. Youle, Vice President ofInstitutional Relations, Southern Peru Copper Corporation, AvenidaCaminos del Inca No. 171, Chacarilla del Estanque, Santiago deSurco, Lima 33, Peru.  Tel: +5114-36-1565; Fax: +5114-35-6619.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Environmentalists Force Texas Oil Company to Scrap ExplorationPlans in Peruvian Nature Reserve     Texas Crude Exploration Inc. of Houston, Texas, USA, decidedin September not to explore for oil in Peru's Pacaya SamiriaNational Reserve, even though the Peruvian government hadtentatively approved in early April a US $24 million oilexploration contract between Texas Crude and Petroperu (the stateoil company) for a one million-hectare northern jungle oil block,known as Block 61.  Texas Crude's decision came in the wake ofprotests by environmental groups and congressmen in Peru and theUS who argued against oil exploration in the wildlife reserve.The company received over 1,000 protest letters, and anenvironmental group picketed its Houston offices.     Environmentalists bolstered their campaign with environmentallegislation enacted in September 1990 by President AlbertoFujimori.  The legislation outlawed exploring for or exploitingnonrenewable resources in a reserve.  The government, however, wasinterpreting the law its own way and was set to give Texas Crudethe go-ahead.  After Texas Crude gave up its exploration plans,the Ministry of Energy and Mines and the Ministry of Agriculturerepealed this law, known as article 71, due to pressure from localinvestors.  Environmentalists, who are working to restore it, saythat foreign oil companies will still look carefully at where theydrill in the future.  Texas Crude said the whole episode has costthem at least US $1 million: $500,000 on seismic data it boughtfrom Petroperu and another $500,000 it will now have to spend toclean up its image in the US.     The block was especially attractive to Texas Crude because ofits potential oil-bearing structures and its proximity to theNorth Peruvian Pipeline.  The 856-km-long pipeline takes Amazoncrude oil from producing fields to Petroperu's marine terminal atBayovar on Peru's north coast.  Created in 1982, Pacaya Samiria isa vast, swampy 2.08-million-hectare network of oxbow lakes,lagoons, and flooded forest that is also home to the almostextinct Amazon manatee and the pink river dolphin.  In the 1970s,exploration companies pulled out of the area after drilling threedry wells and making one noncommercial find.  Petroperu, however,still operates in the reserve.  The cash- strapped state oilcompany's environmentally unsound operations are a result of poormaintenance and sloppy management, say environmentalists.According to the Iquitos-based Institute of Amazonian Research,over 200 hectares of jungle surrounding Petroperu's wells inPacaya Samiria are already contaminated by untreated water andtoxic chemicals used in drilling operations.     For more information: Scott G. Baum, Vice President, TexasCrude Exploration Inc., 801 Travis, Suite 1200, Houston, TX77002-5764, USA.  Tel: +1-713-228-8888; Fax: +1-713-228-0494.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Peruvian Green Law Faces Uncertain Future     Peruvian environmentalists fear that a new private investmentlaw being drafted by the government could sabotage sweepingenvironmental legislation signed by President Alberto Fujimori inSeptember 1990.  Undermining the green law, Peru's first, wouldn'tbe new to the Fujimori administration.     Earlier this year the Fujimori government repealed twoimportant articles in the environmental law when it passedpetroleum and agrarian investment laws.  The agrarian law, forinstance, repealed article 71 of the environmental law, whichprohibited the exploitation of nonrenewable resources in protectedareas.  Article 71 formed the legal basis for environmentallawyers' arguments that stopped Texas Crude Exploration Inc., apetroleum company based in Houston, Texas, USA, from exploring foroil in the Pacaya Samiria National Reserve.  (See previous story.)     Industry in general, and the mining and petroleum sectors inparticular, have been especially critical of the controversialgreen law.  For example, Luis Rodriguez Mariategui, formerpresident of the National Society of Mining and Petroleum, seesenvironmental impact studies, which are stipulated in the law, asjust one more obstacle to starting up business ventures in Peru."The cost of an environmental impact study carried out by a localcompany can run anywhere from US $20,000 to US $120,000, dependingon the size and complexity of the job," he said.  However,Environmental Services of Fort Collins, Colorado, USA, which hascarried out environmental impact studies in Peru for suchcompanies as Mobil Exploration & Producing Peru, a division ofMobil Corp., New York, USA, is telling its clients that "to meetthe full letter of intent of the environmental law anenvironmental impact study would cost from US $400,000 to US$500,000."     Meanwhile, efforts by a multisectoral commission appointed byFujimori to outline regulations for the environmental law havebeen stymied at the cabinet level.  Jorge Caillaux, president ofthe Peruvian Environmental Law Society (SPDA) and a former memberof the commission, blames the impasse on the Fujimoriadministration's "lack of political will" to make environmentalprotection a priority.     For more information: Jorge Caillaux, SPDA, Plaza Arrospide9, San Isidro, Lima 27, Peru.  Tel: +5114-22-4033; Fax: +5114-42-4565.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Environmental Articles Included in Colombia's New Constitution     Environmental protection is on the front burner in Colombia,as evidenced by the passage in August of the country's newconstitution containing 43 articles specifically addressingenvironmental protection.  The old constitution did not mentionthe environment.  The environmental articles range fromprohibiting nuclear and toxic waste from entering the country torequiring the government to protect the nation's biodiversity andundertake environmental awareness campaigns.  The constitutionalso mandates that the principles of sustainable development beadhered to when exploiting natural resources, and givesindividuals, even though they may not have been directly affected,the right to bring legal action against polluters.  According toGuillermo Perry, Colombia's ex-minister of mining and energy, thismeans that companies or individuals damaging the environment inColombia will now be held legally responsible, and will pay finesand be forced to clean up their environmental damage.     A new Congress, to be elected by December, will develop thespecific laws and regulations needed to comply with the newconstitution.  However, the government in power has already takensome concrete steps to bridge the gap between the idealenvironmental goals set forth in the constitution and what reallyoccurs.  According to Manuel Rodriguez Becerra, director ofInderena, Colombia's environmental protection agency, thegovernment approved in August the National Environmental PolicyPlan (NEPP), which outlines how the government plans to enforcethe environmental articles mandated in the constitution.  "TheNEPP calls for the complete overhaul of the government's existingenvironmental protection sector, which is currently very weak,uncoordinated, and operates on a shoestring budget," saidRodriguez.  The new budget should about double, with money comingfrom new taxes on firms exploiting nonrenewable energy sources,and fines for violating environmental laws.  Rodriguez says thegovernment intends to create a Ministry of the Environment and aNational Environmental Council, which will include representativesfrom all government ministries.   The government also will createa series of decentralized regional environmental protectionoffices throughout the country to carry out protection programsand law enforcement.     The environment will also become an important factor in themarketplace, say government officials.  For example, the NEPPproposes pollution taxes for polluters and subsidies for companiesthat switch to cleaner, more environmentally benign technologiesand undertake reforestation and conservation projects.     For more information: Manuel Rodriguez Becerra, Director ofInderena, Carrera 10 #20-30, Bogota, Colombia.  Tel: +571-283-3562.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Columbian Salt Plant Shut Down for Polluting the Rio Bogota     In September the Colombian government decided to permanentlyshut down Alcalis de Colombia, an old state-owned sodium chlorideprocessing plant that operated along the Rio Bogota, just a fewkilometers from downtown Bogota.  The reason was that anenvironmental impact study performed by the US-based consultingfirm Arthur D. Little concluded that the factory was responsiblefor most of the pollution found in that river.  Alcalis, whichproduced 18,000 metric tons of sodium chloride yearly, wasdischarging about 680 metric tons of chloride into the river eachday, five times the permitted level.     The Public Interest Defense Foundation, which demanded thatthe government close down the factory three years ago, said theextremely high concentration of chloride in the river (213 partsper million, against a permissible level of 150) was a serioushealth threat to the local population, as well as nearby farmingand pasture lands.  Sources say that some pastures and cows in thearea may have been contaminated by the river's polluted waters.     The National Council of Social and Economic Policy (NCSEP), ahigh-level interministerial council operating under the presidentof the republic, Cesar Gaviria, made the final decision to closethe factory.  NCSEP authorities admit that the plant was closeddown for economic, as well as environmental reasons.  "Alcalis wasusing old technology, in debt, and losing money," said oneofficial.  NCSEP calculated that the state would have had toinvest more than US $10 million in new, cleaner technology forAlcalis to meet the current environmental regulations.  The 300workers who lost their jobs due to the closing are demanding thatthe government help them.     For more information: German Sarmiento, Director, PublicInterest Defense Foundation, Calle 71 #5-83, Bogota, Colombia.Tel: +571-211-7077.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Texas Petroleum to be Fined for Polluting Colombia's Waters     Colombian environmental protection authorities arethreatening to fine Texas Petroleum Company, of Dallas, Texas,USA, for not properly treating drilling operation wastewater fromits Velazquez fields.  Authorities say the wastewater is pollutingthe Magdalena River, Colombia's most important river.  "There is astrong possibility that Inderena [the government agency in chargeof protecting natural resources and the environment] will besanctioning Texas Petroleum for contamination of waters near itsVelazquez fields," said Alfonso Avellaneda, head of theenvironmental department at Inderena.  "Our legal department willbe announcing the sanctions shortly, and these may include a fineor the closure of the Velazquez fields."     Inderena officials claim that Texas Petroleum, knowing thatInderena officials could not (until quite recently) inspect thearea because it was controlled by paramilitary groups, wasdeliberately discharging untreated effluent into two streams.Furthermore, Texas Petroleum allegedly tried to deceive Inderenaofficials when they inspected the area.  Avellaneda said TexasPetroleum stopped the discharge of all effluent to one of thestreams and tried to convince Inderena authorities that the streamwith no effluent was the one that received all the treatedeffluent.  Texas Petroleum maintains that the Inderena inspectorconfused the two streams due to a lack of familiarity with thearea.  "We clean up effluents as a matter of course, as you wouldsweep and clean your house," said Joaquin Escobar, chiefenvironmental officer for Texas Petroleum in Columbia.Furthermore, Inderena says there's a big difference between theway Texas Petroleum and Colombia's oil company (Ecopetrol) operatein the area.  "We want to demonstrate with these sanctions thatit's possible to exploit the oil in this area withoutcontaminating its waters, as Ecopetrol does," said Avellaneda.Despite all the rhetoric from the government, Texas Petroleum saysit has yet to be officially contacted about the matter, and arguesthat it is innocent.  "Our conscience is clear, and we are certainthat once the technical information is examined, the company'sworldwide reputation for environmental excellence will beconfirmed," said Escobar.     In 1987, Texas Petroleum was admittedly involved incontaminating La Cienaga de Palagua, a freshwater lake near itsVelazquez fields.  It discharged into the lake salty wastewatersloaded with chlorides, strontium, vanadium, lead, and mercury,resulting in the death of millions of fish.  Ecopetrol was alsoimplicated in this environmental disaster.     For more information: Alfonso Avellaneda, Departamento deMedio Ambiente del Inderena, Carrera 10 #20-30, Bogota, Colombia.Tel: +571-283-3562.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Bolivia to Enact Sweeping Environmental Legislation by Year's End     The Bolivian Congress is putting the finishing touches on thecountry's first-ever piece of comprehensive environmentallegislation.  The environmental bill, which is expected to becomelaw before the end of the year, will also create aministerial-level National Environment Secretariat responsible fordeveloping appropriate regulations and seeing that they areenforced.  "The principal goal of this legislation is theprotection and conservation of the environment and naturalresources in Bolivia," said Gerardo Aguierre, Bolivia's SecretaryGeneral of the Environment and one of the bill's authors."Bolivia needs to develop economically, but not at the expense ofthe environment; therefore, there will be incentives forbusinesses to protect the environment as well as penalties fornoncompliance," he told EWLA.     When this bill becomes law, say its drafters, the conduct ofbusiness will change drastically in Bolivia.  For example, finesand prison terms of up to 10 years will await those who import ortraffic in toxic waste in Bolivia, and for those who bring intothe country contaminating technologies that have been outlawed intheir country of origin.  In addition, the law will establishpenal codes for polluting the air, water, and land.  Environmentalimpact studies will be required for all new projects, both publicand private, before authorities grant approval.     Bolivian environmentalists are generally pleased with thebill, although they say developing regulations and enforcing themwill be a tough task.  "The fact that there is an environment billthat will soon become law is a big step in the right direction,but we have to make sure that the laws and regulations areenforced," said Christian Vallejos of the Friends of NatureFoundation, based in Santa Cruz, Bolivia.  Luis Alberto Rodrigo,director of the Environmental Defense League, an umbrellaenvironmental organization in Bolivia, praised the government forhaving the political will to work with many diverse groups to comeup with the comprehensive environmental bill, but likewiseexpressed reservations about how effectively the new laws will beenforced.  "I feel that it will be very hard for the governmentto enforce the laws and regulations without adequate mechanismsand funds," he told EWLA.  He believes that industries operatingin Bolivia will have to start taking environmental protection veryseriously.     The legislation originated about a year and a half ago in theEnvironment Committee of the House of Deputies, the lower house inthe bicameral parliament.  For the executive branch, the office ofthe Secretary General of the Environment was also involved indrafting the bill.  Two previous environmental bills did notsurvive, according to Aguierre, because they tried to cover toomuch and thus were too vague.  The current bill, however, isexpected to survive the process and become law.  "A general draftof the bill unanimously passed in the House in early October, andnow legislators are carefully reviewing each of the 121 articlesand making any needed changes," Aguierre told EWLA.  Once theHouse passes the entire bill, including all of the articles, itwill go to the Senate for a similar process.  But if the Senatemakes any changes, then it will have to be approved again by theHouse.  The exact same bill has to be approved in both chambersbefore it can go to the president of the republic, Jaime PazZamora.     For more information: Gerardo Aguierre, Secretary General ofthe Environment, Av. Camacho 1471, Edificio Maca, La Paz, Bolivia.Tel: +591-2-361-647; Fax: +591-2-357-535.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Central American Nations to Ban Toxic Waste Imports     The Interparliamentary Central American Commission ofEnvironment and Development (ICACED), which convened with all its42 members for the first time 23-26 October in Guatemala City,Guatemala, urged all member nations to ban the importation oftoxic waste.  "We recognize that we have serious environmentalproblems to address, the principal one being to protect CentralAmerica from the industrialized nations' intent on making us theirtoxic waste dump," said Arturo Amiel Escobar, a Guatemalanlegislator and the general coordinator of the event.  Thecommission, which is made up of legislators from each country'scongressional environment committees, also called for steps to betaken to clean up Central America's cities, and halt deforestationon the Central American isthmus.     Panama and Belize are the only two Central American countriesthat have already outlawed toxic waste imports, but sources saythe remaining five are not far behind.  "Following the meeting,the Guatemalan Congress began working on modifying the nation'senvironmental law to include the prohibition of any type of toxicwaste from entering this country," Amiel told EWLA.  In additionto calling for a ban on toxic waste imports, the participants atthe meeting also called on Central American industry to worktogether with the governments to protect the environment.  "Ourobjective is to give the private sector incentives to protect theenvironment, and work toward a consensus between government andindustry on how to protect the environment, because otherwise itwon't work," said Amiel.     The ICACED was created in August 1990, with the ratificationof the Central American Environmental Protection Agreement by themember nations.  The Central American presidents decided at asummit in February 1989 to create the pan-Central Americanorganization to allow the region's governments to work together todevelop coordinated environmental laws.  The commission'sexecutive committee, which consists of the presidents of eachcountry's congressional environment committee, meets every threemonths to discuss legislative initiatives in the areas ofenvironmental protection and economic development and takes backthe commission's recommendations to their colleagues for action.     For more information: Lic. Arturo Amiel Escobar, Congreso dela Republica, 9a, Avenida 9-44, Zona 1 Guatemala City, Guatemala.Tel: +5022-21-260/69.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991"Chemical Prospecting" Unites Costa Rica and US PharmaceuticalFirm     Merck & Co., Inc., one of the word's largest pharmaceuticalfirms, has agreed to pay a Costa Rican conservation group US $1million to provide Merck with plant and insect samples that mightlead to the development of new products.  The two-year renewableagreement is believed to be one of the first in the world, saidRodrigo Gamez, director of Costa Rica's nonprofit NationalInstitute of Biodiversity of Costa Rica (INBio).  INBio willsupply Merck with the chemical makeup of environmental samplesexhibiting desirable characteristics, such as freedom from fungusor other biologically destructive organisms.     The agreement calls for INBio to receive royalties from thesales of any marketable products that result from the research.INBio will use some of the US $1 million to pay for certainstart-up expenses, but part of the money, and later a percentageof the royalties, will be earmarked for Costa Rica's conservationefforts, including its famed national parks system, which covers25% of the country.     "This agreement gives Merck access to the amazing collectionof biological specimens found in Costa Rica, while working with anorganization that will protect and conserve the habitats fromwhich these samples are drawn," said Merck's Pamela Adkins.  Gamezsaid other large companies are interested in the idea of "chemicalprospecting," but he was reluctant to reveal who they were.  Hewas optimistic, though, that agreements such as the one with Merckcould become a lucrative source of income to the country.  "Thiscould become as lucrative as the country's coffee and bananaexports," he said.     The INBio, created in 1989 at the recommendation of the CostaRican government, is currently engaged in the inventory,identification, and classification of the country's diverse wealthof flora and fauna.  At least a half a million species oforganisms exist in Costa Rica's tropical habitat.     For more information: Dr. Rodrigo Gamez, Director, InstitutoNacional de Biodiversidad, Apdo. 22-3100 Santo Domingo, Heredia,Costa Rica.  Tel: +506-40-9287; Fax: +506-36-2816.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Hotline:     The Mexican government recently unveiled a three-year, US$460million environmental protection program for its northern border,which EWLA will examine in the next issue ... In July Venezuela'sgovernment created its first biosphere reserve, an area of eightmillion hectares in the Alto Orinoco region, to protect indigenouspopulations along with flora and fauna ... According toGuatemala's Ministry of Energy, unleaded gasoline is now availablein that Central American country ... For more information on anyarticle in this issue, contact the EWLA Hotline; Tel: +1-617-641-5108, Fax: +1-617-648-8707.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-23IA059-000325-B009-256http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev55.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000534 text/html 75317HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:02:52 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:40 GMTContent-length: 75128Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev55.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet October 23, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EC Breaks With Free Trade Dogma in Landmark Waste Accord (2106 words) ***PACKAGING*** OECD Report on Packaging Waste Favors Industry Solutions (546 words) Eco-Emballage Gains Approval to Handle Waste Recovery (666 words) ***NORMS AND STANDARDS*** Dutch Eco-Label Misses Deadline (482 words) No Green Christmas as EC Eco-Label Also Falls Behind Schedule (806 words) BAT Definition Changes as EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion (1223 words) ***ENERGY*** EC Finalizes US-Style Energy Labeling Scheme for Consumers (343 words) New Report Forecasts Lower CO2 Emissions for Great Britain (495 words) ***CLIMATE*** EC to Push for Methyl Bromide Controls, May Further Accelerate CFC Phaseout (464 words) German Regulations Will Limit Gas Station Emissions Starting 1 January (756 words) Study Finds Biofuel Drawbacks Outweigh Advantages (414 words) ***WATER QUALITY*** In Britain, Better Pay for Better Water (249 words) ***GENERAL POLICY*** Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax, Ignore Packaging Directive in EC Presidency (424 words) Europarliament Committee Wants Pollution Phase-Out Calendar (306 words) British Look at the Big Environmental Picture (424 words) Environment Budget Up in Spain, Down in Italy (571 words) Norway Proposes Green Troops for Environmental Cleanup (195 words) NEWS BRIEFS: (176 words) HOTLINE: (37 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992EC Breaks With Free Trade Dogma in Landmark Waste Accord     Shattering visions that Europe's giant single market forgoods should extend to trash too, the EC's environment ministerssealed an historic agreement on 20 October that allows governmentsto turn away shipments from other EC members of waste destined fordisposal in dumps or incinerators.     For the first time ever the ministers also convinced theEuropean Commission, the Community's executive, to let them basethe packet of new waste rules on the environmental provisions ofthe EC's treaty rather than on articles that promote open trade.The move represents an almost heretical departure from theCommission's long-standing dogma that waste should be consideredas a tradeable commodity, and opens the door for governments tooperate tougher national restrictions than the EC text foresees.     EC Environment Commissioner Karel Van Miert defended theCommission's capitulation as a one-off concession granted in theface of enormous political pressure for stringent waste traderestrictions from several governments, particularly France.  "Whatwe accepted was that the logic of the internal market should notprevail" when it came to combating "waste tourism," he said.  Thedecision did not signify any lasting change in the Commission'swaste policy, he argued.     But triumphant French officials hailed the executive'sdecision as a major victory for the environment over free trade,as well as a crucial precedent for the Community and, moreimportantly, efforts to reform the General Agreement on Tariffsand Trade (GATT).  "The text clearly gives preeminence toenvironmental protection over commerce," said French EnvironmentMinister Segolene Royal.     Secretary-General of the European Federation of WasteManagement Dieter Vogt told EWWE he expected that Germany wouldnow seek a similarly nonharmonized approach to proposed ECpackaging legislation so that Bonn could maintain its far-reaching national recycling rules, which other countries complainpose a barrier to imports.     Private court action seems likely to be launched sooner orlater to determine whether the text agreed by the Council ofenvironment ministers is legal under the EC's founding Treaty ofRome.  Although Van Miert told ministers that the Commission didnot intend to challenge its legality -- a categorical assurancethat took Commission waste experts by surprise -- waste industryofficials said they would consider taking legal action to have thelegislation annulled on the grounds that it breaches the treaty'sfree trade provisions.A Panoply of Rules     The regulation1, arduously negotiated over almost two years,amounts to a landmark panoply of new rules for controllingcross-border trade in waste not only within the 12-member bloc,but also with the rest of the world.     It covers virtually all kinds of waste except nuclearmaterials, for which the EC has separate rules.  A key aim is tobring EC practices into line with the requirements of the 1989Basel Convention, which seek to limit international shipments ofhazardous waste, so that the Community and national governmentscan ratify the pact.  Instead of distinguishing between hazardousand nonhazardous waste, the regulation tailors the severity of itscontrol mechanisms according to whether trash is destined forfinal disposal or for "recovery" -- meaning re-use, recycling, orincineration to produce energy.  Controls on waste for disposalare strictest.  The regulation bans the export of trash fordisposal to all countries except to European Free TradeAssociation (EFTA) states that are also parties to the BaselConvention.     Export of waste for recovery is also banned in principle butpermitted to three groups of nations: members of the Organizationfor Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) that have agreedto apply a common system of controls on movements of such wasteamong themselves (so far Japan has not); parties to the BaselConvention; and nations with which the Community concludesagreements or arrangements guaranteeing, as the Basel Conventionrequires, "environmentally sound" management of the waste at itsdestination.     The inclusion of this last group allows the Community tocontinue exporting recoverable waste, including toxic materials,to many developing or newly industrialized countries as well as toeastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.  (This will not applyto 69 countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Rim, towhich the EC has banned all waste exports at their request).  Theenvironmental organization Greenpeace accused the ministers ofhypocrisy over this decision, arguing that all waste exports tothese states should be prohibited since unscrupulous traders wereincreasingly using the pretext of recycling to dump hazardousgarbage in nations with inadequate import controls.     The export rules also fall short of meeting the EuropeanParliament's repeated calls for a halt to all EC waste exports tocountries outside the OECD, the club of rich industrializednations, from the year 2000.  Ministers went some way towardsatisfying those demands, however, by building in a series ofsafeguards.  All exports will be forbidden when a country has notspecifically consented to receive the waste or when authorities inthe EC nation of dispatch suspect it would not be treated in anenvironmentally sound way.     Moreover, the Commission will periodically review thethird-party agreements -- for the first time by the end of 1996 --and can propose a ban on exports if the environmental guaranteesturn out to be insufficient.     The regulation's innovation, however, is that for the firsttime it explicitly permits public authorities within the Communityto entirely ban or systematically block imports of nonrecoverablegarbage from other EC states.     The provision is inspired largely by France's decision inAugust to ban imports of household waste for disposal in Frenchlandfills after potentially hazardous hospital garbage wasdiscovered mixed in with some consignments from Germany.  Bonn'ssupport for the ban -- once it had swallowed its anger at the lackof warning from Paris -- was vital in getting the rest of theCouncil to back France's restrictive approach.  Having exported astaggering 700,000 metric tons of household waste to French tipslast year, Germany is now having to redouble efforts to build upits waste disposal capacity after years of public opposition toconstruction of new facilities.Accord Cites EC Treaty     The text agreed by ministers stipulates that, to put intopractice the principles that waste should be disposed of as closeas possible to its source and that both the EC and its individualmembers should become self-sufficient in waste disposal, "memberstates may take measures in accordance with the [EC] treaty toprohibit generally or partially or to object systematically toshipments of waste."     Governments will not be allowed, however, to keep out importsof hazardous waste from other EC countries that produce so littlethat it would be uneconomical to build their own disposalinstallations.  This stipulation is intended to ensure that smallstates like Luxembourg, Ireland, Portugal, and Belgium getcontinued access to specialized disposal facilities elsewhere inthe bloc.     Van Miert said he had insisted that ministers insert thereference to the treaty, the EC's equivalent of the Bible, to lendthe regulation a stronger Community dimension and avoid giving theimpression that it allowed the "renationalization" of wastepolicy.  "It was important to have the reference to the treaty sothat we were not just reimposing national boundaries," he toldreporters.  Van Miert also persuaded the Council to declare thatdecisions between member states would be taken in a spirit ofcooperation.     A Commission spokesperson said that inclusion of the treatyreference would act as a constraint on authorities' scope forimposing bans by underlining that their import policy had toobserve the treaty's golden rule of nondiscrimination between ECmembers.     Another official told EWWE the phrasing meant that memberstates would have to be able to justify import restrictions on thegrounds that the waste shipments posed a particular environmentalthreat to them or could be treated nearer to their source.  Thetext would lead to waste policy being conducted on a regionalbasis since it would be virtually impossible to justify blanketbans on imports at the national level, he said.     In practice, the question of whether measures taken are "inaccordance with the treaty" is certain to give rise to differinginterpretations and lead to legal disputes, officials believe.These would be for member states and industry to sort out, sinceministers refused to grant the Commission power to vet measuresbefore they take effect.     Van Miert's decision to temporarily ditch the Commission'straditional line on waste marks his first significant policydecision since taking over as the EC's environment chief in July -- a job many believe he will retain when the 17-strong executiveis reshuffled at the start of next year.  But by going along withthe Council's thinking and pledging not to attack it in court,Commission and industry officials say the studious Belgian clearlyexceeded the mandate his peers in the EC executive had given him.     This mandate envisaged that Van Miert should reserve theright for the Commission to take legal action, as it has done inthe past whenever the Council has approved waste legislation onthe basis of environmental provisions instead of single marketrules.  The Commission's position was bolstered in July when theEuropean Court of Justice, the bloc's supreme court, upheld theview that all waste, even nonrecoverable garbage, is a tradeablegood.  As EWWE went to press it was uncertain whether Van Miert'sCommission colleagues would accept his decision or order him tobacktrack.     Commission officials said he could have to eat his wordsanyway if the Court of Justice again supports the Commission'sdogma in two cases against the Council that are currently beforeit.  Underscoring his claim that the Commission's fundamentalapproach to waste policy had not changed, Van Miert said theexecutive would not withdraw the cases.  France's Royal toldreporters it was now time for the Court to fall in with theCouncil's view that waste could not be considered a marketablecommodity like any other.     Though waste experts at the Commission consider the Frenchban on imports of household waste to be illegal, they do notexpect the EC executive, feeling frail as a number of governmentstry to cut back its powers, to take any action against Paris forthe time being.     Ministers hope to formally adopt the regulation at their nextmeeting on 15-16 December if the European Parliament, which has tobe consulted about the change in the legal base of the measure,can deliver its advisory opinion by then.  The regulation wouldtake effect 15 months after it is passed, although Germany maycall for more time to change the rules in its devolved system.Governments have yet to agree on how soon the Community shouldratify the Basel Convention.     Waste industry officials predicted that extra administrativeburdens resulting from the tighter controls on waste tradeforeseen under the regulation could prove too burdensome forsmaller companies and force them to sell out to powerfulmultinational waste groups.  "I see Waste Management Inc. andBrowning-Ferris picking up market share," said Vogt of theEuropean Federation of Waste Management.Tracking the Waste     The regulation lays down elaborate notification andinformation procedures for virtually all waste movements, whichgive authorities a month or more to decide whether to approve orrefuse a shipment.  Ministers agreed at the last minute to requirethat movements within the Community of waste for recovery includedon the OECD's so-called "green" (nonhazardous) list must beaccompanied by a tracking document giving details of where it isdestined and when.     Belgium insisted that transporters should carry suchinformation with them to facilitate spot checks aimed at ensuringthat such waste is actually recovered.  Investigations in theFlanders region had shown that 30%-40% of all green waste sent forrecovery never arrived at its destination, raising suspicions thatit was simply being dumped, Belgian officials said.     Under the regulation, exports of green list waste forrecovery would be subject to no special controls unless animporting country required them.  But ministers, largely at theinstigation of The Netherlands, agreed that the Community shouldbe able to impose controls on such waste if it proves to havehazardous traits.  Greenpeace argues that although the listprimarily groups inoffensive materials like glass and paper, theUS has succeeded in persuading its OECD partners to include heavymetals that could prove harmful in certain circumstances.NOTES     1 Based on COM(90) 415 and COM(92) 121 - Proposal and amendedproposal for a Council Regulation on the supervision and controlof shipments of waste within, into, and out of the EC.  For moreinformation, contact: EC Council of Ministers, InformationService, 170 rue de la Loi, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2234 6111.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992OECD Report on Packaging Waste Favors Industry Solutions     A report on Reduction and Recycling of Packaging Waste,released this month by the Organization for Economic Cooperationand Development (OECD) and written by James McCarthy of the USCongressional Research Service, cites different definitions anddifferent ways of compiling data on waste and recycling as abarrier to effective waste reduction and management.  The OECDexpects the report to provide a common basis for regulators todevelop and refine national programs to reduce packaging waste.The report carefully avoids direct criticism of individual OECDmember countries, but seems to favor waste reduction programs thatplace the financial and logistical burden of reducing packagingwaste on industry rather than on local governments.     "There is no standard definition of recycling in use in mostOECD countries and certainly no definition accepted by the OECD asa whole," the report says.  "With many countries setting goals forrecycling ... and many wishing to make intercountry comparisons,improved data are now particularly important."  Recyclingstatistics vary widely by country; some include industrial waste,postconsumer waste, or contaminants, while others exclude them.Countries also use different methods to account for imported andexported waste.     The key issues mentioned in the report are:     * Application of the "polluter pays" principle.  Comparingthe US, New Zealand, and Japan (where "it appears that ... thegovernment will pay the additional costs of recycling throughlocal governments") with Europe (where "regulators favor placingthe financial and logistical burden of reducing waste onindustry"), the report concludes that "there are clear advantagesto holding industry responsible" for packaging waste management.If industry collects the materials, the report notes, there is anincentive to reduce waste generation through lighter materials orreusable packaging.  Governments are likely to be less responsivethan industry to market signals and may also run out of funding tosustain effective recycling programs.     * Primary opportunities.  Improved recapture rates can beachieved with all materials, according to the report, butcorrugated containers and glass offer the best opportunitiesbecause they do not pose major logistical problems and they makeup a large amount of packaging waste.     * Packaging restrictions.  The report points out that banningspecific packaging materials or using economic instruments tocurtail their use might be a controversial option.  "In freemarket economies, consumer choice is a fundamental value.Limitations of consumer choice are not taken lightly....Questions arise as to the extent to which other considerations(such as the protection of markets) have masqueraded as a concernfor protection of the environment," the report says.     The OECD is currently working on a report on packaging andfinancial instruments, OECD sources say.  That report could befinished and approved internally by the end of this year.  OneOECD source, however, termed the subject matter "very sensitive"(since the report will deal with taxation and other financialincentives and disincentives to waste reduction) and cautionedthat it might take longer.     To obtain a copy of Reduction and Recycling of PackagingWaste (OECD Environment Monograph Number 62), contact the OECDEnvironment Directorate, 2 rue Andre Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16,France.  Fax: +33 1 4524 7876.  In the US, contact the OECDPublications and Information Center, 2001 L Street NW, Suite 700,Washington, DC 20036-4910, USA.  Tel: +1 202 785 6323; Fax: +1 202785 0350.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Eco-Emballage Gains Approval to Handle Waste Recovery     Eco-Emballage, the system set up by the French private sectorto ensure compliance with France's new packaging decree, has nowobtained the official approval of French Environment MinisterSegolene Royal to contract to consumer goods producers andimporters.  To complete the approval process, it still needs thego-ahead from the Finance, Agriculture, and Industry Ministries,and the Secretary for Local Communities.     The so-called "Lalonde Decree" -- named for formerEnvironment Minister Brice Lalonde and set to take effect inJanuary 1993 -- gives companies a choice between setting up theirown retrieval and reduction schemes for packaging waste or joininga system such as Eco-Emballage.     Because of the financial and logistical problems associatedwith managing a nationwide collection, sorting, and recycling andenergy recovery program, many companies are expected to opt forparticipation in Eco-Emballage.  Wine and spirits producers,however, consider Eco-Emballage's participation fee too expensiveand have decided to establish their own system, Adelphe, to handlebottle glass recovery and recycling.  Adelphe has independentlyapplied for government approval and will have "a separateagreement" with Eco-Emballage to use some, but not all, of theother system's services, according to Eco-Emballage spokespersonNathalie Laine.  Eco-Emballage expects to charge 1 centime (0.2cents) per bottle during its first year of operation, and toincrease the fee during the following years.     Eco-Emballage came into existence in August and now groups 17companies, including Procter & Gamble France, Nestle France, andCoca Cola Beverages S.A.  In return for its participation fee,which is based on a company's annual packaging production, thesystem guarantees to develop sorting facilities and find recyclingor energy recovery outlets for the packaging waste it handles.     Eco-Emballage resembles the German packaging waste recoverysystem, Duales System Deutschland, but there are some keydifferences.  The French system relies on existing localgovernment collection authorities to collect and separate waste.It does not currently expect to install packaging return bins atthe point of sale, as the German packaging law requires.  Andunlike the Duales System, Eco-Emballage will be able to incinerateplastic waste for energy production.  The German system has hadproblems trying to find uses for the plastic waste it collects.     In September, Eco-Emballage signed an agreement with theDuales System to use the German system's "Green Dot" symbol tomark the product packaging of participating companies.  Thisagreement will allow companies selling into both the French andGerman markets to adhere to the collection and recyclingrequirements of both countries by participating in one of thesystems.  The two will jointly use the "Green Dot" to avoidconfusion.  Laine says that Eco-Emballage expects similar systemsin other neighboring countries to eventually use the same symbol.     Though the French decree does not set specific quantitativetargets, they are likely to follow once the proposed EC directiveon packaging waste is approved.  Quantitative targets will then"fill out the rest of the framework" provided by the EC, saysClaude Reny, a French packaging industry expert.  For the timebeing, "no one expects an effective system to come right away,"says Claude Perrin at the French National Federation of Waste andthe Environment, adding that full implementation "is likely totake several years."  Eco-Emballage's general target is to recover75% of all packaging.  It plans to recycle three quarters of thatamount and incinerate the rest.     With regard to the EC packaging proposal, which the EuropeanCommission issued in July, Great Britain, which is president ofthe EC's Council of Ministers until the end of this year, wantsthe 12 environment ministers to hold a first debate on it at theirnext scheduled meeting on 15-16 December in Brussels.  In themeantime, it aims to get negotiations on the proposed directivestarted between officials from the member states.     For more information: Nathalie Laine, Regards InternationalRP, 10 rue Pergolese, 75016 Paris, France.  Tel: +33 1 4417 9000;Fax: +33 1 4067 9488.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Dutch Eco-Label Misses Deadline     The national environmental label that the Dutch EnvironmentMinistry hoped to introduce next month will be several months latein coming.  Although the independent foundation charged withpreparing it is busy defining criteria for six product groups, thecriteria will not be ready until the end of this year, andeco-labeled consumer goods will be available in stores by spring1993 at the earliest.     Development and administration of the eco-label, initiatedthis summer by the Dutch Environment Ministry and the Ministry ofEconomic Affairs, is in the hands of Stichting Milieukeur, afoundation in which producers, retailers, consumers, andenvironmental groups as well as the government are represented.The foundation owns the label, defines the criteria used inawarding it, and controls its use.  In considering a productgroup, Stichting Milieukeur takes into account all phases of aproduct's life cycle, from production to the waste stage.  Foodand pharmaceutical products are excluded from the eco-labelsystem, because in these categories rules for product informationalready exist.     Establishing the criteria for the first six product groups istaking more time than expected, says H.G.M. Giezeman, generalmanager of the foundation.  Stichting Milieukeur is currentlyworking on criteria for cat litter, shower heads, paints, gypsumboard, light sources, and paper.  According to Giezeman, "we'll behappy if we set criteria for two or three of these product groupsby the end of the year.  Our plan is now to have the firstproducts with an eco-label in the stores sometime in the spring of1993."     Producers and consumers alike can make a request to setstandards for a certain product group, and the foundation hasalready received a few requests to include additional groups.After the criteria have been defined and published, a producer orimporter can present a product for examination.  The tests arecarried out by recognized certifying institutions, not by thefoundation itself.  If the applicant is awarded the label, he hasto pay Stichting Milieukeur a turnover-based amount for the use ofit.  The label is then valid for two to five years, depending onthe product group.     The Dutch label will show a hand holding a stamp that prints"Milieukeur," or "Eco-label."     The EC has also approved an eco-label scheme, but "theEnvironment Ministry and the Ministry for Economic Affairs optedfor a Dutch eco-label in addition to the planned EC label for tworeasons," says Giezeman.  "First, because the EC label is a longtime coming, and second, because it is quite possible that theEuropean standards will be less severe.  Of course we aim at onelabel, but with 12 parties involved, [less stringent] compromisesseem likely."     For more information: H.G.M. Giezeman, General Manager,Stichting Milieukeur, Eisenhowerlaan 150, 2517 KP Den Haag, TheNetherlands.  Tel: +31 70 358 6300; Fax: +31 70 350 2517.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992No Green Christmas as EC Eco-Label Also Falls Behind Schedule     Manufacturers hoping to win the EC's new environmental labelfor their "green" products will have to wait until the start ofnext year at the earliest.  Governments had hoped to get the firstgoods bearing the long-awaited eco-label into stores this fall,but the plans have fallen several months behind schedule,officials from the EC and interest groups told EWWE.  "The truthis that no products with an eco-label can appear in the shops in1992," said one.     Getting experts to agree on the cradle-to-grave criteria thatproducts should meet is proving slow going: to date they haveproposed standards only for washing machines and dishwashers.  Butthe scheme has also been held up by teething troubles in thecreation of a 12-strong "consultative forum" of nongovernmentalinterest groups that has to give its (purely advisory) opinionbefore environmental standards for each group of products can befixed.     Industry, the retail trade, consumer organizations, andenvironmental groups have three seats each on the forum.  Tradeunions are angry that industry and retailers have refused toinclude labor representatives in their delegations, whileenvironmental groups have withheld their nominations to the forumuntil they receive financial assistance for participating.Officials from the European Trade Union Confederation and theEuropean Environmental Bureau, an umbrella grouping of some 140environment nongovernmental organizations across the EC, told EWWEthat both issues seemed likely to be resolved fairly soon withhelp from the European Commission, probably enabling the forum tostart work by the end of November.     Theoretically the forum could have been launched without theenvironmentalists -- the other three groups have already nominatedtheir members -- but in practice this could have undermined theeco-label's credibility.  Such credibility is widely seen ascrucial to the success of the scheme as it seeks to bring order toa rash of claims to "environmental friendliness" by manufacturersand to help the growing numbers of concerned consumers choosegoods that are genuinely "greener."  Some officials hope that inthe long term it will supplant the national schemes operated byGermany and getting under way in France and The Netherlands,leaving Europe with a single eco-label.     If getting the first eco-labeled goods into the shops byChristmas seems out of reach, there are hopes that at least thecriteria for the initial product groups can be agreed by then.Proposed standards for washing machines and dishwashers weresubmitted by a British-led working group of EC experts in August.Once the consultative forum delivers its opinion on the proposal,the way will be clear for the Commission, aided by a committee ofEC government officials, to fix the standards.  Assuming the forumstarts work soon, "I still see some prospect that the firstcriteria can be adopted by the end of the year," one EC officialtold EWWE.  "At the moment we're still building the slipway tolaunch the ship, but once the year turns we're likely to seethings rolling forward quite quickly."     That should mean producers and importers of washing machinesand dishwashers will be able to apply for an eco-label early in1993.  Under the decentralized awards procedure decided bygovernments, producers or importers need apply in only one ECmember state for a label valid across the whole Community of 340million people.  Specially designated agencies in each of the 12countries -- due to be set up by early November -- will beresponsible for awarding or refusing the label on the basis of thestandards set at EC level.     After washing machines, paper is likely to be next in line toget the eco-label logo, a flower made up of 12 stars enclosing alop-sided "E."  EC officials said a Danish-led group of experts isclose to proposing criteria for various paper products.  Afterthat may come detergents, although controversy has erupted overthe criteria: self-styled "environmental detergent makers" havecriticized draft standards produced by a German-led expert groupas far too lax and have set up their own trade association toensure they get a say in the rest of the drafting process.Criteria for other goods are further off.  French-led work onstandards for paints and varnishes is months overdue and anItalian-chaired group is still debating norms for packagingmaterials.  Hairsprays, light bulbs, soil enrichers, and textilesare further back still in the pipeline.     For more information: European Commission,Directorate-General for Information, 200 rue de la Loi, B-1049Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 235 1111.  (The Commission's localoffices around the world can also help).  Raymond van Ermen,European Environmental Bureau, 26 rue de la Victoire, B-1060Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 539 0037.  Joseph Roevens,Environmental Detergent Manufacturers' Association, Industrieweg3, B-2390 Antwerp, Belgium.  Tel: +32 3 312 4373.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992BAT Definition Changes as EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion     Answering a key demand of industry, the European Commissionintends to remold its definition of "best" available techniques(BAT) for limiting pollution from industrial plants to takeaccount of the techniques' economic viability and environmentalbenefits.  The new definition will be written into the next -- andpossibly final -- draft of the European Commission's ambitiousupcoming directive on integrated pollution prevention and control(IPPC), a well-placed source in the EC executive told EWWE.  The17 Commissioners could formalize the proposal in the next fewweeks although it seems more likely that they will hold it overuntil early next year (see "Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax" onpage 13).  Once adopted by the Commission, the text will requirethe unanimous approval of the Council of EC environment ministersto get onto the Community's statute book, a process that seldomtakes less than a year.     The EC's industrial lobby has been irked that the approach toBAT taken by the Commission's directorate-general for environmentso far has not been based on cost/benefit analysis.  (This is acomplaint leveled at the department's work across the board by anincreasing number inside as well as outside the Commission.)  Thechange now envisaged means that the Commission's definition of BATwill be akin to what British requirements term BATNEEC ("BestAvailable Techniques Not Entailing Excessive Costs").  "Justbecause the latest technology can reduce emissions by 1% doesn'tmean you will have to use it if it costs three times as much,"explained the Commission source.  Though the concept of BAT willstill be multifaceted and open to differing interpretations, theexplicit inclusion of costs and benefits as factors to be takeninto account will make it easier for industry to resist beingforced into making frequent and expensive plant upgrades asBAT-driven standards are ratcheted up.     The IPPC directive would require new and existing plants in awide range of industries, from energy production to large-scaleanimal rearing, to obtain an operating permit from the relevantnational or local authorities.  It sets a framework of permitrules under which emissions to air, water, and soil would beconsidered in an "integrated" way, the aim being to prevent orminimize emissions and the creation of waste in all areassimultaneously instead of shifting pollution from one medium toanother.  BAT plays a central role in these rules.  The textstipulates that BAT must be used to limit emissions of a broadspan of substances listed in a technical annex, particularly thosethat are carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, toxic, persistent,or bioaccumulative, or that have a "bearing on global pollutionproblems."  BAT would also have to be employed to recover andrecycle waste where such operations made economic andenvironmental sense.Flexibility for Existing Installations     The permit would have to ensure that environmental qualityobjectives -- whether set at EC level or locally -- were met.Moreover, for each plant the competent authority would be requiredto fix limit values for emissions of substances listed in thetechnical annex.  The limits would have to be based on BAT and tobe at least as strict as those fixed by the Community (wherecommon EC standards exist).  There would be a degree offlexibility for existing installations, however: where they couldmeet the relevant environmental quality objectives without usingBAT, their emissions limit could be up to twice as high (thoughnot for the more harmful substances, and only if the lessstringent standards did not pose an unacceptable risk toecosystems or human health).     Any plan to increase emissions would require approval fromthe permit authority.  Furthermore, the authority would have theright to reconsider a permit at any time in the light ofdevelopments in BAT.  For plants where the relevant equipment hasbeen depreciated by 90% or more, the authority would be obliged totoughen up the permitted emission limit values into line withthose attainable by BAT at that time.  Operators unwilling orunable to upgrade an installation to meet revised standards wouldhave to close it within two years.     Under the proposed timetable -- which, if past experience isany indication, is quite likely to be stretched by ministers, atleast for some EC members -- the directive would enter force on 1July 1995.  New plants could not start operations after that datewithout a permit.  Existing installations would have until 1 July1999 to apply for a permit and until 1 July 2005 to comply withits requirements.  In practice this means that many plantsoperating today may not be affected by the rules.     Because BAT is about techniques, not technology, Commissionofficials say increasingly stringent BAT-led limit values could bemet in many cases through improved operating practices withouthaving to make costly new investments.  "The idea is not that(operators) would have to put in new equipment every five years,although that's not entirely impossible," said one.Industry Seeks to Freeze Permit Conditions     Industry is wary of such assurances, however, and wantspermits to be valid for a clearly defined period.  The Union ofIndustrial and Employers' Confederations of Europe (UNICE),European industry's lobby group, proposes that permit conditionsshould not be changed for 10 years "unless to do so would resultin a necessary improvement for the environment as a whole at anacceptable cost for an average operator in the relevant industrialsector."  It also rejects the yardstick of a 90% depreciation ofequipment, which in some countries could be achieved within aslittle as five years, Commission officials said.     The framework directive creates potential for an avalanche offollow-up legislation by stipulating that the EC executive maypropose Community-wide limit values based on BAT.  These wouldrequire approval by only a two-thirds majority in the Council ofMinisters.  The Commission source said, however, that hisinstitution was likely to hold off on proposing common normsunless differences in BAT-based standards from country to countryled to distortions in fair competition within EC industry.     Here, in brief, are other key details of the draft directive:     * Permit applications must detail measures proposed forpreventing or minimizing emissions and waste, as well as solutionsthat were rejected after consideration.     * Permits should normally be issued within six months of anapplication, though the deadline can be waived in certaincircumstances.     * The public must be given the right to comment onapplications for permits before the competent authority makes adecision.  The results of monitoring of plants' compliance withpermit requirements must also be available to the public.     * The Commission will organize information exchanges betweennational competent authorities on developments in BAT andmonitoring.     * A committee of member state representatives chaired by theCommission would have the power to revise EC emission limit valuesin the light of BAT developments.     Sectors covered by the permit requirement would be energy;metals production and processing; manufacture of nonmetallicmineral products; chemicals; waste management; pulp and paper;dyeing; treatment or finishing of fibers or textiles; productionof dyestuffs, pigments, paints, inks and enamels; production andtanning of leather; electrolytic or mechanical plating of metals;printing; application of paints and varnishes; food canning andprocessing; treatment or processing of animal waste; and intensiveanimal rearing.  In some sectors the requirement would apply onlyto installations above a certain size or annual throughput.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992EC Finalizes US-Style Energy Labeling Scheme for Consumers     Manufacturers and importers of a range of householdappliances sold in the EC will be required to supply prospectivecustomers with information on their energy consumption from thebeginning of 1994 at the latest.  Under the terms of a directive1recently finalized by the Council of Ministers, the EC'slegislative body, appliances will have to be labeled for theirenergy efficiency and product brochures must include energyinformation.     The scheme is the latest example of the Community's effortsto harness market forces in the cause of environmental protection.It aims to resuscitate a moribund energy labeling initiative thatdates from 1979 and was only ever applied to electric ovens.  Asgovernments look for new ways to limit carbon dioxide emissionsfrom power generation, the directive also seeks to prevent aproliferation of different national energy labeling schemes thatwould create new barriers to internal trade just as the EC and itsEFTA neighbors prepare to launch the giant European market on 1January 1993.     Initially, energy efficiency labels and information will berequired for seven categories of appliances:     * Refrigerators and freezers;     * Washing machines and driers;     * Dishwashers;     * Ovens;     * Water heaters and hot-water storage appliances;     * Lighting sources; and     * Air conditioners.     The text says, however, that other types of appliances couldbe added to the list later, though only those that use significantamounts of energy and afford adequate scope for improvedefficiency would be targeted.  The directive will apply whetherappliances covered are for use in the home or in nonhouseholdlocations such as restaurants and hotels.     The energy information must not only be displayed in shops,but it must also be provided in mail order catalogues and tocustomers who hire an appliance or buy one on hire-purchase terms.Details of information and labels and measuring methods will bespecified in "daughter" directives for each type of appliance tobe issued before the scheme begins.     For more information, contact: EC Council of Ministers, 170Rue de la Loi, 1041 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 234 6111.NOTES     1 Directive 92/75/EEC.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992New Report Forecasts Lower CO2 Emissions for Great Britain     In the same week that British Rail announced a substantialincrease in long-distance rail fares, the British governmentpublished figures suggesting road transport will overtake industryas the principal source of rising emissions by the year 2000.     In its Energy Paper 59, the British government details itslatest range of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions forecasts andexplains the methodology and models used to arrive at thesefigures for the first time.     The new figures update those given in Energy Paper 58,published in 1990, and suggest Great Britain will emit around 10%less CO2 than was feared in the earlier forecasts.  However, theyalso indicate existing policies will do far less than therecession or the closure of the coal industry to combat globalwarming.     On the basis of the figures given in Energy Paper 59, GreatBritain could readily bring its CO2 emissions back to 1990 levelsby the year 2000.  The forecast of Energy Paper 58 for the year2000 was 174 to 206 million tons of carbon in emissions; EnergyPaper 59 only speaks of 157 to 179 million tons, compared with 160million tons actually emitted in 1990.  The report suggests thatthe earlier estimates have allowed the British government to setitself achievable -- if not lenient -- emissions reductiontargets.  Achieving them is now made even easier by a recessionand a rapid switch away from coal-fired electricity generation topower from natural gas.     The difference between the long-term forecasts is somewhatsmaller; Energy Paper 58 speaks of 188 to 316 million tons, andEnergy Paper 59 stays approximately within that range, with aforecast of 188 to 285 million tons.  These forecasts reinforcethe arguments that overall emissions will continue to rise ifenergy prices continue to fall, and that the proposed EC carbontax is unlikely to affect the two most important future sources ofCO2 emissions: transport and domestic households.     While the British government recently launched a publiccampaign aimed at householders to encourage energy saving in thehome, its road policies are the subject of vocal criticism fromenvironmental pressure groups.     At the recent review of the 1990 government "white paper" onthe environment, "This Common Inheritance," British EnvironmentMinister Michael Howard said he would be "looking at road pricing"to limit environmental damage, but could not promise any firmproposals in this direction before the end of 1994.     Greenpeace UK says the British government "has no policy totackle the rising environmental cost of road transport....  Withthe price of oil around US $20 per barrel, the economic cost ofmotoring in the UK is now cheaper than at any time since beforethe oil crisis.  But the EC carbon tax won't translate into asignificant price rise at the petrol pump."     Copies of Energy Paper 59, published by the BritishDepartment of Trade and Industry, can be obtained from the Britishgovernment publisher, Her Majesty's Stationery Office.  Tel: +4471 622 3316.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992EC to Push for Methyl Bromide Controls, May Further Accelerate CFCPhaseout     The EC is to join the campaign by industrialized countries,aimed toward next month's conference of parties to the MontrealProtocol, to impose controls on production and use of methylbromide, a gas widely used for fumigating soil and crops.  Thedecision reflects mounting scientific evidence that the chemicalis a hugely powerful destroyer of atmospheric ozone.     Greece had resisted the move but backed down and fell intoline with the rest of the Community at a meeting of the EC'sCouncil of environment ministers in Luxembourg on 20 October.  Theministers agreed that the Community should press other parties tothe protocol to bring methyl bromide into the list of controlledsubstances at the Copenhagen conference.  The EC will push forproduction and use of the pesticide to be frozen at 1991 levels by1995, and for more far-reaching limits to be set next year.     Molecule-for-molecule, methyl bromide is estimated to bebetween 30 and 120 times more destructive to ozone than chlorine.A scientific panel set up by the UN Environment Program has foundthat cutting atmospheric methyl bromide concentrations by 10%would be as beneficial to the ozone layer as speeding up thephaseout of CFCs by three years.  But many developing countriesare resisting the idea of limiting use of the chemical, arguingthat alternatives for crop fumigation are costlier and lesseffective.     Differences between the 12 EC members meant ministers had toleave open the question of whether the Community should push atCopenhagen for an even quicker phaseout of other ozone eaters bythe industrialized world than it has envisaged hitherto.  LastMarch the EC agreed to urge a 1 January 1996 deadline for a totalhalt to production and use of CFCs, halons, carbon tetrachloride,and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (methyl chloroform) except for essentialuses for which no viable substitutes existed.  Now Germany,Denmark, and The Netherlands, with some support from Belgium,Britain, and the European Commission, want faster action.     Ministers decided to come back to the question at acoordination meeting just before the Copenhagen conference openson 18 November.  British Environment Secretary Michael Howard, whochaired the Council meeting, said governments had agreed that theMarch position "is not the last word."  EC EnvironmentCommissioner Karel Van Miert told reporters the situation wasstill evolving and the Community could even agree on a moreambitious position on methyl bromide before the conference begins.     After Copenhagen, the Council aims to decide at its nextmeeting on 15-16 December whether the EC should go faster inphasing out listed substances internally than whatever newtimetable emerges from the Montreal Protocol conference.  For moreinformation, contact: EC Council of Ministers, InformationService, 170 rue de la Loi, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2234 6111.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992German Regulations Will Limit Gas Station Emissions Starting 1January     Two regulations seeking to limit hydrocarbon emissions at gasstations in Germany will come into force on 1 January 1993.  Onemandates the introduction of the so-called "balancing" system,which cuts down on emissions from the filling of gas stationstorage tanks.1  In this system, a hose runs between the gasolinetruck and the tank.  Gasoline flows into the tank, while vaporsfrom the tank that would otherwise escape into the atmosphere arepumped back into the truck, then taken back to the refinery to bereprocessed.  This system is already widespread, and Josef Lerach,an expert at the German Environment Ministry, expects it to be"fully functional" within five years.  For new gas stations,compliance with the regulation has been mandatory since 14 October1992, while others have a grace period.     The second regulation2 provides for gas stations to installdouble-barreled hoses on their pumps to limit emissions frompumping gasoline to cars.  Gasoline flows out, while vapors arerecovered.  The regulation does not specify the technical details,leaving room for development.  It seems fairly certain, however,that German gas stations will not adopt the US-type vapor recoverysystem, which petroleum industry representatives have described as"unwieldy" (and which would also not work well in Europe becauseits effectiveness depends on a degree of filler neckstandardization that does not yet exist there).     New gas stations will have to comply with the regulation asof January, which makes it particularly important for the formerEast German states, where many new stations are opening up.Existing fuel stations will benefit from grace periods in inverseproportion to their size to allow time for retrofitting. Largestations, selling more than five million liters per year, havethree years to comply, medium-sized ones four years and small onesfive years. Existing stations selling less than one million litersa year are exempted altogether.  Annual checkups are mandatory;every five years, an independent expert must inspect the system.     At the EC level, an initiative to combat hydrocarbonemissions is taking shape at the European Commission in Brussels.The proposal, which could be ready by the end of this year orearly 1993, would generalize the requirements that Germany andalso The Netherlands (where regulations requiring the installationof vapor recovery systems were recently introduced) are alreadyputting into law.     The plan, which like all legislative proposals would requireapproval by the EC's Council of Ministers before it could enterthe statute book, marks the second stage in a Commission drive toreduce hydrocarbon emissions from the fuel distribution chain.The EC executive launched the first stage in August by proposing adirective3 that seeks to cut emissions of volatile organiccompounds (VOCs) from storage facilities and distribution tankersby 90% over 10 years through use of vapor recovery systems andother measures.     Behind the strategy lie the twin goals of cutting pollutionby low-level ozone and reducing people's exposure to potentiallyharmful localized vapors of benzene and other hydrocarbons.Hydrocarbons are one of the main precursors of ozone, creating theirritant gas when they react in sunlight with nitrous oxides fromvehicle exhausts.     To the chagrin of the oil industry, Brussels has followed theUS's lead in deciding against requiring large carbon canisters tobe fitted on cars.  Vapor recovery systems will be pump-basedinstead.  The Commission's current thinking is to make fuelthroughput, rather than location, the key criterion: large servicestations would be the primary targets for installing vaporrecovery equipment.     A minimum of technical harmonization would also be needed tolay down essential specifications for pump and car equipment andvapor recovery efficiencies.  Whether location will also become acriterion remains to be seen.  An earlier suggestion that stationsin towns of fewer than 50,000 inhabitants should be exempted seemsto have faded.  Germany, with its approach based on the throughputof fuel stations, opposes such exemptions on the grounds thatemissions pose a health risk wherever they occur, Lerach toldEWWE.  In Germany, the location of the gas station plays a roleonly in that stations in more polluted areas (as defined by theLander, or federal states) have one year less to comply.     For more information: Josef Lerach, Bundesministerium furUmwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit, Bernkastelerstrasse 8,5300 Bonn 2, Germany.  Tel: +49 228 305 2424.NOTES     1 Verordnung zur Begrenzung der Kohlenwasserstoffemissionenbeim Umfullen und Lagern von Ottokraftstoffen (20.Bundesemissionsschutzverordnung).     2 Verordnung zur Begrenzung der Kohlenwasserstoffemissionenbei der Betankung von Kraftfahrzeugen (21.Bundesemissionsschutzverordnung).     3 COM(92) 277.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Study Finds Biofuel Drawbacks Outweigh Advantages     A study commissioned by the German Federal Environment Office(Umweltbundesamt), and due to be released soon, comes to theconclusion that the environmental drawbacks of substitutingrapeseed oil for diesel fuel outweigh the advantages, and thatmoney subsidizing rapeseed production could probably be used tomore advantage elsewhere.     The study tries to take a comprehensive look at the differentways in which the use of rapeseed oil would affect theenvironment.  It takes into account emissions of variousgreenhouse gases -- in particular methane and nitrous oxide (N2O),fertilizer use and runoff in rapeseed production, and the extentto which rapeseed production (and the subsidies farmers can obtainfor it) interferes with a government program to let fields liefallow for a certain period to improve the soil.     Its overall conclusion is that while shifting to rapeseed oildoes have environmental benefits, they are too small to warrantsuch a shift.  Subsidies for rapeseed production, says JurgenLandgrebe, the author of the study, could be put to more effectiveuse elsewhere, for example in research on fuel-efficientautomobiles.  This conclusion is not likely to please theagricultural lobby, which considers rapeseed production one way ofhelping West European farmers at a time when they see agriculturalsubsidies in general to be in danger.     Experts at research institutes and in the German EnvironmentMinistry are currently commenting on the study, and challengingsome of the assumptions it is based on.  One main concern is thatthe N2O level that the study's conclusions are based on may be toohigh.  Reliable data on man-made N2O are relatively hard to comeby, compared with other greenhouse gases.     A second study, by Guido Reinhardt of the Institute forEnergy and Environmental Research (IFEU-Institute) in Heidelberg,Germany, focuses specifically on energy and carbon dioxide (CO2)emissions.  Reinhardt, whose study is being published separately,compared the overall amount of energy needed to produce enoughrapeseed oil or diesel to fuel a car for a given distance.  Hisconclusion is that, in terms of energy and CO2 emissions alone,the use of rapeseed oil offers significant environmental benefits,but that, if one wants to take all factors into account, more workneeds to be done.     For more information: Jurgen Landgrebe, Umweltbundesamt,Bismarckplatz 1, 1000 Berlin 33, Germany.  Tel: +49 30 8903 2083.Guido Reinhardt, IFEU (Institut fur Energie- und UmweltforschungHeidelberg GmbH), Wilhelm-Blum-Strasse 12-14, 6900 Heidelberg,Germany.  Tel: +49 6221 47670; Fax: +49 6221 476 719.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992In Britain, Better Pay for Better Water     Severn Trent Water Ltd., a British utility company, has madea deal with its employees that may give them a good reason tocomply with EC directives on water quality -- a persistent problemfor Great Britain -- and cut down on customer complaints.  Twoyears of negotiations between the company and the local unions ledto an agreement -- the first of its kind in the British waterindustry -- under which workers could see pay rises of up to 23%by 1994, provided that the quality of Severn Trent's waterimproves.     The basic annual pay increase for Severn Trent's maintenancestaff is 4%.  On top of that, workers have been promised "qualityperformance" bonuses of 5% in 1993 and 10% in 1994.  The bonusesare contingent upon the company's achieving its targets for waterand sewage treatment and customer services.     Severn Trent will not, however, tie the payments to theresults of water quality tests.  Instead, workers will receive thebonus when the number of customer complaints comes down.According to a Severn Trent spokesperson, "We want the waterpeople drink to be of the best quality.  The only way we know weare achieving this is if we see the number of complaints at aminimum."     Severn Trent employs 10,000 people and supplies water andtreats sewage for over 8 million customers in the BritishMidlands.     For more information: Terry Corner, Industrial RelationsManager, Severn Trent Water Ltd., 2297 Coventry Road, BirminghamB26 3PU, UK.  Tel: +44 21 722 4380.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax, Ignore Packaging Directive in ECPresidency     According to a preliminary list of priorities drawn up by theDanish Environment Ministry, Denmark intends to push for agreementon an EC-wide carbon/energy tax but to cold-shoulder proposals forcommon rules on packaging during its term as president of theCommunity's legislative body, the Council of Ministers, in thefirst half of next year.     Copenhagen is hoping EC environment ministers will approvethe highly controversial carbon/energy tax proposal1 during itssix-month presidency, a goal many will find ambitious given thetechnical complexity of the tax and the political raw nerves ittouches in several countries.  Denmark is eager for the Communityto bring in the tax to help meet its CO2 stabilization goal,without waiting for the US, Japan, and other Organization forEconomic Cooperation and Development (OECD) members to takesimilar measures, as the European Commission has proposed.     Conspicuously absent from the environment ministry's list ofeight priorities is the long-awaited directive on packaging2proposed by the Commission in July.  Denmark is among the memberstates that have criticized the draft proposal, which in itscurrent form would force Copenhagen to scrap its long-standing banon the sale of beverages in cans.     Denmark is, however, hoping the Council will reach agreementon introducing a voluntary eco-auditing scheme for industry3 (seeNews Briefs, page 16) and to approve tighter regulations on tradein endangered species.4     The other issues Denmark plans to work on are:     * A yet to be published proposal establishing a common regimefor integrated pollution prevention and control (see "BATDefinition Changes As EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion" onpage 7);     * A directive seeking to reduce volatile organic compound(VOC) emissions from fuel storage and distribution by 90% over 10years5;     * A directive toughening up emissions standards forincineration of hazardous waste6;     * The European Commission's fifth EC environmental actionprogram,7 and the possible development of further initiatives tocarry out the program; and     * The discussion and possible establishment of procedures tointegrate the concept of sustainable development into all sectorsof policy.     The ministry stresses that the list is tentative and may bechanged, possibly in order to accommodate any issues leftunresolved by Great Britain, the Council president until the endof this year.  However, the ministry considers eight issues themaximum number it can properly deal with over six months.NOTES     1 COM(92) 226.     2 COM(92) 278.     3 COM(91) 459.     4 COM(91) 448.     5 COM(92) 277.     6 COM(92) 9.     7 COM(92) 23.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Europarliament Committee Wants Pollution Phase-Out Calendar     An influential committee of EC parliamentarians is callingfor the bloc to draw up a timetable for completely phasing outemissions of pesticides, phosphates, nitrates, and otherpollutants.  The demand forms part of a resolution the EuropeanParliament's environment committee has drafted in response to thefifth EC environmental action program proposed by the EuropeanCommission, the Community's executive.  The program, the mainvehicle through which the EC intends to translate the Rio EarthSummit agreements into practice, will run from next year until2000, and seeks to make a start on shifting the Community economytoward environmental sustainability.     The full 518-member Euroassembly is expected to vote nextmonth on the resolution, which the Commission is not obliged toheed.  Spanish Socialist member Carmen Diez de Rivera, who draftedthe resolution, told EWWE the zero emissions calendar was one ofmany long-standing demands of the parliament that had so far beenignored.  Other suggestions in the paper include an EC-widereferendum on nuclear power, creation of a Community inspectorateto make sure environment rules are heeded, a standard tourist taxto fund environmental maintenance of resorts, and payment of partof the revenues from the proposed EC carbon/energy tax into a fundto help developing countries and East European states reduce theircarbon dioxide emissions.     The Community's Council of environment ministers is waitingfor the parliament to approve the resolution before finalizing itsown reaction to the program in December, the last proceduralhurdle to cross before the Commission can start implementing theplan.  The program forms a comprehensive strategy of measures toachieve defined environmental quality targets through cooperationamong all levels of society.     For more information, contact: Carmen Diez de Rivera,European Parliament, 97/113 rue Belliard, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.Tel: +32 2 284 5895.NOTES     1 COM(92) 23.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992British Look at the Big Environmental Picture     The British government has for the first time published acomprehensive collection of environmental statistics.  UKEnvironment covers a broad range of topics including climate, airquality, waste, soil and land use, water quality, the marineenvironment, coastal erosion, wildlife habitats, and populations.     Not much of the information in the compendium is new, butmuch of it has not been compiled into one reference source before.The publication of the report also fulfills a promise made in theBritish government's 1990 "white paper" on the environment, ThisCommon Inheritance, to make information about the environmentavailable to everyone.  Consequently, much of the information ispresented in the form of charts and maps for the layperson ratherthan detailed tables for the expert.     The report confirms that some environmental standards havedeteriorated.  Since 1980, sulphur dioxide concentrations havedeclined, but carbon monoxide emissions have risen by 30% over thesame period due to an increase in road transport.  For the samereason, nitrogen dioxide emissions have increased by 35% since1986.  CO2 emissions have remained reasonably static over the past10 years, but the relative importance of road transport has alsorisen substantially for this pollutant.     According to the report, accurate figures for the amountspent on protecting the environment do not exist in Great Britain.Nevertheless, the compendium estimates that some 14 billion pounds(US $22.4 billion), or about 2.5% of gross domestic product, wasinvested in environmental protection during 1991.  [Note: As usedin EWWE, the word billion equals thousand million or1,000,000,000.]     According to government estimates, the largest share of this,6.7 billion pounds (US $10.7 billion), went toward waterpurification and river pollution cleanup.  British water suppliersare currently implementing a program of changes required by ECdirectives governing water quality (see "In Britain, Better Payfor Better Water" on page 13).     Three billion British pounds (US $4.8 billion) was spent toreduce pollution arising from all types of waste material.Industry spent a further 2.4 billion pounds (US $3.8 billion) toreduce air emissions, and just under 2 billion pounds (US $3.2billion) went toward land cleanup and noise reduction.     Overall, around 60% of identifiable expenditure, or 8.8billion pounds (US $14 billion), was related to pollutionabatement.  Natural resource management took 24% and amenityimprovement 8%.  Less than 10% in total was spent on conservation,research, development, education, and training.     Copies of UK Environment, published by the British Departmentof the Environment, can be obtained from the British governmentpublisher, Her Majesty's Stationery Office.  Tel: +44 71 622 3316.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Environment Budget Up in Spain, Down in Italy     The Spanish Ministry for Public Works and Transport (which isalso in charge of environmental affairs) projects a 30% increase(over 1992) in Spain's environment budget for next year.  For1993, Vicente Albero, general secretary for water and theenvironment, will have a total amount of 160 billion pesetas (US$1.5 billion) to spend.  Water plays a major role in theallocation of those funds; substantial amounts will go towardcoastal improvements, the improvement of wastewater systems, and anew water management and protection plan.     If approved, this plan would create protected areas for allrivers, and would also set water prices to reflect the cost oftreating wastewater.  According to a recently released governmentreport, more than 100 Spanish rivers are -- at least in part --extremely polluted, groundwater is overexploited, and 40% of allSpanish reservoirs are entropied.  Under the proposed water pricepolicy, however, consumers in the driest and least-developedregions of Spain (which use the largest amounts of water) wouldhave to pay the most, a fact that has already provoked negativeresponses from consumers as well as some parliamentarians.     At the same time, the Department of Nature Conservation(Instituto Conservacion de la Naturaleza) within the Ministry ofAgriculture plans to invest more than 5 billion pesetas (US $48million) in the maintenance of Spain's nine national parks.  TheMinistry of Industry and Tourism, for its part, expects to investa total of 48 billion pesetas (US $457 million) in a program thatprovides, among other things, for grants to local administrationsand tourist industry companies that want to improve theirenvironmental performance.  Tourism is a key industry in Spain,and surveys have shown that environmental quality is important tovisitors from abroad.     In Italy, meanwhile, the environment budget seems set to godown by as much as three quarters, as the country is experiencingmajor economic and institutional problems.  This, at least, is thecabinet proposal that the Italian Parliament is currentlydiscussing.  If the budget is approved in its present form, fundsfor energy efficiency and renewable energy programs underEnvironment Laws 9 and 10 will be trimmed substantially; fundsearmarked for a CFC phaseout and the stabilization of greenhousegases would also suffer.  In the area of public transportation,the development of high-speed trains, which connect major cities,would continue to be funded, while funds for local publictransportation are expected to go down.  At the same time, no cutshave been proposed in the area of road building and roadtransport.     Substantial budget cuts will not help Italy's new environmentminister, Carlo Ripa di Meana, who has to accomplish three majortasks: reorganize the Ministry of the Environment, badlyunderstaffed given its tasks and compared with other ministries;improve Italy's system of enforcement of environmentalregulations;  and fight for funds.  In the latter area, at least,there may be two partial solutions.  For one thing, Ripa di Meanahas managed to retrieve funds that his predecessor, GiorgioRuffolo, did not spend; normally, such funds would go back to theTreasury.  The 30% left over from last year's budget will now beavailable in addition to this year's budget.  Ripa di Meana isalso considering the introduction of "green" taxes and charges(for example on land use), and the setting of fees for water useand waste management to reflect their actual cost.  Revenue fromthese sources may also help offset budget losses.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Norway Proposes Green Troops for Environmental Cleanup     The Norwegian government has announced a preliminary plan toestablish an elite force of "green troops" to fight national andinternational environmental disasters.  The troops would be drawnfrom the regular Norwegian army and would be trained to deal withoil spills, natural disasters, and nuclear disasters, and to leadpost-war cleanup efforts.     Gabriel Lund, secretary of the joint defense-environmentministerial working group that proposed the new program, toldEWWE's sister publication, the Global Environmental Change Report(GECR), that the government will hold a hearing to discuss theplan on 16 November 1992 and will publish its decision inDecember.  The plan must then be approved by Parliament.     Lund told GECR that troops would be deployed in two majorunits: an emergency unit of 500 to 600 soldiers, prepared torespond to any disaster within 48 hours, and a follow-up force of1,100 that would be involved in longer-term cleanup efforts.  Lundsaid that international requests for green troop assistance wouldbe handled through diplomatic channels and cleared with the UN.     For more information, contact the Norwegian Defense MinistryInformation Office.  Tel: +47 2 402 300 or +47 2 402 310.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992NEWS BRIEFS:     Former EC Commissioner for the Environment Carlo Ripa diMeana is threatening to set up a European environment agency withnon-EC countries unless the bloc's leaders agree at their Decembersummit in Edinburgh on where to site the currently homeless ECEnvironment Agency.  The colorful Ripa, who now heads Italy'senvironment ministry, exploded when his French and Spanishcounterparts blocked attempts to get agreement on a location forthe agency at the EC environment ministers' recent meeting inLuxembourg.  He also indicated that Italy and France would sooncome forward with new initiatives for reducing carbon dioxideemissions...  Officials say prospects have improved that ECenvironment ministers will agree in December to create a voluntaryscheme to encourage eco-auditing by industry after Germany did notrenew threats to block the initiative...  Belgium'sFrench-speaking Green party has put forward detailed proposals foreco-taxes on packaging, throw-away razors, pesticides, andnon-recycled paper, but an agreement in principle, reached on theissue by the country's major parties this summer, now seems indoubt...Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992HOTLINE:     Contact the EWWE Hotline for more information on any newsitem covered in this issue.  Tel: +1 617 641 5128 (Boston); +32 2230 8978 (Brussels).  Fax: +1 617 648 8707 (Boston); +32 2 2308558 (Brussels).Back to Headline List WT03-B36-24IA059-000325-B009-302http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev25.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000633 text/html 58513HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:04:15 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:29 GMTContent-length: 58324Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev25.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNet February 8, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GREENHOUSE DISPUTE CLOSES THE CURTAIN ON BUSH'S ENVIRONMENTAL HONEYMOON (NEWS ANALYSIS) (842 words) NEW EPA RULE THREATENS VIRGINIA COAL PROJECTS (500 words) SRP: AN ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH PARK? (358 words) DOE LOOKS TO VITRIFY ITS WASTE PROBLEMS AT THE SAVANNAH RIVER FACILITY (864 words) NSWMA APPEALS ALABAMA HAZARDOUS WASTE COURT CASE (375 words) SENATE ENERGY HEARS KEY DOE NOMINEES (161 words) CRAY WINS $66 MILLION SUPERCOMPUTER CONTRACT (62 words) STATE RECYCLING FUNDING TO CLIMB IN 1990 (54 words) USDA EARMARKS WATER QUALITY R&D FUNDS (73 words) NATURE CONSERVANCY BUYS GRAY RANCH (109 words) QUOTABLE (75 words) LUKEN ANNOUNCES RETIREMENT, DECISION LIKELY TO INFLUENCE RCRA DEBATE (96 words) HOUSE PANEL APPROVES TIGHTER STANDARDS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION (78 words) JONTZ LAUDS BUSH FORESTRY PROPOSAL (208 words) DELAWARE'S ROTH PUSHES `CLUNKER' INCENTIVE FOR EPA (422 words) LOCAL ANGLE TOPS ENVIRONMENT AGENDA (623 words) EPA TARGETS PESTICIDE CONTAINERS: Farmer cooperation tops 90 percent (466 words) COALITION URGES $1 BILLION LAND PURCHASE PROGRAM (358 words) MARCH CALENDAR OF ENVIRONMENT EVENTS (789 words) ********BEYOND THE BELTWAY: NEWS FROM THE STATES******** ARIZONA (97 words) NEW JERSEY (81 words) PENNSYLVANIA (64 words) MARYLAND (54 words) CONNECTICUT (142 words) NEBRASKA (106 words) PENNSYLVANIA (101 words) ILLINOIS (61 words) TECHNOLOGY POLICY IN THE 1990s: THE SHIFT FROM MILITARY TO CIVILIAN TECHNOLOGIES, A CONFERENCE (308 words) WARNING (72 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990GREENHOUSE DISPUTE CLOSES THE CURTAIN ON BUSH'S ENVIRONMENTALHONEYMOON (NEWS ANALYSIS)by Dennis WamstedThe tenuous year-old truce between President Bush and theenvironmental community was breached, perhaps irreparably, thisweek as long-simmering differences between the two sides onglobal warming, the pending reauthorization of the Clean Air Actand Bush's no-net-loss policy on wetlands all surfaced in heatedpublic disagreements. The spark for the public split was thepresident's speech before the meeting of the IntergovernmentalPanel on Climate Change (IPCC) here in Washington.In his speech, Bush stressed the U.S.' commitment to the IPCCprocess and "aggressive and thoughtful action on environmentalissues." As part of this commitment, Bush announced his intentionto host a White House conference on science and economic researchon the environment. In addition, the president reminded thedelegates of the U.S.' budgetary commitment to environmentalprotection. The new budget includes more than $2 billion in newspending for environmental protection, he said, with $1 billionearmarked specifically for the U.S. Global Change ResearchProgram."That commitment, by far the largest ever made by any nation,reflects our determination to improve our understanding of thescience of global change," Bush said. "We are working with ourneighbors around the world to enhance global monitoring and datamanagement, improve analysis, reduce the uncertainty ofpredictive models and conduct regular reassessments of the stateof science."Beyond this global climate change R&D initiative, theadministration has "already taken many steps...that bring botheconomic and environmental research. Steps that make sense ontheir own merits in terms of responsibility and efficiency, whichhelp reduce emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and carbon dioxideand other pollutants now entering the atmosphere."Still, the president refused to endorse immediate action tofreeze or reduce carbon dioxide emissions, the principalgreenhouse gas, in an effort to slow the projected rise in globaltemperatures in the next 50 years or so. "You're called upon todeliver recommendations which strike a difficult yet criticalinternational bargain: a convergence between global environmentalpolicy and global economic policy," Bush told the IPCC delegates."Human activities are changing the atmosphere in unexpected andin unprecedented ways," Bush continued, but many questions remainunanswered. "Together, we have a responsibility to ourselves andthe generations to come to fulfill our stewardship obligations.But that responsibility demands that we do it right."Some may be tempted to exploit legitimate concerns for politicalpositioning," Bush added, concluding: "Our responsibility is tomaintain the quality of our approach, our commitment to soundscience and an open mind to policy options."Bush's refusal to call for immediate action was assailed by theenvironmental representatives at the IPCC meeting. Thepresident's speech "was just a lot of hot air," said Dan Becker,the director of the Sierra Club's Global Warming & EnergyProgram. Bush's promise to plant a billion trees a year in theU.S. is akin to throwing sponges into Prince William Sound toclean up the oil spilled by the Exxon Valdez tanker. "Sununuwon," Becker added, referring to the intra-administration debateregarding global warming in which Sununu has taken the go-slowapproach.The speech had "no new direction, no substantive steps" to attackthe global warming problem, added Brooks Yeager, vice presidentof government relations for the National Audubon Society, whosaid that the environmental community had hoped Bush wouldendorse a CO2 reduction policy. Instead, the administrationcontinues to oppose even the automotive CO2 emissions standardincluded in the Senate's version of the pending Clean Air Actreauthorization. A national policy on CO2 reductions must be thefirst order of business, continued Rafe Pomerance, who isaffiliated with the World Resources Institute.These concerns were echoed by a number of the environmentalcommunity's strongest supporters in Congress. The president'sspeech was disappointing, Sen. Tim Wirth (D-Colo.) said. "Weought to be doing a lot more right now," he said after Bush'spresentation, citing in particular the need for additionalemphasis on energy efficiency measures, alternative fuels andpopulation control. I am concerned that the administrationappears "unable to move forward."Later, in a speech on the Senate floor, Wirth urged hiscolleagues to act--even if the administration refuses tocooperate. "It bewilders me why we do not take a leadership role.It bewilders me why the steps that are so obvious to be taken arenot begin taken."Wirth's comments were seconded by Sen. Joe Lieberman (D-Conn.),who blasted Bush for his inaction. "Having shed his alleged wimpimage in the conduct of foreign affairs, the business ofresurrecting that wimp image in the conduct of our environmentalpolicy."Similar concerns were broached this week regarding theadministration's commitment to clean air. "[Bush] has abandonedhis commitment to clean air for all Americans and even threatenedto veto the bipartisan compromise...now pending in the Senate,"Richard Ayres, the chairman of the National Clean Air Coalitionsaid in a statement. "The administration is attempting to force aback-room negotiation aimed at eliminating every singleimprovement the Environment Committee made in the administrationbill."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NEW EPA RULE THREATENS VIRGINIA COAL PROJECTSby Kennedy MaizeA unilateral decision by EPA Region III regarding PSD orprevention of significant deterioration requirements for newcoal-fired generating facilities, "unless quickly corrected, willdelay and may prevent the development of generating capacityneeded for continued reliable electric service in Virginia,"Daniel Bird, Virginia's Coal and Energy Commission chairman,warned in a letter to Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) late last month.In addition, Bird wrote, the region, which covers Virginia, isbeing tougher on pollution control technologies than Region IV,which covers North Carolina. As a result, "investment ingenerating projects and the resulting employment and economicbenefits may shift from Virginia to North Carolina."According to Bird, prior EPA policy based air modeling for thePSD program, which governs the construction of new pollutionsources in clean air areas, on the assumption that sources wouldemit at their historic rates. But EPA unilaterally decided thatmodeling should instead be based on the maximum allowable rate."This policy change was made without notice to the public and didnot become apparent until project developers began filing airpermit applications during 1989," wrote Bird. "In March of 1989,EPA advised the states that modeling on the basis of allowableemissions would be required by October 1989."Bird noted that many cases in Virginia show that "a wide gulfexists between actual and maximum allowable emissions. Therefore,EPA's shift in policy represented a drastic change that wouldbecome effective while a number of projects that had been plannedand sited under the previous policy were in the process ofdevelopment."Bird said he understands the reason for the EPA shift: The agencyhas no assurance that emitters will not increase emissions. ButBird wants EPA to come up with a transitional approach that doesnot harm projects started under the old rules. "I would emphasizethat the commission does not quarrel with EPA's apparentobjective," Bird continued. "However, this rule's unnecessarilylarge impacts and the lack of adequate notice...requires a promptadjustment in this policy."Bird also said EPA Region III is "unduly aggressive" inimplementing "Best Available Control Technology" (BACT)requirements. The EPA region, Bird wrote, "appears to be seekingtechnologies providing 95 to 99 percent SO2 removal that have notbeen adequately demonstrated to be effective and economic for thesame type of generating unit." But Region IV next door is notrequiring such stringent removal levels, Bird added.Region III's ardor, said Bird, is also out of step with the BushAdministration's proposals to cap sulfur dioxide emissions andrequire offsets for new units. "Assuming that a cap is retained,"Bird wrote, "total SO2 emissions will be controlled regardless ofhow BACT requirements are applied." With caps, Bird argued, "nopurpose is served by forcing developers to a higher level ofcontrol on new units than they consider economic. On thecontrary, a key principle underlying the president's proposals isthat the control be achieved at the lowest cost."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990SRP: AN ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH PARK?by Danialle WeaverAIKEN, South Carolina--The Department of Energy's Savannah Riverfacility, located on 192,000 acres of reforested farmland inwestern South Carolina, is a study in contrasts.The site boasts state-of-the-art waste processing technology inthe Defense Waste Processing Facility (see story on page two), anearly complete facility that will render millions of gallons ofdeadly defense wastes into a harmless glass matrix. At the sametime, the site serves as home to a weapons production technologylittle changed in nearly four decades.Like many of DOE's other weapons facilities, the site has beendesignated a National Environmental Research Park that serves asa refuge for five endangered species, including four birdspecies--bald eagles, wood storks, red cockaded woodpeckers andperegrine falcons--and one fish species, the short-nosedsturgeon.The Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, operated on the site bythe University of Georgia, has a large environmental monitoringeffort to study the long-term health of the site's wildlife. Infact, because the site's 320 square miles represent a virtualoasis of greenery compared to the surrounding cropland, the DOEfacility is an excellent place to study the effects of geneticisolation and natural selection in closed populations.At the same time, the site also contains damnable examples ofenvironmental practices that have long since been disavowed,notably seepage basins used for the land disposal of liquid low-level wastes and low-level solid waste buried directly into theground.One of the site's Carolina Bays--formed when the glaciers of theice age receded--was formerly home for several typical SouthCarolina species of flora and fauna, including Venus flytraps andalligators. But heavy metals and volatile organics, such astrichloroethylene, from the nearby seepage basins seriouslycontaminated the bay, which is now nicknamed "Lost Lake" byworkers at Savannah River.Environmental restoration activities, including removing severalfeet of lake mud and draining some of the lake water, havehelped, and life is slowly returning to Lost Lake. Seepage basinsand low level waste burial grounds are being cleaned up, cappedwith a clay cap impermeable to rainwater and covered with newvegetation.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990DOE LOOKS TO VITRIFY ITS WASTE PROBLEMS AT THE SAVANNAH RIVERFACILITYby Danialle WeaverAIKEN, South Carolina--In 1992, workers at the Department ofEnergy's Savannah River site hope to write a new and hopefulchapter in the long history of the U.S. struggle to find ways tosafely store the nation's most deadly radioactive waste for thethousands of years it remains hazardous to human life and theenvironment.The solution, says Lucien Papouchado, manager of waste managementprograms at Savannah River for Westinghouse Savannah RiverCompany, lies in vitrifying or glassifying the waste. Similartechnology has already been successfully adopted in France andBelgium.Although several waste vitrification facilities are slated tobegin operations in the U.S. in the 1990s and beyond, SavannahRiver's $1.2 billion Defense Waste Processing Facility isscheduled to come on-line first. The wastes generated by nearly40 years of plutonium and tritium production at the site accountfor 56 percent of the radioactivity in DOE's inventory of high-level defense waste, according to recent estimates by the GeneralAccounting Office.It took "15 years of R&D" to come up with the processes that willbe used at the DWPF, said Richard Begley, director of theSavannah River Laboratory and a vice president for WestinghouseSavannah River Company, the facility's operating contractor.Bechtel served as architect-engineer for the facility andMorrison-Knudsen served as the primary construction contractor.Groundbreaking was held in late 1983.Westinghouse and DOE plan to begin a series of "cold" processingruns with simulated radioactive waste in September. Once thefacility begins operating, it will take approximately 15 years tovitrify the 34 million gallons of liquid high-level waste alreadystored at Savannah River.The majority of DOE's liquid high-level defense waste isgenerated in the process of recovering the uranium and plutoniumfrom the reactors' spent fuel rods. Before they ever reach thevitrification facility, spent fuel rods are soaked in nitric acidto dissolve the cladding. Then, the fuel itself is dissolved inan aqueous solution of nitric acid, and an organic solvent isused to separate the nitrates of uranium and plutonium from thefission products.Before the waste is placed in storage tanks, the acid isneutralized with sodium hydroxide, and the radioactive elementssettle in a thick sludge on the bottom of the tanks. The liquidon top, called supernate, makes up about 90 percent of the wasteand consists of sodium nitrate and sodium nitrite.The supernate, or salt solution, will then be evaporated at theSavannah River saltstone facility, which is expected to start upthis year. The remaining "saltcake" will be treated to removecesium-137 and strontium, which will then be sent to the DWPF.The saltcake will be mixed with cement, fly ash and furnace slagand then pumped into a concrete storage vault, where it will cureinto a stable concrete. After the vault is filled, it will becapped with clean concrete and backfilled with earth to isolateit from rain and weathering.At the vitrification facility, the waste will first be treatedwith chemicals to remove the mercury introduced duringreprocessing. Then, the waste will be mixed with groundborosilicate glass, fed into a melter and heated to 2,100 degreesFahrenheit. The melter is designed to turn a gallon of the wasteslurry into about four pounds of glassified waste at a rate of228 pounds per hour. It will take about 16 hours to fill onecanister 85 percent full, according to Steve Sheetz, a seniorWestinghouse engineer.Particles will be scrubbed from the waste gases generated by themelter by water that is shot out of scrubber nozzles at very highspeed, trapping radioactive particles and separating them fromthe gases. Any remaining particles will be caught by highefficiency filters and a bed of sand.From the melter, the waste will flow into stainless steelcanisters that are 10 feet high, 2 feet in diameter, and 3/8-inchthick. The canisters, which weigh about 1,100 pounds empty, willweigh approximately 4,800 pounds when filled, according toSheetz. The canisters hold about 3,700 lb. of glass. A temporaryplug will then be inserted, and the canisters decontaminated toDepartment of Transportation standards using a slurry of groundglass, Sheetz continued. Once they are decontaminated, thecanisters will be permanently sealed with a steel plug forced inplace by 70,000 pounds of hydraulic pressure. A 23,000 ampcurrent will then be applied to the plug for about two seconds,resulting in a weld "far superior" than those from conventionalwelding techniques, Sheetz said.The canisters will then be transferred to a temporary glass wastestorage building, which Sheetz manages, where they will be storedin below-ground concrete vaults until they can be shipped to afederal repository.All major operations at the facility will be performed by remotecontrol. Before equipment was installed in the facility,engineers created full-scale mock-ups of the equipment to ensurethat it could be maintained and repaired via remote control.Equipment can be removed and replaced using an overhead crane orrepaired in place using mechanical arms placed at strategiclocations along the walls of the facility.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NSWMA APPEALS ALABAMA HAZARDOUS WASTE COURT CASEThe National Solid Wastes Management Association has appealed afederal District Court ruling that upheld Alabama's controversialhazardous waste disposal legislation, the association announcedlate last month. The court, in a January 12 ruling, upheld a lawthat enables the state to ban shipments of hazardous waste fromstates that do not have waste disposal facilities of their own.NSWMA General Counsel Bruce Parker challenged the logic used bythe court in its ruling. "The issue of whether or not states havecomplied with federal law to deal with their own hazardous wastescannot be used as independent grounds for allowing a state likeAlabama to violate the Constitution," Parker said, adding: "It isour belief that the January 12 opinion did not address all of thelegal points we challenged in our suit and it improperly appliedsome basic tenants of constitutional law."The association is also concerned about the decision's impact onthe much-delayed Superfund clean-up program, Parker continued."We are sympathetic with Alabama's concerns that other states maynot have completed the required hazardous waste capacityassurance process, but we can not allow Alabama to violate theConstitution in an attempt to force other states to develop theirown hazardous waste management plans."The association and Chemical Waste Management Inc., the owner ofthe Emelle disposal facility affected by the decision and a jointparty to the lawsuit, filed their appeal with the Eleventh U.S.Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta, along with a request for anexpedited briefing and hearing schedule.The court's decision could have a negative impact on ChemicalWaste Management's stock, Debra Coy, an analyst with WashingtonAnalyst Corporation, warned in a recent issue of `CapitalComments.' To date, the decision has not hurt the company's stockprice, Coy wrote. "However, we believe there's a good chance thedecision could be upheld, setting a precedent for other statesthat want to restrict imports of waste, both solid and hazardous.We also believe there could be an impact on landfill earnings ifsome of the waste banned from the site is diverted tocompetitors' landfills. We believe the recent courtdecision...may be more worrisome to Chemical Waste Managementthan most industry analysts have anticipated."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990SENATE ENERGY HEARS KEY DOE NOMINEESTwo Department of Energy nominees received a friendly receptionfrom members of the Senate Energy & Natural Resources Committeeduring a joint confirmation hearing on Monday.Highlighting his technical training, managerial capability andpublic service experience, John Bartlett, nominated as directorof DOE's Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, pledged"open, frequent and effective interactions with Congress" andsaid he "hopes to achieve respect for DOE's management" of thewaste program during his tenure. Before becoming a DOE consultantin November 1989, Bartlett directed energy and environment workfor The Analytic Sciences Corporation of Reading, Massachusetts.Robert Gentile, nominated to become DOE's assistant secretary forFossil Energy, told the committee: "We're entering a new era inwhich environmental rhetoric is being replaced by environmentalaction yet we must at the same time be assured of an adequatesupply of energy at reasonable costs." Gentile was previously thedirector of the Department of the Interior's Office of SurfaceMining.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990CRAY WINS $66 MILLION SUPERCOMPUTER CONTRACTCray Research has won a contract from the National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration to supply the agency with twosupercomputers in a deal valued at $66.1 million over five years.Cray will be paid $10.7 million this year for the supercomputersystems. The two machines will be used to improve computercapability at the agency's National Meterological Center nearWashington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990STATE RECYCLING FUNDING TO CLIMB IN 1990Twenty states have budgeted more than $900 million to fundrecycling programs over the next two years, according to a surveycompiled by Recycling Times, which is published by the NationalSolid Wastes Management Association. The funding includes nearly$600 million earmarked by the state of California to boost itsin-state recycling efforts.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990USDA EARMARKS WATER QUALITY R&D FUNDSThe U.S. Department of Agriculture has earmarked more than $17million for programs aimed at improving water quality inagricultural watershed areas in 37 states, Agriculture SecretaryClayton Yeutter announced last month. "This is a part of USDA'saccelerated water quality effort for the 1990s and active supportof the president's 1990 Water Quality Initiative," Yeutter said."We're scheduling 37 hydrologic units areas this year andanticipate another 37 areas in 1991."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NATURE CONSERVANCY BUYS GRAY RANCHThe Nature Conservancy has purchased the 321,703-acre Gray Ranchin southwestern New Mexico, the Arlington, Virginia-basedorganization announced last week. The purchase, for anundisclosed amount, of the 502.6-square-mile parcel is believedto be the largest private land acquisition in conservationhistory. "The purchase of Gray Ranch is a milestone inconservation history," said John Sawhill, the incoming presidentof the Conservancy. "Few intact natural systems of this caliberexist in the world today. The Gray Ranch also represents thefuture trend for The Nature Conservancy and its partners. Totruly insure our natural world for future generations, we aredeveloping creative ways to safeguard much larger landscapes."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990QUOTABLE"If we put a roadblock in front of exporting to countries likeCanada, it's going to have to come to places like Alabama. Wehave enough waste in Alabama. We don't want anymore. We want itto go somewhere else."--Rep. Sonny Callahan (R-Ala.) speaking at the first hearing thisyear before the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee ontransportation and hazardous materials regarding reauthorizationof the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990LUKEN ANNOUNCES RETIREMENT, DECISION LIKELY TO INFLUENCE RCRADEBATERep. Thomas Luken (D-Ohio), the chairman of the House Energy andCommerce transportation and hazardous materials subcommittee,announced late last month that he would not seek reelection thisfall. The announcement, which was something of a surprise, couldhave a significant impact on reauthorization of the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act, which is now pending beforeLuken's subcommittee.The 64-year-old's decision to retire will open a coveted seat onthe Energy and Commerce Committee when the 102nd Congressconvenes next year. Chairmanship of Luken's subcommittee willlikely be assumed by Rep. Al Swift (D-Wash.).Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990HOUSE PANEL APPROVES TIGHTER STANDARDS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALSTRANSPORTATIONThe House Energy and Commerce transportation and hazardousmaterials subcommittee last week unanimously approved legislation(H.R. 3520) that would tighten existing regulations on thetransportation of hazardous wastes. The bill would authorize thehiring of 200 additional federal inspectors to enforce the newregulations, which would require the Department of Transportationto register companies that ship hazardous waste and requirecompanies that haul extremely hazardous material, such asradioactive wastes and poisons, to obtain federal safetypermits.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990JONTZ LAUDS BUSH FORESTRY PROPOSALThe Bush Administration's plan to plant one billion trees at acost of $175 million should be linked with a reduction in thenumber of trees cut on public lands in the Pacific Northwest,Rep. Jim Jontz (D-Ind.) said last week. "With the president'sproposal, trees are finally receiving the attention they deserveas the most cost-effective means of addressing the global warmingproblem," Jontz said. "But to be responsible stewards of ournation's environment, we must also take steps to stop thedestruction of our remaining old growth ancient forests. It isironic that at the same time the president proposes to do abetter job replanting trees where they were once cut, we areliquidating our most magnificent forests faster than everbefore."Jontz, a member of the House Agriculture forests, family farmsand energy subcommittee, is the sponsor of legislation (H.R.2144) that would significantly boost federal support for urbanforestry initiatives. The bill, which passed the House inNovember and is now pending before the Senate AgricultureCommittee, would establish a matching fund plan for urban areasinterested in setting up forestry programs. The fund would giveinterested urban areas a dollar in federal money for every dollarraised from local sources.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990DELAWARE'S ROTH PUSHES `CLUNKER' INCENTIVE FOR EPASen. William Roth (R-Del.) introduced legislation (S. 2049) lastweek that would authorize the Environmental Protection Agency toprovide incentives to remove pre-1980 model year automobiles fromthe country's highways. There are roughly 22 million cars stillon the road dating from before 1980, Roth said, and these autosare "some of the biggest polluters on our nation's highways."Overall, there are roughly nine million cars dating from before1975 and another 13 million from the 1976-1979 model years.Together, these two groups emit 1.1 million tons of hydrocarbonsa year--or somewhere between 15 percent and 30 percent of thetotal annual automobile-generated hydrocarbon emissions."In fact," Roth continued, "I have heard estimates run as highas 40 percent when one considers evaporative losses and otherlosses, and it has been stated that about 60 percent of thetransportation-sector hydrocarbon emissions in southernCalifornia come from clunkers."The clean air legislation pending in the Senate ignores thiscrucial source of pollution, Roth said, adding that his billwould amend this shortcoming. The incentives in the DelawareRepublican's bill would focus principally on the existingCorporate Average Fuel Economy or CAFE system. Specifically, thelegislation would give the manufacturers of newer automobilescredits under the CAFE program whenever a post-1980 model wassold to an individual trading in a pre-1980 automobile. Toqualify for this credit, which would be based on the differencein gas mileage between the two automobiles, the manufacturerwould have to prove that the engine block and body of the oldercar have been permanently removed from the road. Fines forcompanies that do not comply would total $2,000 per car.The legislation would be beneficial to all parties, Roth said."I can foresee a scenario where the owners of these clunkersbecome valuable customers when they drive onto the new car lotlooking for a new fuel efficient, low-polluting car." Forexample, a manufacturer could receive a CAFE credit of some 30miles per gallon (mpg) if a customer trades in an older vehiclegetting just 10 mpg for a newer one at 40 mpg. Further, dependingon the size of the CAFE credit, part of the bonus could beearmarked for the buyer to reduce the cost of the newautomobile."Consequently, the bill is good for everyone--for themanufacturer, the retailer, the owner, but most importantly, forthe environment. We need to encourage more fuel efficient, saferenvironmentally sound methods of transportation. This would be avery good beginning," Roth concluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990LOCAL ANGLE TOPS ENVIRONMENT AGENDAby John EganHOUSTON--When it comes to the environment, many Americans seem tohave adopted an "out of sight, out of mind" attitude, accordingto a nationwide survey commissioned by Cambridge Energy ResearchAssociates. A majority of those polled said they would help fundlocal environmental issues, but far fewer people would be readyto fund more geographically diffuse and intangible issues likeacid rain and global warming, adds the report, released here onMonday in conjunction with CERA's annual executive meeting.The study, `Energy and the Environment: The New Landscape ofPolitical Opinion,' was conducted by Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Opinion Dynamics Corp. for CERA.Mandatory recycling was favored by 88 percent of the 1,250 peoplequestioned in the survey. About 81 percent supported a ban onnon-biodegradable products, while 58 percent wanted to encouragemass transit use by strictly limiting the amount of automotiveparking in cities.Six out of ten of the respondents would "definitely" pay a one-time $50 fee to help protect the nation's wildlife and wildernesslands, according to the study. About 54 percent would also paythe same-size tariff to clean up polluted water, while 50 percentsaid they would dig into their pockets to help dispose ofhazardous chemicals and toxic wastes."The environmental consensus will be a major factor in the futureAmerican political and business landscape," Daniel Yergin, CERA'spresident, told a press conference where he unveiled the study."The popular-based support for environmental improvement cutsacross traditional demographic, partisan and ideologicaldivisions of American society, and could translate into far-reaching political and economic consequences."But while the public thinks the environment is important, otherissues are more pressing: Approximately 53 percent of thosesurveyed said the U.S. government should spend more to battledrug abuse. Uncle Sam should also spend more on public education,according to 42 percent of those polled. By contrast, 40 percentsupported spending more to safely dispose of dangerous chemicalsand wastes, while only 28 supported spending more to clean thenation's air.As the issues covered by the survey became more global and lesstangible, fewer people said they would be willing to dig intotheir pockets to support remediation efforts. Specifically, onlyone-third of those surveyed would "definitely" give the U.S.government $50 to counter either the greenhouse effect or acidrain, according to the study. About 35 percent of thosequestioned would give $50 to help solve municipal solid wastedisposal problems, while 37 percent were willing to fund programsto counter ozone depletion. Slightly under half those surveyedwould spend $50 to help solve the nuclear waste disposal problem.Nearly 20 percent of the respondents said they would refuse topay extra for efforts to curb diffuse problems like acid rain andthe greenhouse effect. By contrast, only about 10 percent ofthose surveyed categorically refused to spend more of their moneyon visible issues like protecting wildlife or cleaning up waterpollution.Respondents differentiated between open-ended and one-timetariffs. By a two-to-one margin they opposed cutting pollutionthrough a 50 cent per gallon gasoline tax. A majority alsorejected a 25 cent per gallon gasoline tax. "Open-ended taxeswith no dollar limits to be used for purposes only broadly andvaguely defined do not win support from most Americans as anacceptable price tag on environmental improvement," the reportwarned.Sixty-two percent of those surveyed believe that economic growthand environmental clean-up can go hand-in-hand. If the economyand the environment were locked in a zero-sum struggle, 74percent would choose to have slower growth and a cleanerenvironment. Only 16 percent of those queried would chooseeconomic growth over a cleaner environment.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990EPA TARGETS PESTICIDE CONTAINERS: Farmer cooperation tops 90percentby Paul KemezisA successful pilot program to clean up and recycle pesticidecontainers in Washington County, Mississippi could lead tosimilar programs in several states, according to EnvironmentalProtection Agency officials familiar with the program.Small, state-sponsored container collection efforts already existin Oregon and Maine, but a large-scale recycling program hadnever been tried before in a densely farmed region. In addition,the Mississippi pilot program was the first time that pressurizedspray cleaners were used and the empty high-density polyethylenecontainers were sold for recycling, according to Robert Denny,EPA's pesticide program manager.Iowa is currently considering a statewide program and otherstates, including North Dakota and Minnesota, have also expressedinterest in the pilot program's results. EPA, which provided$80,000 for the Mississippi program, may allocate additionalfunds from its special projects budget for similar programs,Denny told Environment Week.Washington County, which is located in a major cotton growingregion bordering the Mississippi River, launched the project inthe summer of 1989 to prevent used containers with pesticideresidues from being discarded in landfills, burned or simplythrown in ditches. Farmers were given high pressure cleaningequipment donated by ICI Americas Inc., and urged to flush thecontainers and retain the pesticide residue to spray on fields.After they were cleaned, the metal and plastic containers were tobe deposited at eight collection centers.Mississippi Agriculture Dept. officials who ran the program saythe results were surprisingly good. All told, the departmentcollected 52,000 plastic containers and 48,000 pounds of metalcans. Using a heavy publicity campaign including video tapes,slide shows and local television ads, they estimate that theyachieved a 90 percent recovery rate. The program was totallyvoluntary.EPA's Denny says a principal goal of the program was to test theresults of the pressure rinsing, which has been shown to be 600times more effective in removing residues than traditional triplerinsing. The rinsing is particularly important because itprovides a cleaner product to sell to recyclers. Nevertheless,use of the recycled plastic is still somewhat restricted becauseof its previous pesticide contact.Robert McCarty, deputy director of plant industry with thestate's Agriculture Dept., says the Washington County programwill continue next year using remaining EPA funds. The departmentwill also ask the legislature to fund a statewide program. Whilethe program generates some revenue from the sale of recycledmaterials, it is not planned as a profit-making venture.Notwithstanding the success of the pilot program, Denny says itwill be up to individual states to initiate and fund large-scaleprograms. EPA plans to help by developing rules regardingcontainer shapes in order to make cleaning easier and also onwhat can be used to construct the containers.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990COALITION URGES $1 BILLION LAND PURCHASE PROGRAMCongress should make better use of the billions of dollarsauthorized for the Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) toacquire environmentally sensitive land and to create new publicrecreation areas, a coalition of 20 national conservation groupsrecommended in a report released last week. During the 1980s, thecoalition said, the unappropriated balance in the conservationfund climbed from zero to more than $7 billion as the ReaganAdministration consistently failed to appropriate the fundsavailable. "During the 25th anniversary year of the Land andWater Conservation Fund, we believe it is time to renew ourcommitment to present and future generations through theappropriation of $999 million in fiscal year 1991," the heads ofthe 20 groups wrote in a cover letter accompanying the report.Specifically, the coalition proposed spending: *  $253.05 million for land acquisition activities by the U.S.    Fish and Wildlife Service; *  $249.18 million for the National Park Service; *  $242.98 million for the U.S. Forest Service; *  $200 million for state grants; and *  $54.15 million for the Bureau for Land Management;The LWCF, which was signed into law by former president Johnson,is composed primarily of revenues raised from leasing activity onthe Outer Continental Shelf and royalties associated with OCS oiland gas production.The coalition's report identifies lands in 46 states, theDistrict of Columbia and four U.S. territories that should bepurchased during the coming fiscal year. In crafting itssuggestions for land purchases, the coalition focused particularattention on areas where there is a serious threat to land, wateror wildlife; willing sellers; existing acquisition efforts; andexisting or expected court orders that will require the federalgovernment to compensate landowners."During the fund's silver anniversary, we should be bold enoughto invest the $1 billion proposed in 1987 by President Reagan'sCommission of Americans Outdoors," urged Wilderness Societypresident George Frampton in releasing the report. "Every daythere is less open space left in America, and unless we actquickly, many of the natural treasures that our report recommendsfor purchase will be gobbled up by subdivisions and otherspeculators."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990MARCH CALENDAR OF ENVIRONMENT EVENTS1-2, Environmental Training: Requirements, Strategies & Resourcesfor Environmental Managers and Trainers Course, Washington, DC,Contact: Grace Lee, Government Institutes, 966 Hungerford Drive,Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850, (301) 251-9250.5-6, Government Environmental Contracting, Washington, DC,Contact: Miss J.K. Van Wycks, Federal Publications, 1120 20thSt., NW, Washington, DC 20036, (202) 337-7000.5-7, Risk Assessment in the Process Industries, Chester, England,Contact: Sara Mountford or Louise Marriott, IBC TechnicalServices Ltd., Bath House (3rd Floor), 56 Holborn Viaduct, LondonEC1A 2EX England, (01-236-4080).6-7, Federal Environmental Markets Conference, Arlington,Virginia, Contact: Government Institutes, 966 Hungerford Drive,Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850, (301) 251-9250.6-7, Environment 1990, Seminar and Exhibition, Milwaukee,Wisconsin, Sponsor: Federation of Environmental Technologies,Contact: FET, PO Box 185, Milwaukee, WI 53201, (414) 251-8163.6-9, GEN-UPGRADE '90, International Symposium on PerformanceImprovement, Retrofitting and Repowering of Fossil Fuel PowerPlants, Washington, DC, Sponsors: U.S. Department of Energy, theInternational Energy Agency and the Electric Power ResearchInstitute, Contact: Gary Poe, EPRI, (415) 855-8969.8-9, Handling Land Use and Environmental Problems of Real Estate,San Francisco, California, Sponsors: Practicing Law Institute andthe California Continuing Education of the Bar, Contact: AnnTracy, PLI, 810 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10019,(212) 765-5700.8-11, 1990 Sulfur Dioxide Control Symposium, New Orleans,Louisiana, Sponsors: EPA and the Electric Power ResearchInstitute, Contact: Sharon Luonogo, EPRI, 3412 Hillview Ave.,Palo Alto, CA 94303, (415) 855-2010.10-13, Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries 1990 Conventionand Exhibition, New Orleans, Louisiana, Sponsor: ISRI,(202) 466-4050.11-15, Third Annual Symposium on the Application of Geophysics toEngineering and Environmental Problems, Golden, Colorado,Sponsors: The Society of Engineering and Mineral ExplorationGeophysicists, Contact: (303) 980-1648.12-13, Modeling the Physics, Biology and Chemistry of the UpperOcean and its Interaction with the Atmosphere, London, England,Contact: Mike Fasham, Institute of Oceanographic Science, BrookRoad, Wormley, Godalming, Surrey, GU8 5UB, England.12-16, Third Annual Hazardous Waste Conference, Albuquerque, NewMexico, Sponsors: New Mexico Hazardous Waste Management Society,City of Albuquerque, the New Mexico Environmental ImprovementDivision and EPA, Contact: Phyllis Pei, (505) 846-2654.15-16, Environmental Reporting & Recordkeeping RequirementsCourse, Washington, DC, Contact: Grace Lee, GovernmentInstitutes, 966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850,(301) 251-9250.18-22, American Institute of Chemical Engineers Spring NationalMeeting, Orlando, Florida, Contact: Steve Smith, AIChE, (212)705-7845.19-21, New Jersey Energy and Facilities Management Exposition,Secaucus, New Jersey, Contact: Sally Gambrill, Energy Expo Inc.,PO Box 222, Maplewood, NJ 07040, (201) 763-5739.19-21, Great Lakes International Solid Waste Management Forum,Lansing, Michigan, Sponsors: Engineering Society of Detroit,Society for Environmental Science and Michigan Waste Industries,Contact: ESD, 24 Frank Lloyd Wright Drive, Suite C500, Ann Arbor,MI 48105, (313) 995-4440.19-22, Soltech '90, Power We Can Live With, and Solar '90,Today's Uses, Tomorrow's Opportunities, Austin, Texas, Sponsors:U.S. Department of Energy, Solar Energy Industries Association,American Solar Energy Society and the Lower Colorado RiverAuthority, Contact: American Solar Energy Society, 2400 CentralAvenue, Suite B-1, Boulder, CO 80301, (303) 443-3130.19-23, GLOBE '90, North America's 1st International EnvironmentalIndustry Trade Fair and Conference, Vancouver, British Columbia,Sponsor: International Environment Industry, Contact: DavidMarshall, 250-1130 West Pender St., Vancouver V6E 4A4, Canada,(604) 681-6126.19-23, Chapman Conference on Biomass Burning--Atmospheric,Climatic and Biospheric Implications, Williamsburg, Virginia,Sponsors: American Geophysical Union and the National Air andSpace Administration, Contact: AGU, (202) 462-6000.20-22, Tropospheric Ozone and the Environment, Los Angeles,California, Sponsor: Air & Water Management Association, Contact:AWMA, (412) 232-3444.20-23, EPRI-EPA Symposium: Transfer and Utilization ofParticulate Control Technology, San Diego, California, Contact:Ramsay Chang, EPRI, (415) 855-2535.22-23, First Annual Recycling Conference, Liverpool, New York,Sponsor: New York Department of Environmental Conservation,Contact: DEC, 50 Wolf Road, Albany, NY 12233, (518) 457-6603.22-23, New Jersey Environmental Laws and Regulations Course, EastBrunswick, New Jersey, Contact: Lori Cannon, GovernmentInstitutes, 966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850,(301) 251-9250.26-27, New York Environmental Laws and Regulations Course,Albany, New York, Contact: Lori Cannon, Government Institutes,966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850, (301) 251-9250.26-28, Energy and the Environment in the 21st Century, Cambridge,Massachusetts, Sponsor: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,Contact: MIT Conference Services Office, Room 7-111, Cambridge,MA 02139, (617) 253-1703.27-28, 1990 Update on RCRA Regulations, Washington, DC, Contact:Government Institutes, (301) 251-9250.27-29, International Landfill Gas Symposium, Chicago, Illinois,Sponsor: Governmental Refuse Collection and Disposal Association,Contact: GRCDA, PO Box 7219, Silver Spring, MD 20910, (301) 585-2898.27-29, National Conference on Octane and Reformulated Gasoline,San Antonio, Texas, Sponsor: Octane Week, Contact: Greg Haigwood:1-800-872-3835.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990ARIZONAPhoenix, Arizona's voluntary recycling pilot program has been sosuccessful in the past year that it will be expanded city-wide,the city announced recently. The newly expanded program willinclude 300,000 homes, compared to the 4,000 homes in the pilotprogram. "This expansion will occur pending evaluation ofeconomics and end market agreements," said Jack Friedline, deputypublic works director for the city. "Full evaluation of the pilotprogram will be made in the second quarter this year. If economicanalysis shows a benefit, we will recommend a multi-yearimplementation program probably from 1991 to 1995."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NEW JERSEYWheelabrator Technologies has begun start-up operations at itsGloucester County, New Jersey, trash-to-energy facility, thecompany announced recently. The project is the first in thecountry to be regulated as a public garbage utility, and willoperate under a tariff rate and franchise system regulated by thestate's Board of Public Utilities. Located on the Delaware River,the facility will be capable of processing up to 575 tons ofmunicipal solid waste a day and producing 14 megawatts ofelectricity.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990PENNSYLVANIAThe Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources hasrevoked the waste processing permit of Philadelphia-based ACNInc. for violations of the state's environmental regulations andstandards. Improper storage of waste at the site and poorlymaintained leachate collection tanks have been of particularconcern to the state agency, which initially ordered the companyto cease all operations last May pending resolution of theseproblems.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990MARYLANDMaryland Secretary of the Environment Martin Walsh recentlyannounced the approval of $360,000 in state grants to assistlocal jurisdictions implement air pollution control programs. The11 grants will be funded with money from the Maryland Clean AirFund, which receives revenues from permit fees and civilpenalties collected by the state agency.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990CONNECTICUTConnecticut's Department of Environmental Protection has awarded$60,000 in grant funds to municipalities in the state's CentralNaugatuck Valley to boost regional recycling efforts. The fundswill be used by the Valley's council of governments to institutea comprehensive regional recycling program for the area's roughly370,000 residents. "This is one more important step forward forConnecticut's recycling movement," DEP Commissioner LeslieCarothers said in announcing the grant award. "This grant willhelp add more than 10 percent of the state's population in theCentral Naugatuck Valley join the large numbers of citizensalready involved in regional recycling around Connecticut." Thegrant will help the Valley's municipalities comply with a statelaw mandating recycling for nine items by January 1, 1991,including: glass and metal food containers, newspaper, corrugatedand white office paper, scrap metal, automotive batteries, usedoil and leaves.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NEBRASKAThe Nebraska Department of Environmental Control and the AttorneyGeneral's Office have filed suit in Hitchcock County againstTexaco Producing, Inc. for allegedly contaminating surface andgroundwater during the company's operations in the area. Thedepartment is seeking to have the contamination cleaned up, andto collect civil penalties and the cost of the investigation fromthe company. "We have asked the court to make Texaco assess thecontamination and clean it up," said Steve Moeller, the state'sassistant attorney general. "We're also asking for civilpenalties of up to $5,000 per day, and the payment of $20,000 tocover the cost of our investigation."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990PENNSYLVANIAEnvironmental protection efforts have been a cornerstone ofPennsylvania Governor Robert Casey's administration, and 1990will be no exception if the Republican governor has his way. Inhis State of the State address late last month, Casey announcedthe signing of an executive order requiring all new passengercars sold in the state to comply by 1994 with the tight emissionsstandards now in effect in California. "To set the example,"Casey continued, "I've ordered that all new state vehicles meetthese standards, effective immediately. In addition, we're goingto toughen up inspection standards so they cover emission controldevices."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990ILLINOISOfficials of Philadelphia-based Reading Energy Company and theVillage of Robbins announced late last month that they wouldbegin construction on a $200 million resource recovery facilitysouth of Chicago, Illinois by mid-1990. The facility will becapable of processing 1,600 tons of municipal refuse a day andwill generate enough electricity to supply the daily needs of50,000 homes.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990TECHNOLOGY POLICY IN THE 1990s: THE SHIFT FROM MILITARY TOCIVILIAN TECHNOLOGIES, A CONFERENCEMay 1 & 2, 1990, Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.Hear the experts from the administration, congress, industry,academia, labor and finance address these critical technologyquestions:--How will government, industry and academia adjust to the newworld order and the de-emphasis on military technolgy development?--Will new resources be freed up for civilian technology programsas a result of cuts in defense spending? Where will the growth bein the 1990s?--Will those working on basic research get squeezed out in favor ofthose working on applied technologies?--What will it take to move technology to the top of the nationalpolicy agenda?--Is there a role for government in stemming the sale of U.S.technology companies to overseas competitors?--Will government military R&D programs be restructured toencourage the development of civilian industries?--What is the role of the National Laboratories, the nation'slargest employers of scientists and engineers?--How should companies reorient themselves vis-a-vis the federalgovernment to prosper in the 1990s?Among the Speakers:EDWARD BLACK, General Counsel & Vice President, Computer &Communications Industry AssociationRICHARD DeLAUER, Chairman, Fairchild Space & Defense Corp.JOHN DEUTCH, Provost, Massachusetts Insitute of TechnologyLYLE GRAMLEY, Vice President and Chief Economist, MortgageBankers Association, former governor of the Federal ReserveBoardGEORGE KOURPIAS, President, International Association ofMachinists and Aerospace WorkersREP. DAVE McCURDY, Member, House Armed Services Committee andHouse Science, Space and Technology CommitteePAUL NESBIT, Senior Aerospace Analyst, Prudential-Bache ResearchEDWARD TELLER, Director Emeritis, Lawrence Livermore Laboratoryand Senior Research Fellow, Hoover InstitutionDAVID FISHLOCK, Science Editor, Financial Times of London(Moderator)Registration Fees: (through 4/2/90) - $595.00                   (after   4/2/90) - $645.00For further details, contact Lissa Dyer, 202/662-9728 phone, or202/662-9744 fax.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990WARNINGFederal law prohibits reproduction of this newsletter for anypurpose without the publisher's permission. This means you CANNOTPHOTOCOPY, distribute by FAX, TRANSMIT ELECTRONICALLY, DOWNLOADto a DATABASE or MAKE COPIES of this NEWSLETTER BY ANY OTHERMEANS whether for INTERNAL or EXTERNAL DISTRIBUTION, NEWSSUMMARIES, ROUTING or any OTHER PURPOSE. Under Federalcopyright law (17 United States Code 10 et seq.) violators can befined up to $50,000 for each infringement.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-25IA059-000325-B009-341http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev58.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000723 text/html 63371HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:05:15 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:41 GMTContent-length: 63182Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev58.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNet January 16, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * AIR * ARB MODIFIES ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE MANDATE (473 words) STUDY RELEASED ON DIOXIN EMISSIONS FROM WASTE COMBUSTION (162 words) MARGETT INTRODUCES LEGISLATION TO OVERRIDE CFC BAN IN CALIFORNIA (187 words) * ENFORCEMENT * 51-MONTH JAIL TERM FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE VIOLATIONS (340 words) * ENVIRONMENT * JUDGE REVERSES RULING ON FISH AND GAME CEQA FEES (280 words) * ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY * LAWRENCE LIVERMORE LAB TO ASSIST CAL/EPA WITH TECHNOLOGY EVALUATIONS (168 words) * INITIATIVES * TWO ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVES ENTER CIRCULATION (303 words) * PESTICIDES * GOVERNOR CALLS SPECIAL SESSION FOR CONTINUATION OF METHYL BROMIDE REGISTRATION (444 words) WORKER PROTECTION STANDARD IMPLEMENTATION HEARINGS SCHEDULED (317 words) ADDITIONAL COMMENT PERIOD FOR EXTENDED PESTICIDE USE (231 words) CROSS CONTAMINATION OF PESTICIDE PRODUCTS POLICY RELEASED (308 words) TWO PESTICIDES BANNED TO REDUCE POLLUTION IN BAY AND ESTUARIES (158 words) * UNDERGROUND TANKS * UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK LEAKAGE MAY BE LESS OF A THREAT (280 words) * NEWS DIGEST * AIR (235 words) ELECTRIC VEHICLES (116 words) TANKS (141 words) U.S. EPA (117 words) * ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OPINION * CALIF. ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OPINION REPORT (88 words) * GOVERNOR'S APPOINTMENTS * GOVERNOR WILSON MAKES ENVIRONMENTAL APPOINTMENT (453 words) * CALIFORNIA REGULATION REPORT * NEW REGULATIONS (519 words) PROPOSED REGULATIONS (610 words) * CALIFORNIA BILL REPORT * 1/12/96 REPORT NOTES (1558 words) * CONGRESSIONAL BILL REPORT * 1/5/96 REPORT NOTES (396 words) * FEDERAL REGISTER REVIEW * EDITOR'S NOTE (30 words) * CALENDAR * REGULATORY CALENDAR (355 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996ARB MODIFIES ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE MANDATESACRAMENTO -- The Calif. Air Resources Board (ARB) staff hasproposed changes to the current Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) rule,scheduled for introduction in 1998.  The ZEV modification, endorsedby Governor Wilson, would retain the requirement for fullimplementation by 2003.BackgroundIn 1994, Governor Wilson submitted California's StateImplementation Plan (SIP), under the 1990 Clean Air Act.  The planset forth the state's strategies to achieve clean air byimplementing cost-effective regulations which encourage the advanceof technology through market forces.  One of the most controversialelements of the SIP is the ZEV mandate.Under the terms of the ZEV regulation, adopted in 1990, majorautomakers are required to offer vehicles with no tailpipeemissions in 2 percent of their fleets by 1998.  The numberincreases to 5 percent in 2001 and ultimately to 10 percent in2010.An alternative to the present rule was requested by the ARB afterauto makers' projections indicated the sales demand for lead/acidbatteries with limited mileage ranges would not appeal to enoughbuyers to meet the rules.In response to concerns such as cost/marketability, technology, theuse of hybrids and the development of infrastructure needs, the ARBsubmitted to the Governor, a proposal to modify the ZEV rule, whilemaintaining the ultimate long-term goal.ARB ProposalARB Staff's preliminary proposal is to drop the 2 percentrequirement in the early years of the program and build up to 10percent ZEVs by 2003, when all car companies that sell more than3000 vehicles per year statewide must comply with the regulation.In addition, manufacturers will receive extra ZEV credit through2003 for ZEVs sold before 1998 and those equipped with advancebattery types that have the range and lifespan that many expertsbelieve is needed to make them competitive with gasoline poweredmodels.  Those battery types, including lithium and nickel-baseddesigns, are expected to be commercially available by 2001.The staff proposal would suspend the current ZEV requirements until2003, and propose that auto manufacturers participate in apartnership program to promote and evaluate the development ofadvanced ZEVs.  All of the exhaust, evaporative and refuelingemission reductions associated with the existing ZEV requirements,plus a premium, would be made up by the manufacturers through theproduction of cleaner cars.ARB staff has been directed to fully develop the plan and presentit for consideration at a public hearing no later than March 1996.In his endorsement of the ZEV modification proposal, GovernorWilson said, "This proposal...would retain the requirement for fullimplementation of the ZEV mandate by 2003.  But it will also permitmodifications that both allow enforceable emission benefits thatexceed existing requirements and at the same time encourage earlydevelopment of battery technology that will produce ZEVs the marketwill accept."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996STUDY RELEASED ON DIOXIN EMISSIONS FROM WASTE COMBUSTIONNEW YORK -- The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) hasreleased a study that concludes there is no correlation between theamount and type of chlorine in the waste constituents of combustionfacilities and dioxin concentrations measured at the stack.The study, "The Relationship Between Chlorine in Waste Streams andDioxin Emissions from Waste Combustor Stacks," analyzed more than1,900 test results, and concludes that limiting the chlorinecontent of combustor feedstocks has no, or little, effect on thecomposition or quantity of dioxin emitted.According to ASME, the finding refutes claims by public interestgroups that there is a direct relationship between chlorine anddioxin, or PCDD/F, emissions.  ASME says these groups have beenseeking regulations limiting the amount and type of chlorinatedwaste that can be combusted in waste-to-energy plants, hazardouswaste incinerators, cement kilns, and other types of combustionsystems.Copy AvailabilityA copy of the study is available from ASME, (800) 843-2763.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996MARGETT INTRODUCES LEGISLATION TO OVERRIDE CFC BAN IN CALIFORNIASACRAMENTO -- Assemblyman Bob Margett (R-Arcadia) has introducedlegislation that would repeal the federal ban onchlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which became effective on Jan. 1, 1996.AB 1996 would allow the use, possession, and production of CFCs inCalifornia, despite the Federal ban.  The bill, known as theCalifornia Air Conditioner Protection Act of 1996, would delay theprohibition of freon until the year 2000.According to Margett, "What we have, is a classic example ofstate's rights.  The Tenth Amendment of the Untied StatesConstitution gives states powers not delegated to the Federalgovernment by the Constitution.  Last time I checked, theConstitution was silent on the issue of freon and CFCs.""I wanted to take a reasonable approach to the freon issue.  Ingiving industry a much needed extension to thoroughly study theeffects of freon on the environment while still protectingCalifornia's consumers," Margett said.More InformationMargett and principle co-author Senator Richard Mountjoy, aretrying to build a state wide coalition of consumers and businessesin support of AB 1996.  For information contact Margett's office at(916) 445-7234.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 199651-MONTH JAIL TERM FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE VIOLATIONSWASHINGTON -- U.S. EPA has announced a 51-month incarcerationsentence for Reginald B. Gist, former operator of High Tech PlatingSystem, in Balch Springs, Texas.  Gist was sentenced for allegedlyimproperly disposing and transporting of hazardous wastes generatedby his electroplating businesses.In addition to the jail sentence, Gist is required to payrestitution in excess of $75,000 and may not operate anotherplating business.Gist was one of the owners of the High Tech Plating from 1988 -1990.  Following repeated notices to him by Dallas County wastewater control authorities that his business had been illegallydumping electroplating waste into the sewer system, the sewerconnection was disconnected.  Gist admitted that he abandoned thefacility, leaving plating vats and 55-gallon drums containing morethan 70,000 gallons of hazardous wastes, including acids, cyanidesand heavy metals.  EPA cleaned up the site at a cost in excess of$300,000.According to court records, Gist opened a new company, MetalPlating Systems in Forney, Texas, where liquid plating wastes weredumped into the septic system and onto the surrounding ground.  Healso hauled liquid and solid plating wastes to property he owned atLake Fork, Texas.  When the Texas Natural Resources ConservationCommission discovered the contamination at the Forney facility,Gist was ordered to remove the contaminated soil and dispose of itproperly.As part of the pleas agreement, Gist admitted that rather thandispose of the contaminated soil properly, he transported it to theLake Fork property where it was either buried or dumped on theground.  Gist left the Forney location in 1992 and moved MetalPlating Systems to Terrell, Texas.On Sept. 22, Gist pled guilty to one count of unlawful disposal ofhazardous waste at Balch Springs and one count of unlawfultransportation of hazardous waste from the Forney and Terrelllocations to Lake Fork, in violation of the Resource Conservationand Recovery Act (RCRA).  EPA estimates that the Agency spent inexcess of $450,000 to cleanup the Terrell Facility, alone.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996JUDGE REVERSES RULING ON FISH AND GAME CEQA FEESSACRAMENTO -- Sacramento Superior Court Judge Jeffery Gunther hasreversed his previous ruling and ordered the Dept. of Fish and Gameto collect fees charged for the implementation of the CaliforniaEnvironmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the review of environmentalimpact documents of major developments in accordance with Fish andGame Code Section 711.4.The ruling was the result of an action taken by the CaliforniaAssociation of Professional Scientists (CAPS).  CAPS sued Fish andGame to set aside a settlement agreement with private land ownersthat required the department to cease and desist the collection ofapproximately $3 million in annual fees.  Judge Gunther hadpreviously approved the settlement agreement.CAPS argued that Judge Gunther's approval of the settlement wasunconstitutional.  Section 3.5 of the State Constitution prohibitsan administrative agency from refusing to obey a state law in theabsence of a ruling from an appellate court that the law isunconstitutional.According to CAPS, the settlement that was overturned had beenentered into after Judge Gunther ruled the fees statute wasunconstitutional.In reversing his approval of the settlement, Judge Gunther stronglyexpressed his unhappiness with the constitutional provisionprohibiting agencies from refusing to enforce statute law on thebasis of a Superior Court decision, but ultimately acknowledgedthat the Constitution controls.CAPS says an appeal of the court's decision in likely.CAPS represents approximately 2,400 state employed scientists,including several hundred biologists and related resourceprofessionals working for the Dept. of Fish and Game.The fees generated by the Environmental Review Procedure, for whichthe fees are collected, result in a significant portion of thedepartment's annual budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996LAWRENCE LIVERMORE LAB TO ASSIST CAL/EPA WITH TECHNOLOGYEVALUATIONSSACRAMENTO/LIVERMORE -- Under a Memorandum of Agreement singed lastmonth between Cal/EPA's Dept. of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC)and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, scientists andengineers from the Lab will help develop and commercialize newenvironmental technologies.  The lab will provide personnel and Labfacilities to evaluate new environmental technologies seekingcertification under the Environmental Technology Certificationprogram.According to DTSC, the agreement:*Creates a wider, more diverse pool of available scientific andengineering expertise available for the testing of technologies.*Makes available additional scientific, testing and laboratoryfacilities to evaluate environmental technologies, and*Enhances the credibility of the certification through thesynergism of California's reputation for environmental standardsand Lawrence Livermore's reputation for technology development."Our partnership brings together the field and regulatoryexperience of Cal/EPA with the research and development experienceof the Lab," said Cal/EPA Secretary James Strock.  "Thiscombination will provide a tremendous resource to the environmentaltechnology industry and allow for greater capability to certifymore technologies."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996TWO ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVES ENTER CIRCULATIONSACRAMENTO -- Secretary of State Bill Jones has announced that twonew environmental initiative measures have entered circulation forpetition signatures.Beverage Container Recycling Program.  Wine and Liquor Containers.This initiative proposes to amend the existing recycling law to addwine and liquor containers to beverage containers on whichdistributors are assessed a charge.  If adopted, the measure wouldincrease funding for recycling and anti-litter programs fromprogram-generated revenues.  In addition, it would providefinancial incentive for sterilization and refilling of recycledcontainers.The estimated annual cost of the state recycling program wouldincrease by approximately $2 million.  Additional recycling programrevenue increases are estimated at $20 to 25 million annually.More InformationThe proponent of this initiative is Mark Murray of CaliforniansAgainst Waste, (916) 443-5422.  He must submit 433,269 signaturesof registered voters to county officials by May 30, 1996.Radioactive Waste Disposal. Initiative Statute.This initiative would prohibit the disposal of low-levelradioactive waste in the state by means of burial.  It wouldrequire low-level radioactive wastes generated by medical,biomedical or biotechnical industries to be managed usingretrievable and monitored facilities.The proposal would also establish a third party liability fund forinjury to persons or property from waste disposal, paid for throughsurcharge on waste generators.  It also exempts the state fromcosts or liability for waste storage or disposal, except for wastesgenerated by state and local agencies.It is estimated that the measure would result in one-time state andcounty costs ranging from $8 million to $13.5 million, and ongoingannual costs of approximately $1 million to $2 million.More InformationThe proponent of this initiative is Ernest Goitstein, (415) 369-6690.  He must collect 433.269 signatures of registered voters byJune 3, 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996GOVERNOR CALLS SPECIAL SESSION FOR CONTINUATION OF METHYL BROMIDEREGISTRATIONSACRAMENTO -- At the end of December, Governor Pete Wilson calleda special session of the California Legislature to considerlegislation that would allow the continued registration of methylbromide and pentachlorophenol.Methyl bromide is a widely used pesticide to control insects,mites, rodents, plant diseases, nematodes, termites, and forpretreating soil prior to planting a number of agricultural corps.Pentachlorophenol is a wood preservative used by all major utilitycompanies in California to protect power and telephone poles fromdestruction by wood-eating pests.Currently, some of California's major trading partners includingJapan, Korea and Mexico require methyl bromide treatment onagricultural products prior to shipping.  New Zealand and Australiarequire all shipments of products in wooden crates or pallets to betreated with it to prevent pests from entering their countries.Existing law requires manufacturers of pesticides to conduct healtheffect studies and submit them to the state for evaluation.Current law requires that the registration of methyl bromide besuspended after March 30, 1996, if the necessary studies are notsubmitted by then.According to a recent study released by the Calif. Dept. of Foodand Agriculture (CDFA) the state could loose up to $346 million inrevenues and 9,894 full-time jobs annually, from the suspension ofmethyl bromide registration.Ongoing scientific debate between Cal/EPA and U.S. EPA regardinghow these studies should be conducted, delayed the initiation ofthe studies.  Consequently, the last toxilogical study for methylbromide will not be completed until December 1997.At the end of the last legislative session, SB 808 by Senator DickMonteith (R-Modesto) and Assemblyman Peter Frusetta (R-San Benito)that would have resolved this problem, failed passage.  A specialsession provides a practical way to extend the statutory deadlinefor the submittal of the last methyl bromide study.  The specialsession will run concurrently with the regular Legislative session.At this time, in the Third Special Session, SB 1 (Henry Mellow, D-Monterey),  SB 2 (Monteith) and AB 1 (Frusetta) have beenintroduced.  Each bill would extend the methyl bromide studydeadline to December 1997.  Last week AB 1 passed the AssemblyAppropriation Committee (11-4).  It is currently scheduled forhearing on the Assembly Floor.  SB 1 and SB 2 are scheduled forhearing in the Senate Health and Human Services Committee on Jan.24.  (For more information on these bills, see the California BillReport.)Legislation passed during a special session go into effect on the91st day after adjournment of the special session, while thosepassed during a regular session of the Legislature go into effecton January 1 of the following year.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996WORKER PROTECTION STANDARD IMPLEMENTATION HEARINGS SCHEDULEDSACRAMENTO -- The Dept. of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) has scheduledsix workshop/hearings throughout the state on the implementation ofthe federal Worker Protection Standard (WPS) in California.Current California regulations place requirements on employers ofpesticide handlers and fieldworkers.  Currently the handler portionof the regulations is applicable to all pesticide use situations:the fieldworker portion is applicable to employees working intreated agricultural fields; handler regulations cover protectionof study participants, hazard communication, emergency medicalcare, training, personal protective equipment, decontaminationfacilities, medical supervision, change areas, light, and closedhandling systems.  Fieldworker regulations encompass posting, andreentry into, treated fields, training, emergency medical care,decontamination facilities, and hazard communication.By implementing the WPS in California, the coverage of both thehandler and fieldworkers of the WPS are limited to the commercialor research production of agricultural plant commodities on farms,forests, greenhouses, and nurseries.  Although the WPS addressesmost, but not all, of the same areas covered by current Californiarequirements.The following hearings have been scheduled on Worker ProtectionStandards:Salinas - February 21Salinas Community Center (Santa Lucia Room), 940 North Main St.,Salinas, 93901.Sacramento - February 26Secretary of State Auditorium, 1500 - 11th St., Sacramento, 95814.Visalia Area - February 28UC Kearney Agriculture Center, 9240 South Riverbend Ave., Parlier,93648.San Diego Area - March 6San Diego County Farm Bureau, 1670 East Valley Parkway, Escondido,92027.El Centro -March 7Imperial Irrigation District Auditorium, 1285 Broadway, El Centro,92243.Redding Area - March 12Shasta District Fairgrounds, 1890 Briggs St., Anderson 96007.Comments/More InformationComments must be received no later than March 15.  Comments and/orquestions should be directed to Roy Rutz, Worker Health and SafetyBranch, Dept. of Pesticide Regulation, 1020 N St., Room 200,Sacramento, CA 95814-5629, (919) 445-4279.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996ADDITIONAL COMMENT PERIOD FOR EXTENDED PESTICIDE USEWASHINGTON -- Under the terms of a recent settlement agreement,U.S. EPA will provide additional opportunity for public commentbefore the Agency extends the time period during which "existingstocks" of certain canceled pesticides can be used.The settlement resolves a lawsuit brought by the United FarmWorkers of America (UFW) against EPA.  UFW sued the Government onbehalf of migrant workers who were exposed to the pesticide,mevinphos, which was later canceled.  The workers learned that EPAextended the period during which the manufacturer could continue tosell "existing stocks" of the canceled pesticide.Under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act(FIFRA), a manufacturer's registration of a pesticide can becanceled if the pesticide poses an unreasonable health orenvironmental threat.  In some cases, upon the request of amanufacturer, EPA can permit the sale and use of existing stocks ofthe canceled pesticides.Through the settlement, EPA has agreed to go beyond the existingterms of FIFRA, and provide public notice and an opportunity tocomment before it modifies the time period during which existingstocks of certain canceled pesticides can be used."[This] settlement is part of EPA's ongoing efforts to increasepublic involvement in the pesticide regulatory process," said LynnGoldman, EPA's Assistant Administrator for Prevention, Pesticides,and Toxic Substances.EPA is expected to publish its policy early this spring.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996CROSS CONTAMINATION OF PESTICIDE PRODUCTS POLICY RELEASEDWASHINGTON -- Last month, a new policy that sets numerical limitsof contamination for all categories of pesticides, above which U.S.EPA would consider the contaminant to toxicologically significant,was released by the Agency.In a notice issued to pesticide registrants (PR Notice 95-X), EPAexplained the Agency's new interpretation of what "toxicologicallysignificant" means in terms of contamination of pesticide activeingredients, particularly as it pertains to the contamination ofone pesticide by another.  The new policy will allow EPA to focusits attention on the contamination issues that pose a risk forhealth and the environment.According to the objectives in the PR notice, the new policyshould:* set a clear standard that can be readily applied by the regulatedindustry, as well as EPA;* maintain accountability of the product form the producer to enduser;* minimize the possibility that cross contamination will pose asignificant problem; and* not preclude marketplace or private solutions to correct problemsthat do arise.Under the new policy, which goes into effect after a 60-day commentperiod, EPA will move from a "zero-based" to a "risk based"approach in considering the "toxicological significance" ofcontamination of one pesticide by another.  Risk considerationsinclude potential human health effects from both dietary and non-dietary exposure, ecological effects, potential groundwatercontamination and the potential for leaving unwanted residues onfood.EPA has concluded that potential toxicity to plants by thecontaminant poses the greatest potential for harm, given the lowconcentration of contamination being considered.A contaminant that is toxicologically significant must be reportedto EPA for a determination of its potential effects and possiblecorrective or regulatory action.More InformationCopies of the new policy are available form EPA's Office ofPesticide Communications, (703) 305-5017.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996TWO PESTICIDES BANNED TO REDUCE POLLUTION IN BAY AND ESTUARIESSACRAMENTO -- Emergency regulations to prohibit the sale and use ofpesticide products containing copper sulfate or tributyltin (TBT)in nine Bay Area counties, have been announced by Cal/EPA.  Bothpesticides have been proven harmful to San Francisco Bay and itsestuaries.The ban affects copper sulfate-containing pesticide products thatare poured into sewers and drains to kill plant and tree roots.The affected TBT products are used in cooling towers in larger airconditioning systems to control microorganisms that can causefouling.  The pesticides are prohibited for use in Alameda, ContraCosts, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano,and Sonoma counties.Cal/EPA Secretary James Strock said, "Because we know that theseproducts have important uses, our scientists developed informationon alternative methods for controlling root intrusion in sewerlines and microorganisms in many air conditioning systems.  This isan excellent example of how environmental and economic progress canbe successfully combined."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK LEAKAGE MAY BE LESS OF A THREATSACRAMENTO -- According to a recent study by Lawrence LivermoreNational Laboratory (LLNL), the impact of some leaking undergroundstorage tanks on the environment maybe less than previouslythought.The independent study supports increasing evidence that many siteswithin California present a low risk to the environment once thetanks have been removed, and may require only monitoring to ensurethat the contaminated plume is stable and not contaminating otherareas.In response to the study, recent state and public concern regardingexpensive regulatory oversight in the cleanup of leakingunderground fuel storage tanks, the State Water Resources ControlBoard (SWRCB) has advised the state Regional Water Quality ControlBoard and local oversight Programs to halt active remediation andbegin monitoring programs in cases containing low risk groundwaterexposure.  According to Cal/EPA, this will assure that Stateattention is focused on better remediation of high risk sties andsituations.Cal/EPA Secretary James Strock said, "This initial act by the WaterBoard is among the first regulatory reforms resulting from GovernorWilson's recent executive Order W-127-95.  We heard about theurgency of this issue in our public forums in November, and now weare taking action."The report, "Recommendations to Improve the Cleanup Process forCalifornia's Leaking Underground Fuel Tanks," was presented to theSWRCB in October.  The report also recommends that passivebioremediation be considered the primary remediation tool in mostcases, once the fuel leak source has been removed.Typically, low risk cases involve shallow groundwater with amaximum depth to water less than 50 feed and without drinking waterwells screened in the shallow groundwater zone with 250 feet of theleak.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996AIRCPUC SETS UTILITY FUNDING LIMITS FOR LOW EMISSION VEHICLES -- TheCalif. Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) has set the dollar amountutilities can recover in rates to fund low emission vehicle (LEV)programs for the next six years.  The combined utility LEV programfunding request totaled $426,652,000.  The CPUC approved$171,421,000 (40 percent) of this amount.  Ratepayers will fund$132,408,000.  Shareholders will fund the remainder.  The LEVprograms are intended to comply with Legislative mandate tofacilitate purchase and use of electric and natural gas vehicles inCalifornia.STUDY CONFIRMS HEALTH BENEFITS OF ACID RAIN REDUCTION -- A recentstudy released by U.S. EPA estimates the value of health benefitsfrom the reduction of sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions fromutilities, under the acid rain provisions of the Clean Air ActAmendments, at between $3 billion and $11 billion for 1997.  Thereport focused on 31 eastern states where sulfates are asubstantial problem.   It is estimated that by 2010, when the acid rain reductionprogram will be fully implemented, the annual U.S. health benefitswill range between $12 billion and $40 billion.  According to thereport, reductions in premature deaths account for approximately 88percent of the total health benefits; reductions in the number ofnew cases of chronic bronchitis account for another nine percent ofthe total.  More Information:  Copies of the study are availablefrom the Acid Rain Hotline, (202) 233-9620.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996ELECTRIC VEHICLESGOVERNOR COMMENDS GENERAL MOTORS ON VEHICLE DEBUT -- Governor PeteWilson has congratulated John Smith, Jr., chairman of the GeneralMotors (GM) Corporation, on the debut of the EV1, the firstpurpose-built electric vehicle to be available to the public inSouthern California later this year.  "Making this revolutionaryvehicle available to the public will inevitably accelerate thecompetition to produce zero emission vehicles, and will help usreach California's mandate of having 10% of the automobiles forsale be ZEVs [Zero Emission Vehicles] by 2003," the Governor said.   GM introduced the EV1 on January 4.  The two-seat vehicle willbe marketed this fall.  The company has spent approximately $350million on electric car development.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996TANKSFINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR UST OWNERS AND OPERATORS -- The StateWater Resources Control Board has announced the availability of anadditional U.S. EPA-prepared publications describing federal andstate funding programs designed to help owners and operators onunderground storage tanks (USTs) upgrade their facilities to meetthe Dec. 22, 1998 upgrade deadline.  "Financing Underground StorageTank Work, Federal and State Assistance Programs," is designed tohelp all UST owners and operators -- especially those with tanks ontribal lands -- obtain loans or grants for financing correctiveaction and upgrading UST systems.  It describes federal loan andgrant programs and provides a listing of states that offer USTfinancial assistance programs.  The booklet is based on the"Federal and State Financial Assistance Report," introduced lastSeptember.  More Information: For copies of these documents,contact U.S. EPA's RCRA/Superfund Hotline, (800) 424-9346.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996U.S. EPAFIRST ANNUAL CUSTOMER SERVICE REPORT PUBLISHED BY U.S. EPA -- Thefirst annual customer service report, "Putting Customers First:EPA's Customer Service Plan," has been released by U.S. EPA.  Thereport describes EPA's mission and commitment to customer service.It also provides customer service standards and plans for thisyear's efforts to improve customer service for each of the Agency'smajor business processes: permitting; pesticide registration;research and demonstration grants; rulemaking; public access;state, tribal, and local program grants; enforcement inspectionsand compliance assistance; and voluntary programs.  A final sectionreports performance information received in 1995 from surveyscompleted by several core processes.  More Information: Copies maybe obtained from EPA's Public Information Center, (202) 260-7551.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996CALIF. ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OPINION REPORTCalifornia Attorney General Dan Lungren has issued the followingopinion regarding surface mining:95-502 -- The removal of soil, rocks, and debris from flood controlchannels and debris basins by a flood control district in order tomaintain original construction contours is not a "surface miningoperation" requiring a permit and the preparation of a reclamationplan.Copy AvailabilityTo obtain a copy of an opinion contact the Calif. AttorneyGeneral's Office, Opinion Unit, P.O. Box 944255, Sacramento, CA94244-2550.  Or, call (916) 324-5172.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996GOVERNOR WILSON MAKES ENVIRONMENTAL APPOINTMENTGovernor Pete Wilson has announced the following appointments.Deputy Secretary for Technology at Cal/EPAAnn C. Heywood, of Danville, as deputy secretary for technology atCal/EPA.  Heywood, 50, has been vice president of corporatedevelopment at Thematrix, Inc., since 1994.This appointment does not require Senate confirmation.Air Resources Board StaffRick Tomilinson, 29, of Salinas, as chief of the Office ofEnvironmental Technology Certification.  Tomlinson has served asspecial assistant tot he secretary of Cal/EPA since 1993.This appointment does not require Senate confirmation.Members to the Governor's Council on BiotechnologyErnest Mario, Ph. D., 57, of Palo Alto, has been the co-chairmanand chief executive officer of ALZA Corporation, a Silicon Valleydeveloper of therapeutic delivery systems, since 1993.William W. Otterson, 65, of La Jolla, is the co-founder anddirector of the Univ. of California, San Diego Connect Program inTechnology and Entrepreneurship, a position he has held since 1986.These appointments do not require Senate confirmation.Director of Cal/EPA's Orange County Permit Assistance CenterDanian M. Hopp, 34 of Mission Viejo, has served as assistant to thecity manager for the City of Mission Viejo since 1988.This appointment does not require Senate confirmation.Member to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, SantaAna RegionEvelyn R. Hart, 64, of Newport Beach, currently serves on the stateBoard of Behavioral Science Examiners.  She is a former citycouncilwoman and mayor of Newport Beach, having served on thecouncil from 1978 to 1994.This appointment requires Senate Confirmation.Members to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, SanFrancisco Bay RegionRichard J. Balocco, 46, of San Ramon, is vice president ofcorporate communications for the San Jose Water Company, a positionhe has held since 1982.John H. Muller, 49, of Half Moon Bay, is the owner and operator ofDaylight Nursery, a position he has held since 1991.These appointments are subject to Senate confirmation.Member to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, CentralValley RegionKathleen "Molly" Wilson, 70, of Redding, has been a member of theShasta County Board of Supervisors since 1989 and currently servesas the vice chair of the Board.  Since 1964, Wilson has been co-owner of Page Equipment Sales, Inc., a logging trailermanufacturing business in Anderson.This appointment requires Senate confirmation.Member to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, NorthCoastal RegionWilliam "Bill" Hoy, 51, of Weed, is a Siskiyou County Supervisorand is the co-owner and operator of Hoy Hereford Ranch.This appointment is subject to Senate confirmation.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996NEW REGULATIONSThe following regulations have been filed with the Secretary ofState.  For more information contact the filing agency.  Copies ofthe regulations may be obtained by contacting the filing agency, orthe Secretary of State at (916) 773-3000.TITLES 3 & 26: PESTICIDESSUBJECT: Copper and Tributyltin Containing PesticidesAGENCY: Dept. of Pesticide RegulationDATE FILED: 12/11/95 (Emergency)EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/11/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: Adopt 6910 and 6920INFORMATION/COPIES: Bill Fabre, (916) 324-4191SUMMARY: This action is the resubmission of two emergencyregulations which will ban the safe use of tributyltin and coppersulfate for specified purposes in nine counties in order to preventthe pollution of San Francisco Bay which results from the use ofthese compounds.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: Implementation Delay of PSI ProgramAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardDATE FILED: 11/30/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/30/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 2190, 2193INFORMATION/COPIES: James Ryden, (916) 322-2884SUMMARY: This action delays implementation of the periodic smokeself-inspection program for heavy-duty diesel fleets from 1/1/95 to1/1/96.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: California HDV Exhaust Emission StandardsAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardDATE FILED: 12/14/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 1/3/96SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 1956.8, 1965, 2112INFORMATION/COPIES: Moritz Glazer, (916) 322-2884SUMMARY: This action deals with California exhaust emissionsstandards for heavy duty vehicles.TITLE 16: AUTOMOTIVE REPAIRSUBJECT: Automotive Repairs Dealers and Official Stations andAdjustersAGENCY: Dept. of Automotive RepairDATE FILED: 12/5/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/5/96SECTIONS AFFECTED: Adopt 3340.28, 3340.29, 3340.30; Amend 3303.2,3340.1, 3340.15, 3340.22.1, 3340.24, 3340.31, 3340.31, 3340.32.1,3340.33, 3340.33.1, 3340.35, 3340.36, 3340.37, 3340.50, 3340.50.3,3340.50.5; Repeal 3340.25, 3340.30, 3340.34, 3340.37, 3340.50,3340.50.3, 3340.50.5; Repeal 3340.25, 3340.30, 3340.34INFORMATION/COPIES: Donald Minnich, (916) 255-3163SUMMARY: This Certificate of Compliance amends requirements forlicensure as a smog technician.TITLE 14: ENDANGERED SPECIESSUBJECT: Coho SalmonAGENCY: Fish and Game CommissionDATE FILED: 12/1/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/31/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 670.5INFORMATION/COPIES: Ronald Pelzman, (916) 653-4899SUMMARY: This action adds coho salmon south of San Francisco Bay tothe endangered species list.TITLE 16: AUTOMOTIVE REPAIRSUBJECT: Emergency Regulations - Emissions StandardsAGENCY: Dept. of Automotive RepairDATE FILED: 12/1/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 1/2/96SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 3340.42, 3340.42.1INFORMATION/COPIES: Donald Minnich, (916) 322-3553SUMMARY: This action establishes the definition of a grosspollution vehicle, new inspection procedures for dynamometer-basedemissions testing, and new maximum emission standards in tableform.TITLE 22: WATERSUBJECT: Lead and Copper Drinking WaterAGENCY: Dept. of Health ServicesDATE FILED: 12/11/95 (Emergency)EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/11/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: 64670, 64671.05, 64671.10, 64671.15, 64671.20,64671.25, 64671.35, 64671.40, 64671.50, 64671.60, 64671.65,64671.70, 64672, 64672.6, 64673, 64674, 64675, 64676, 64677, 64678,64679, 64680, 64681, 64682, 64683, 64684, 64685, 64686, 64687,64688, 64689, 64690, 64691, 64692; Amend 64252, 64254, 64256,64257, 64258, 64415, 64468.1INFORMATION/COPIES: Charles Smith, (916) 657-0730SUMMARY: This emergency action adopts the U.S. EPA's NationalPrimary Drinking Water Regulations for lead and copper, for allsuppliers of domestic water to the public, pursuant to both thefederal and state Safe Drinking Water Acts.  This includesrequirements for treatment and monitoring, replacement of leadservice line, public education, reporting and recordkeeping.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996PROPOSED REGULATIONSThe following regulations have been proposed and/or scheduled forhearing.  ** = New entries since the last issue.TITLE 3: PESTICIDESSUBJECT: Conflict of InterestAGENCY: Dept. of Pesticide RegulationACTION: Proposal to amend 87306HEARING: No hearing has been scheduled at this time.  Comments aredue by February 8, 1996.INFORMATION/COPIES: Susan Jimenez, (916) 445-1691SUMMARY: This proposed action would amend an existing Conflict ofInterest Code which designates employees who must disclose certaininvestments, income, interests in real property, businesspositions, and employees who must disqualify themselves from makingor participating in the making of governmental decisions affectingthose interests.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: CaFRG StandardsAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardACTION: Proposal to amend 2271HEARING: January 25, 2020 L St., (Board Hearing Room), Sacramento,9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may not be considered until January 26.INFORMATION/COPIES: John Courtis, (916) 322-6019SUMMARY: This proposed action is intended to implement theprovisions of SB 709, and to provide other clarifications to theCalifornia Reformulated Gasoline (CaFRG) variance procedures.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: CO Relaxation Standard for Utility EnginesAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardACTION: Proposal to amend 2403HEARING: January 25, 2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room),Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may not be considered untilJanuary 26.INFORMATION/COPIES:  Michael O'Connor, (818) 575-6635SUMMARY: This proposed action would amend regulations and testprocedures related to the control of emissions from utility andlawn and garden equipment engines.**TITLE 14: SAN FRANCISCO BAYSUBJECT: PermitsAGENCY: San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development CommissionACTION: Proposal to amend 10300 (and other items)HEARING: February 15, 101 Eighth St., (Metro Center Auditorium),Oakland.INFORMATION/COPIES: Ellen Sampson, (415) 557-8784SUMMARY: This proposed action would amend the definition of "majorpermits" (and other items).**TITLE 14: SOLID WASTESUBJECT: Emergency Waiver of StandardsAGENCY: Calif. Integrated Waste Management BoardACTION: Proposal to amend sections 17210 through 17210.9HEARING: February 6, 8800 Cal Center Dr., (Board Room), Sacramento,10:00 a.m.INFORMATION/COPIES: Chris Deidrick, (916) 255-2309SUMMARY: This proposed action would provide clarification andguidance to each operator who hold a solid waste facilities permitin applying for an emergency waiver of standards in the event of astate emergency or local emergency.TITLE 16: AIRSUBJECT: NOx StickersAGENCY: Bureau of Automotive RepairACTION: Proposal to amend 3340.37HEARING: January 25, 400 R St., Suite 1030, Sacramento, 3:00 p.m.INFORMATION/COPIES: Donald Minnich, (916) 255-4484SUMMARY: This proposed action would delete the requirements for theissuance of NOx window stickers designating whether a retrofit NOxcontrol device has been properly installed or the vehicle is exemptfrom the requirements for a retrofit NOx control device.TITLES 17 & 26: AIRSUBJECT: Toxics Hot Spots FeeAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardHEARING: January 25, 2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room),Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may not be considered untilJanuary 26.INFORMATION/COPIES: Genevieve Shiroma, (916) 322-7072SUMMARY: The Board is proposing several major amendments to the FeeRegulation for 1995-96.TITLES 22 & 26: HAZARDOUS WASTESUBJECT: Hazardous Waste Management: Delay of ClosureAGENCY: Dept. of Toxic Substances ControlACTION: Proposal to amend 66264.13, 66264.112, 66264.113,662640142, 66268.13, 66265.113 and 66265.142HEARING: January 18, 1996, 744 P St., (Auditorium), Sacramento,10:00 a.m.INFORMATION/COPIES: Lorna Kirby, (916) 342-2431SUMMARY: The proposed Delay of Closure regulations would allow,under limited and stringent circumstances, a landfill, surfaceimpoundment or land treatment unit to delay closure of the unit andremain open after the formal receipt of hazardous wastes in orderto continue receiving non-hazardous wastes in that solid orhazardous waste management unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 19961/12/96 REPORT NOTESThis report covers significant actions through 1/12/96.  Copies ofbills may be ordered from the Legislative Bill Room, call (916)445-2323.EDITOR'S NOTE:  If you are following California environmentallegislation not being covered in EIR, please bring the bill numbersto our attention.  Call us at (916) 920-9094, or FAX a list to usat (916) 920-9096, and we will add them to our tracking list.PRINGLE ELECTED SPEAKERAssemblyman Republican Leader Curt Pringle (R-Garden Grove) waselected Speaker of the Assembly on January 4.  He succeedsAssemblyman Brian Sentencich (R-Fresno)."This is the completion of one process and the beginning ofanother," Speaker Pringle said.   "Let 1996 mark the year in whichour legislative agenda is fulfilled -- an agenda of hope forCalifornia's businesses and families."Pringle is a businessman by background.  A twenty-seven yearresident of Garden Grove, Pringle was born in Iowa.  In 1968 hisfamily moved to California and soon thereafter established PringleDraperies, a wholesale/retail window covering firm.IMPORTANT DATESJanuary 19 -- Last day for policy committees to hear and reportfiscal bills introduced in their house in 1995.January 26 -- Last day for any committee to hear and report billsintroduced in their house in 1995.January 31 -- Last day for each house to pass bills introduced intheir house in 1995.February 23 -- Last day for bills to be introduced.BILL INTRODUCTIONSThe following bills have been introduced since the last report.Assembly BillsAB 1983 (MILLER) CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS   Existing law prohibits the prescribed manufacture or sale ofspecified chlorofluorocarbons or aerosol propellants containinga chlorofluorocarbon.  Existing law limits, as specified, thesale of motor vehicles equipped with CFC-based products, andrequires motor vehicle manufacturers to submit specifiedinformation in that regard to the State Air Resources Board.   This bill would repeal those provisions.  The bill wouldprovide that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, aperson may possess, use, manufacture, purchase, install,transport, or sell chlorofluorocarbons, and the possession, use,manufacture, purchase, installation, transportation, or sale ofchlorofluorocarbons does not subject any person, this state, orany political subdivision of this state to any penalty, fine,retaliatory action, or other punitive measure.1/3/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: ASSEMBLY DESK-----------------------------------------------------------------AB 1996 (MARGETT) FREON: AIR-CONDITIONING   Existing law prohibits the prescribed manufacture or sale ofspecified chlorofluorocarbons or aerosol propellants containinga chlorofluorocarbon.  Existing law limits, as specified, thesale of motor vehicles equipped with CFC-based products, andrequires motor vehicle manufacturers to submit specifiedinformation in that regard to the State Air Resources Board.Existing federal law prohibits the production or use of certainchlorofluorocarbons.   This bill would provide that, notwithstanding any suchprovision of law, until January 1, 2000, the production,manufacture, use, and sale of freon for express use inautomotive and home air-conditioning units and home appliancesdoes not subject any person, this state, or any politicalsubdivision of this state to any penalty, fine, other punitivemeasure, or enforcement action.1/4/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: ASSEMBLY DESK-----------------------------------------------------------------AB 2009 (CORTESE) WASTE: SOLID WASTE FACILITIES: PERMITS   Existing law, the California Integrated Waste Management Actof 1989, regulates the management of solid waste.  The actrequires the California Integrated Waste Management Board andcertified local enforcement agencies to perform specifiedfunctions with regard to the regulation of solid wastemanagement, including the issuance and enforcement of solidwaste facilities permits.  The board is required to concur orobject to the issuance, modification, or revision of any solidwaste facilities permit within 60 days of the board's receipt ofany proposed solid waste facilities permit. However, the boardis required to object to the permit and to submit itsdetermination and specific objections to the local enforcementagency, the applicant, and the city or county within which thefacility is located, until a countywide integrated wastemanagement plan has been approved by the board, if the boardmakes a determination concerning specified diversionrequirements.   This bill would delete that requirement that the board objectto the permit until the countywide integrated waste managementplan is approved.   The bill would declare that it is to take effect immediatelyas an urgency statute.1/8/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: ASSEMBLY DESKSenate BillsSB 1371 (MELLO) ECONOMIC POISONS   Under the Birth Defect Prevention Act of 1984, the Departmentof Food and Agriculture was required by December 31, 1985, toidentify pesticide active ingredients that the departmentdetermined had the most significant data gaps and widespread useand that were suspected to be hazardous to people.   Under the act, the Director of Pesticide Regulation also wasrequired on January 15, 1992, to issue a notice of the impendingsuspension of the registration of those pesticide productscontaining an active ingredient with a significant data gap forwhich the registrant had not submitted required data by December31, 1991.   However, existing law provides that notwithstanding theseprovisions, if the director finds that delays in submitting themandatory health effects studies were primarily caused byactions of the Department of Pesticide Regulation, the director,with the concurrence of the Secretary for EnvironmentalProtection, may extend the deadlines for submitting themandatory health effects studies for certain ingredients,including, among others, pentachlorophenol and methyl bromide.   In addition, under the act, no pesticide product containingspecified active ingredients for which the required studies havenot been submitted by March 30, 1996, shall remain registeredin this state after that date.   This bill would revise these latter provisions to specify, inaddition, that no pesticide product containing methyl bromideor pentachlorophenol for which the required studies have notbeen submitted by December 31, 1997, shall remain registeredafter those respective dates.   This bill would declare that it is to take effect immediatelyas an urgency statute.1/3/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES-----------------------------------------------------------------SB 1385 (ROSENTHAL) PUBLIC CONTRACTS: STATE PURCHASING: RECYCLEDPRODUCTS   Existing law requires all state agencies to purchasererefined automotive lubricants, recycled antifreeze, recycledsolvents, and recycled paints, as defined.  Existing lawrequires the purchase of the listed materials only when they areavailable, of a fitness and quality equal to their nonrecycledproduct and are not more costly than 5% of the lowest pricequoted by suppliers.  Existing law would repeal on January 1,1997.   This bill would delete the repeal date of January 1, 1997,thereby continuing the requirement that all state agenciespurchase the listed materials indefinitely.1/4/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONTHIRD EXTRAORDINARY SESSIONGovernor Wilson has called an Extraordinary Session of theLegislature to deal with the Methyl Bromide issue.  This is theThird Extraordinary Session the Governor has called during the1995-96 Regular Session of the Legislature.INTRODUCTIONSThe following bills have been introduced in the Third ExtraordinarySession.Assembly BillsAB 1 (FRUSETTA) ECONOMIC POISONS   Existing law prohibits a pesticide product containing certainspecified active ingredients for which the required studieshave not been submitted by March 30, 1996, from remainingregistered in this state after that date.   This bill would permit a pesticide product containing methylbromide or pentachlorophenol to remain registered in this stateif the required studies for those active ingredients aresubmitted  by  on or before  December 31, 1997.1/11/96 PASSED ASSEMBLY APPROPRIATIONS (11-4)AMENDED: 1/10/96STATUS: ASSEMBLY FLOORSenate BillsSB 1 (MELLO) ECONOMIC POISONS: METHYL BROMIDE AND PENTACHLOROPHENOL   Under the Birth Defect Prevention Act of 1984, the Departmentof Food and Agriculture was required by December 31, 1985, toidentify pesticide active ingredients that the departmentdetermined had the most significant data gaps and widespread useand that were suspected to be hazardous to people.  Under theact, the Director of Pesticide Regulation also was required onJanuary 15, 1992, to issue a notice of the impending suspensionof the registration of those pesticide products containing anactive ingredient with a significant data gap for which theregistrant had not submitted required data by December 31, 1991.  Existing law permits the director, with the concurrence of theSecretary for Environmental Protection, to extend the deadlinesfor submitting the mandatory health effects studies for certainingredients, including methyl bromide and pentachlorophenol, ifthe director finds that delays in submitting the mandatoryhealth effects studies were primarily caused by actions of theDepartment of Pesticide Regulation.  Existing law also prohibitsa pesticide product containing certain specified activeingredients for which the required studies have not beensubmitted by March 30, 1996, from remaining registered in thisstate after that date.   This bill would prohibit a pesticide product containingpentachlorophenol or methyl bromide from remaining registered inthis state after December 31, 1997, if the required studies forthat active ingredient have not been submitted by that date.1/8/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES-----------------------------------------------------------------SB 2 (MONTEITH) ECONOMIC POISONS: METHYL BROMIDE ANDPENTACHLOROPHENOL   Existing law prohibits a pesticide product containing certainspecified active ingredients for which the required studieshave not been submitted by March 30, 1996, from remainingregistered in this state after that date.   This bill would permit a pesticide product containing methylbromide or pentachlorophenol to remain registered in this stateif the required studies for those active ingredients aresubmitted by December 31, 1997.1/8/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICESBack to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 19961/5/96 REPORT NOTESThis report covers significant actions through 1/5/96.  Copies ofbills may be ordered by contacting your U.S. Representative or U.S.Senators.CONGRESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTSClean Air ActH.R. 325 (Manzullo) became law on December 23, 1995.  The billamends the Clean Air Act to provide for an optional provision forthe reduction of work-related vehicle trips and miles traveled inozone nonattainment areas designated as severe.BILL INTRODUCTIONSThe following bills have been introduced in the 104th Congress.U.S. Senate BillsS. 1491 (GRAMS) PESTICIDES (12/20/95):  A bill to reformantimicrobial pesticide registration, and for other purposes; tothe Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.S. 1497 (NICKLES) SOLID WASTE (12/21/95): A bill to amend the SolidWaste Disposal Act to make certain adjustments in the land disposalprogram to provide needed flexibility, and for other purposes; tothe Committee on Environment and Public Works.S. 1505 (LOTT) PIPELINE SAFETY (12/22/95):  A bill to reduce riskto public safety and the environment associated with pipelinetransportation of natural gas and hazardous liquids, and for otherpurposes; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, andTransportation.U.S. House of RepresentativesH.R. 2827 (MORELLA) ENVIRONMENT (12/21/95): A bill to consolidateand improve governmental environmental research by organizing aNational Institute for the Environment, and for other purposes; tothe Committee on Science.H.R. 2835 (PALLONE) MERCURY POLLUTION (12/22/95): A bill to reducethe risk of mercury pollution through use reduction, increasedrecycling, and reduction of emissions into the environment, and forother purposes; to the Committee on Commerce.H.R. 2838 (SMITH of N.J.) SOLID WASTE (12/22/95): A bill to amendthe Solid Waste Disposal Act to provide congressional authorizationfor State and local flow control authority over solid waste, andfor other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce.H.R. 2845 (COLLINS) SOLID WASTE (1/4/96):  A bill to amend theSolid Waste Disposal Act to allow petitions to be submitted toprevent certain waste facilities from being constructed inenvironmentally disadvantaged communities; to the Committee onCommerce.H.R. 2846 (COYE) CONTAMINATED INDUSTRIAL SITES (1/4/96):  A bill toamend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow a credit for thecleanup of certain contaminated industrial sites and to allow theuse of tax-exempt redevelopment bonds for such cleanup; to theCommittee on Ways and Means.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996EDITOR'S NOTEDue to the partial shut down of the federal government the FederalRegister Review is not contained in this issue.  It will continuein the next issue of EIR.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996REGULATORY CALENDARJanuary 18Dept. of Toxic Substances Control hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal toamend Hazardous Waste Management Delay of Closure regulations.  744P St., (Auditorium), Sacramento, 10:00 a.m.  INFORMATION: LornaKirby, (916) 342-2431.January 24 - 25Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA) hearing.SUBJECT: Recommendations regarding issues that affect multiplecomponents of Cal/EPA's risk assessment practices.  400 P St.,(Room 1160), Sacramento, 8:30 a.m. each day.  INFORMATION: JoyceSmylie, (510) 540-1011.January 25Calif. Air Resources Board hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal to implementthe provisions of SB 709, and to provide other clarifications tothe California Reformulated Gasoline (CaFRG) variance procedures.2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room), Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.NOTE: This item may not be considered until January 26.INFORMATION: John Courtis, (916) 322-6019.January 25Bureau of Automotive Repair hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal to deleteNOx window stickers requirements.  400 R St., Suite 1030,Sacramento, 3:00 p.m.  INFORMATION: Donald Minnich, (916) 255-4484.January 25Calif. Air Resources Board hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal to amendregulations and test procedures related to the control of emissionsfrom utility and lawn and garden equipment.  2020 L St., (LowerLevel Hearing Room), Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may notbe considered until January 26.  INFORMATION: Michael O'Connor,(818) 575-6635.January 25Calif. Air Resources Board hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal tosignificantly amend the Toxics Hot Spots Fee Regulation for 1995-96.  2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room), Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.NOTE:  This item may not be considered until January 26.INFORMATION: Genevieve Shiroma, (916) 322-7072.February 6Calif. Integrated Waste Management Board hearing.  SUBJECT:Clarification and guidance to each operator who hold a solid wastefacilities permit in applying for an emergency waiver of standardsin the event of a state emergency or local emergency.  8800 CalCenter Dr., (Board Room), Sacramento, 10:00 a.m.  INFORMATION:Chris Deidrick, (916) 255-2309.February 15San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission hearing.SUBJECT: Proposal to amend the definition of "major permits," andother items.  101 Eighth St., (Metro Center Auditorium), Oakland.INFORMATION: Ellen Sampson, (415) 557-8784.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-26IA059-000325-B009-399http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev61.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000816 text/html 87879HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:06:05 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:43 GMTContent-length: 87690Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev61.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CONVERGENCE (1262 words) GUIDANCE LIKELY IN THE SPRING (352 words) CONFERENCE REPORT VENDORS & WASTE PRODUCERS AT RISK (769 words) NEW MEMBERS WANT TOUGHER STANDARDS (2044 words) LONG WAY TO GO BEFORE ACCESSION (1033 words) EMERGING FROM SOVIET RULE (460 words) WASTE OFFENCES BRING NEW LAW (252 words) PARLIAMENT RATIFIES BASEL (114 words) BC PUBLISHES THIRD SITE DRAFT (413 words) REPORT HOLDS OMAI LIABLE FOR DAM (456 words) PARLIAMENT PRESSES FOR LIABILITY DIRECTIVE (391 words) 4TH INTERNATIONAL ENFORCEMENT CONFERENCE (414 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW EEA HIGHLIGHTS SOIL & GROUNDWATER (409 words) EEA INTERNET SITE LAUNCHED (111 words) REFINERY FINED RECORD S$150,000 (281 words) NEW EPA AUDITING/SELF-REPORTING POLICY (1018 words) ACCOUNTING FORUM ADVISES ON REPORTING (796 words) GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS POSTPONED (592 words) ISO PUBLISHES SUPERFUND REPORT (472 words) SPATE OF OIL/CHEMICAL SPILLS (1070 words) WASTE TREATMENT DISPUTE (155 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONVERGENCEA senior official of the Austrian Environment Ministry raised anintriguing question at the end of last year (this issue p5): will thepresence of the three new member states of the European Union, Austria,Finland and Sweden, lead to future ecological criteria comparable tothe convergence criteria set as pre-conditions for economic andmonetary union (EMU)?  From one point of view, the notion of anenvironmental equivalent to the EMU convergence criteria would be seenby some Euro-sceptics as just another potty idea from Europhiles whohave lost contact with reality.  After all, the member states arehaving enough difficulty getting their economies into line for EMU atthe moment, to the point where even Germany seems to be waivering onthe timetable.On the other hand, the mere stating of such a thought tells ussomething about the changing balance of power within the EU onenvironmental policy.  The three new states which joined in 1995 haveadded an important new block of votes within EU Council meetings on theside of environmental rigour.  Their decisions to join the Union werehard fought internally and were predicated upon a determination toretain their own higher-than-EU environmental standards and anunderstanding that other like-minded member states would help them toraise the whole EU regulatory framework into line.  Each had toovercome considerable doubts about the commitment of the EU toenvironmental protection before they could persuade their populationsto support accession.For a variety of reasons, including high disposable income, exposure toimported pollution by air or water, vulnerable and highly prizednatural assets, and cultures insured in a certain brand of civicresponsibility, these countries had already gone beyond the existing EUstandards in a number of environmental fields.  There were others wherethey had done less, but those received rather less publicity and, inany case, the public in these countries does appear overall to be morewilling than their colleagues in some other EU states to support publicspending on environmental objectives.In the course of the negotiations about their joining the EU, the threenew members secured a deal which allowed them to keep environmentalstandards which exceeded EU requirements for up to four years while theEuropean Commission attempted to persuade the rest of the Union torevise the common rules upwards.  The EU gave no binding commitment tosuch upward revisions at the end of the four-year transition period;what it agreed to was to try to achieve that and to convene a fullreview of the standards at issue at the end of the period, giving thenew members a chance to participate in the review on an equal footingwith those which had arrived before but also obliging them to come intoline with whatever emerges.  The open-ended nature of this agreementseems to have been somewhat glossed over within the three countries,where the public has been assured that there is absolutely no way theEU is going to force them to back down on their tight standards.The governments involved, which had stuck their necks out politicallyto support EU entry, have limited room for manoeuvre on this, becausethe anti-EU campaigns made great play of the argument that their proudnational environmental standards would be undermined by EU membership.Having now gone in, it is therefore imperative to prove them wrong byshowing that there has been no back-tracking and that, on the contrary,the new members have helped to raise the level of protection throughoutthe Union.Because there is still some way to go before the transition periodexpires, differing perceptions about what has been agreed can be safelyleft alone for the time being, in the knowledge that, on some of thecritical issues, the previous member states had already accepted thatexisting regulations were out of date.  Nevertheless, as the Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC) to decide the next steps towardsintegration of the EU approaches, environmental policy seems set toplay a greater part in the proceedings than ever before.  Someobservers even think that it could become a serious obstacle to furtherprogress, both among the existing fifteen members and in relation toaccepting new countries from central and east Europe (CEE).Both the new entrants and several longer-standing members have anagenda for the IGC meetings in Turin which amounts to a clear steppingup of environmental regulation, including greater use of qualifiedmajority voting within Environment Council meetings and less recourseto the principle of subsidiarity.  That principle, the same Austrianofficial said, " should be interpreted restrictively and not in thesense of impeding environmental policies at Community level .... In anycase," she went on "we should avoid a narrow-minded interpretation ofthis important principle."Although some items on these countries' agenda will be agreed allround, other objectives on their lists will set them directly at oddswith less enthusiastic member states which either think that regulationhas gone far enough in a certain field or believe that it should beleft to national governments.  Perhaps more importantly, since the EUis well accustomed to such internal struggles, the new strengthening ofthe environmental harmonisation voice also risks worsening a potentialcollision between existing EU members and the countries which hope tobe the next in line.  In particular, the countries of central and eastEurope (CEE) have high expectations of early EU accession and suchhopes are only increased by signs of political instability in Russia.And yet, the task of approximating their environmental laws andstandards in a wide range of fields to those of the EU remains adaunting one (this issue p7).Estimates of the cost of this approximation process vary widely, withfigures like ECU100bn (US$78.6bn) or even ECU300bn quoted for theregion as a whole.  At the same time, the enormous environmentalproblems faced by these countries remain somewhat side-lined by urgenteconomic objectives, presenting the governments concerned with endlessreasons for postponing painful and expensive environmental reforms andfor restraining environmental enforcement.  Real progress isundoubtedly being made and there is no shortage of people at all levelswho are determined to push through such reforms.  The problem is thatthis is very difficult and there is no shortage of momentum for plentyof other crying needs as well.Amid this potentially awkward conflict between member states insistingon an upward revision of EU standards and politically sensitiveaspiring members who have a huge task ahead just to get close to thepre-conditions for entry, EU policy-makers are working hard to injectmore realism into the debate.  In doing so, they have to take on boardon both the ecological imperatives of countries like Austria, Sweden,Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands, and the need for practical waysforward in the CEE countries.One fear is that this could all lead inexorably towards a split or evena series of splits into two- or three-speed Europes, the implicationsof which are distinctly uncomfortable for many people.  The danger isthat failure to reconcile these ill-matched goals could bring progresstowards CEE accessions to a halt and that such a setback wouldundermine hard-won understandings among existing EU members.  In someways, it is hard to believe that environmental issues could play acritical part in such weighty historical developments and, indeed, whenthe crunch comes, they may be swept aside.  For the moment, however,they seem likely to command a lot of attention.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GUIDANCE LIKELY IN THE SPRINGThe guidance document due to elaborate on key contaminated land andliability provisions in the Environment Act 1995 now seems likely toemerge in draft for public comment around April (ELR028/3, 026/5, 025/3et al).  No formal announcement has been made, but ELR understands thata pre-publication draft is due to be circulated to selected experts andinterested groups in mid-February.  A meeting with a core group ofpeople has been arranged by the Department of the Environment (DoE) for22 February, apparently to garner initial responses to that draft.  Asimilar meeting was held in April 1995 at an earlier stage in thepolicy debate to give the same people early warning of the Government'sthen plans for guidance and amendments as the Environment Bill wasentering the House of Commons (ELR020/6).Until recently, the main target date for the DoE has been to get thepackage of guidance and regulations ready for submission to Parliamentbefore its summer recess.  Although ELR can only speculate at thisstage, it looks now as though that date could be hard to meet.  If apublic draft is put out for comment in April, there could be aconsultation period of about six to eight weeks, after which thesubmissions will have to be digested and revisions made whereappropriate.  The DoE apparently kept open the option of seekingfurther advice once the public responses were received from thecontractors it used at the end of last year (ELR026/5), although it maynot exercise that option.  The most likely date for a revised draft nowseems to be late-summer, early-autumn, perhaps October.  Hopefully,that will go straight to Parliament for approval in a procedure thatcan not take less than three weeks.  Some observers have suggested thatthere might be a need for a further brief period for comment beforefinal submission to Parliament if substantial changes have been made inthe light of the responses in the spring.  The DoE will be hoping toavoid that and, provided it does, the whole regime could come intoforce around the beginning of 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VENDORS & WASTE PRODUCERS AT RISKThe possible implications of the UK Government's new contaminated landregime continue to be pored over in advance of the guidance documentsand regulations due out soon in draft to clarify important points inPart II of the Environment Act 1995 (this issue above).  At a seminarin London in January, convened by the Contaminated Land Working Partyof the UK Environmental Law Association, Richard Burnett-Hall, ofBristows Cooke & Carpmael, London, warned that people sellingcontaminated sites could be at risk of liability later on if thepurchaser or subsequent owners decided to change the site's use.  Healso argued that, although the UK Act does not name waste producers orgenerators as primary responsible parties in the way that the USSuperfund law does, waste producers could nevertheless find themselvesdrawn into the liability net as polluters.Mr Burnett-Hall observed that a vendor who had warranted that a sitewas clean for the purposes of a planned future use such as a car parkand had agreed a sale price with a purchaser under those conditionsmight find that a subsequent change of use at the site re-opened thequestion of responsibility for the remaining contaminants.  Under thenew regime, a site could be approved as satisfactory by the authoritiesfor the purposes of a specific intended use while a considerable amountof residual contamination remained underground, contained againstfurther dispersion but neither removed nor eliminated.  That is thecore of the Government's "suitable for use" clean-up strategy, intendedto encourage the return to productive use of old industrial sites byavoiding the excessive costs which would be incurred if all sites hadto be returned to a pristine condition.Such partially cleaned sites would, however, be granted approval onlyfor restricted uses.  A plan to change their use to, say, a residentialdevelopment might cause them to be re-classified as contaminated andtrigger a whole new round of official remediation procedures.  At thatpoint, Mr Burnett-Hall told ELR, the regulator might deem the originalvendor an "appropriate person" for a remediation order or cost recoveryaction on the grounds that he or she "caused" the offending substancesto be "in, on or under" the relevant land.  Unless the forthcomingofficial guidance were specifically designed to avoid vendors being putback on the hook once they had done what was required for theoriginally intended use, he said, vendors would be well advised to seekan indemnity from the purchaser covering all the contaminationremaining at the site.  Otherwise, the vendor's liability exposurecould remain open long after the site had passed out of his or hercontrol.In relation to waste producers, Mr Burnett-Hall said that much woulddepend on the meaning of "cause".  At present, there must be someconcern, he suggested, that a waste producer operating under the dutyof care imposed by the Environmental Protection Act 1990 might followhis wastes all the way to a disposal site and even require that they bedeposited at a certain location within the site, remaining to checkthat this was carried out, and then find later that the regulatordeemed such control to amount to causing contaminating substances to bepresent in, on or under the land.  Again, Mr Burnett-Hall said that hewould like to see the guidance address this directly, specifying thatwaste producers in such circumstances were not "appropriate persons".Among other things, Mr Burnett-Hall also predicted that the forthcomingguidance under the Act would be "seriously useful" compared with whathad existed hitherto and that the new land regime would be far moreeffective in making things actually happen.  He said that it remainedopen to question, however, how far local authorities would be competentand willing to carry out the provisions, especially in relation peopleoperating in their areas.  He expected voluntary clean ups, whereoperators chose to agree a plan with the regulators, often to go beyondstatutory requirements and not stop at just enough remedial action forthe next site use.  He also expressed concern about  the procedure forapportioning liability, arguing that it would be difficult to define aclear hierarchy of "appropriate persons" even in the guidance and thatone option would be to give local authorities discretion over whom toname.  If that were adopted, he said, either there would be room forappeal on the grounds that someone else should have been named asresponsible, in which case there was a risk of Superfund-stylelitigation, or appeals would not be allowed and the process would beseen as very unfair.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW MEMBERS WANT TOUGHER STANDARDSWith the approach of the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC) todecide the next steps towards integration of the European Union, no oneshould be in any doubt that the arrival as EU members of Austria,Finland and Sweden in 1995 has increased the pressure for tightenvironmental regulation. Speakers from all three countries at aconference in Vienna in November* emphasised the importance placed onthis by a broad cross-section of opinion in each and the overall effectof this on the European Commission was confirmed by representatives ofthe Commission's environment directorate general (DGXI).  To someextent, this process has passed unnoticed in the rest of the EU up tonow, perhaps because of the low key role so far played by the newmembers.The IGC process may turn out to be the first widely visible platformfor this new pro-environment block, which is likely to support moves,already backed by some existing member states, for more stringentstandards and greater use of qualified majority voting, rather thanunanimity, within the Council of Ministers on environmental matters.Another opportunity will arise when an initial four-year transitionperiod for the new member states comes to an end.  During that period,the accession treaty allows the new states to maintain standards whichare stricter than those within the rest of the EU and commits theEuropean Commission to conducting a review of EU standards in the hopeof raising them to the levels prevailing in the new states.  At the endof the period, the intention is to have settled common standards acrossall 15 member states, with the aim of setting them at the highestpossible level.The new states clearly expect that to accommodate their own or higherstandards and are stating that, if such agreement has not been reachedby then, they will be very reluctant to reduce their standards intoline with those of less strict members.  The Commission, on the otherhand, is insisting that the accession treaty and the joint declarationswhich went with it commit the EU only to a process of revision and notto any definite result.  The new states will therefore have the chanceto press their case as full participants in an EU-wide discussion, butthe outcome can not be guaranteed.Jose MartAEnez Aragon, of DGXI, told the conference nevertheless thatthe arrival of the new member states had given new impetus to the EU'senvironmental policy.  Among other things, it had allowed the EU totake a more assertive position in international negotiations, such asthe Berlin climate change conference and the third meeting of the BaselConvention (ELR025/8).  In an accompanying paper, Margaret Brusasco-MacKenzie, the head of DGXI's international affairs unit, said that itwas already clear from the new states' role in recent environmentcouncil meetings that their arrival, with a background of highstandards and high public awareness of environmental issues, would"produce a Union with a far more ambitious approach".  When it comes tothe review under the transition arrangements, she said, "the question isnot whether the Union of fifteen can go hand-by- hand towards higherstandards, but rather the speed at which this is to be done."AustriaSpeakers at the conference* from Austria all stressed thatenvironmental concerns had figured high on the list of prioritiesduring the debate about joining the EU, with a majority of Austriansconcerned about any possible dilution of the country's stringentregulations.  The agreement, known as the "horizontal solution", in theaccession treaty allowing Austria to maintain its own environmentalstandards even where those exceed the EU equivalents, throughout thefour-year transition period, was seen as a key result of thenegotiations leading up to accession.  It is clear that the AustrianGovernment, recently re-elected with a similar political complexion,will fight hard at the end of that period to prevent any loosening ofstandards and will lobby strongly for support in other member states .Ingrid Thomasitz, of the Federal Environment Ministry, said that, inthe current review of the EU's Fifth Environmental Action Programme(this issue p12), the Austrian Government would support a more robustapplication of sustainability as a real test of policies in fields suchas transport, energy, agriculture and tourism, a restrictiveinterpretation of subsidiarity so that it does not impede environmentalpolicies at EU level, and a further strengthening of the precautionaryand polluter pays principles, together with the integration ofenvironmental costs into the prices of goods and services.At the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC), she said that Austriawould advocate: an obligation on the Commission to consider theenvironmental effects or "ecological consequences", as well as thebudgetary ones, of every legislative proposal; simplification andrevision of the safeguard clause in Article 100(a)(4) of the Treaty tomake it a real "environmental guarantee", allowing member states "tointroduce stricter national standards as well as apply the existingones"; wider support for qualified majority voting and the jointdecision-making procedure under Art 189(b) of the Treaty, to enablemeasures such as energy taxes to be imposed, although with limits inrelation to certain policy fields; other reforms to strengthen the roleof the European Parliament in EU decision-making; and greatertransparency in decision-making to aid public involvement.Overall, Ms Thomasitz speculated that the presence of the three newmember states might at some stage lead to ecological criteriacomparable to the convergence criteria for economic and monetary union. Klemens Fischer, of Austria's Permanent Representation to the EU inBrussels, told the conference that the acknowledgment given in JointDeclarations 6 and 7 of Act of Accession to the new member states'attachment to their existing environmental standards had been veryimportant to the voting within Austria on joining the EU.  He warnedthat, if the Union had not reached common standards equivalent to thoseprevailing in Austria by the end of the four-year transition period,Austria would see no alternative to exercising its right to imposenational standards under Art 100(a)(4)  and, he said, the politicalstakes would be too high for the European Commission to prevent that.Frank Ceska, General Secretary of the Federation of AustrianIndustrialists, observed that an important part of the case presentedby opponents of joining the EU had been that it would deprive Austriaof its ability to pursue an independent, and stricter, environmentalregime.  He made clear that Austrian industry had rejected that viewand was gratified that the critics had been proved wrong, since none ofthe country's stricter regulations had been changed since EU entry.  Healso drew attention to a pledge given by EU Environment CommissionerRitt Bjerregaard at a Council meeting in March 1995, that she did notintend that any of the new member countries should be forced to changetheir standards after the end of the transition period.Given Austria's commitment to tight environmental rules, Mr Ceskareported that industry favoured accelerated harmonisation of stricterrules throughout the EU, rather than development of new rules inAustria alone. In particular, he called for postponement of currentJustice Ministry proposals for a new environmental liability act inAustria, based on the Council of Europe convention on civil liabilityfor damage resulting from activities that are dangerous to theenvironment (the "Lugano" Convention).  This, he argued, would cause"an enormous burden for industry and an unbearable distortion ofcompetition".  It would be much better, he said, to await forthcomingEuropean Commission proposals for an EU directive in this field.Paul Luiki, of Heller, Lober, Bahn & Partners, Vienna, explained thatAustria had good reasons for sensitivity to environmental damage: it isa small, land-locked country bordering on eight other countries, whichimports over 90% of its air pollution and a good deal of waterpollution through rivers such as the Danube, depends on groundwater for99% of its drinking water, has an important tourist industry whichrequires a clean environment and also poses risks to it, and has aparticular problem with ground-level ozone, with substantially higherconcentrations than elsewhere in Europe.  As a result, he said,according to a 1991 OECD study Austria devoted a higher percentage ofits GDP to environmental protection, at 1.94%, than most otherindustrialised countries, including Germany (1.74%), the Netherlands(1.46%) and the US (1.36%).Mr Luiki cautioned that comparisons of Austrian and EU environmentalstandards could be over-simplified, since in some cases these were notdefined in comparable ways, and like Mr Ceska, he pointed to some areaswhere EU membership had led Austria to introduce new rules, such asenvironmental impact assessment and access to environmentalinformation.  He also noted that, in some fields such as wastewaterdischarges, implementation of stricter Austrian standards left room forimprovement.  On the other hand, he said that Austria had given greaterpriority than the EU to groundwater quality within its drinking waterpolicy.  A regulation under the country's Water Act, he told theconference, required provincial governors to declare a groundwateraction area and to implement clean-up action where quality criteriawere exceeded.  He reported that the first such action was stillawaited, but he did not think it would be long before one occurred.  Healso pointed to associated regulations on storage of hazardousmaterials, including one covering chlorinated solvents which involvedstringent emission and monitoring standards and for which there was asyet no EU equivalent.Ernst Brandl, of Schonherr Barfuss Torggler & Partner, Vienna,highlighted the heavy reliance under Austrian law on "command andcontrol" mechanisms, at both federal and provincial levels.  Lengthypermitting procedures, he said, usually allow everyone who might beaffected by a proposed development to participate and to appeal, withthe result that, for example, 12,000 people were involved in thecertification process of a garbage incineration plant in Vienna.  Mostprovinces also have an "attorney for the environment" who has standingin all provincial proceedings concerning activities which might have animpact on the environment.Finland/SwedenSatu Nurmi, of the Finnish Permanent Representation to the EU, told theconference* that Finland's geography presented special environmentalrisks, with one-third of its territory above the Arctic Circle, a harshnorthern climate and natural resources which were vulnerable tochemical precipitation.  "Even a small input of a hazardous substance,"he said, "may cause impacts that are difficult if not impossible toremedy simply because the natural renovation capacity of ecosystems isvery slow in northern latitudes."  He then listed a series of subjectson which Finland had obtained special declarations and transitionalarrangements during the EU accession process, where it consideredpresent EU regulations insufficiently strict.  These includedtransitional measures covering: pentachlorophenols (PCPs), fertilisers,pesticides, sulphur content of liquid fuels and plant protectionproducts.Like the Austrian speakers (this issue above), Mr Nurmi emphasised thatsuch environmental issues were given a high priority by the Finnishpublic.  That was also echoed by Prof Hans Stenberg, of AdvokatfirmanLindahl, Stockholm, who said that this was one area in which theSwedish Government could find common ground with a large part of theSwedish population, the political parties and non-governmentalorganisations (NGOs).  He reported that the Government had specified aspriorities in its approach to the EU's environmental agenda: measuresto combat acidification and climate change, resource management andproduct recycling, conservation of biological diversity, more stringentchemical control, international co-operation and more specific measuresincluding: environmental impact assessments, cleaner industrialprocesses, waste disposal, environmental management and audits, trade,energy-related taxes and land and water resource management.More generally, Prof Stenberg said that the Swedish Government attachedmuch importance to implementation of rules once they were agreed.  Thatwent further than the basic question of correct implementation ofdirectives under member state law, he said; it also included allocationof enough economic resources to the responsible bodies to ensure thatthe rules are effectively observed.* "European Environmental Harmonisation, Liability and Enforcement: TheImpact of Accession of New EU Member States", 5th Annual Seminar of theEuropean Environmental Law Subcommittee (F1) of the International BarAssociation's Section on Business Law, 271 Regent Street, London W1R7PA. Tel: +44 (0)171-629 1206; Fax: +44 (0)171-409 0456.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LONG WAY TO GO BEFORE ACCESSIONEnvironmental issues could become a major obstacle to accession to theEuropean Union for the first time as the countries of central and eastEurope (CEE) prepare for this step following agreement on a broad pre-accession strategy at the Essen European Council in December 1994.Despite much rhetoric and optimism up to now, they still have a verylong way to go before they fulfil the environmental policy conditionsrequired for entry, according to a representative of the EuropeanCommission.  Speaking at a conference in Vienna in November(this issueabove), Julian Wilson, of the PHARE Programme staff in DGIA, said thatwhile the Commission was working hard to support the countries' effortstowards accession, there were some unrealistic expectations within theCEE region, particularly in relation to the environmental conditions.Among the problems experienced so far, he reported, were that thedialogue with the EU on the issues involved was relatively superficial,basic information and statistics were lacking, as were comprehensivecountry strategies, financing plans and schedules did not exist,legislation was being passed but not monitored or enforced, and theenvironment was generally of secondary importance compared witheconomic growth.He warned that existing member states would not allow new entrantsunless the statutory targets on matters such as emissions were met andthe CEE region was mostly still a long way off that.  The EuropeanCommission's environmental policy representatives were often seen as anirritating obstacle by CEE government ministries, such as finance andindustry, he said, some of whom had to be convinced that environmentalrequirements were unavoidable.  Mr Wilson described the progress whichhad been made since the publication last summer of a White Paper onpreparation for integration into the internal market (COM(95) 163final), on matters such as harmonisation of regulations, monitoring andenforcement, municipalities, and past environmental damage and thegreening of industry.  He emphasised that the funds available throughthe PHARE Programme and other international financial institutionswould amount to only a small proportion of the money required by theCEE countries for approximation to EU environmental standards.Mr Wilson made a number of forecasts on how things would develop in thenext few years, including that: CEE industry would remain uncontrolledand very "ungreen" during the accession period; municipalities wouldmeet environmental conditions faster; the environment overall wouldbecome a block to creation of a free market and to eventual accession;the central part of the region had a head start, although the Balticstates were catching up fast; the countries which costed theenvironment fully, enforced more strongly and asked for acceptabledispensations would accede first; and the present timeframes werecompletely crazy.  The idea being promoted by some that the countrieswould meet the objectives within five years was nonsense, he said;progress could be made, however, if governments were prepared todiscuss specific derogations and enforcement matters.  The whole debatein the environmental field, he argued, needed to be much morestructured, operational and realistic.  He also warned that thisprocess presented real dangers if it was not taken sufficientlyseriously, because a failure to achieve the EU's objectives in relationto CEE countries could rebound on what had been achieved within theexisting EU membership.Tim Murphy, head of the environmental appraisal unit at the EuropeanBank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), London, also urgedsober assessment of the amounts of money needed to achieveharmonisation with EU standards, pointing out that one estimate for allsix accession countries and three Baltic states was ECU100bn, or 3.6%of gross domestic product (GDP) a year.  Another estimate given earlierat the conference, of ECU300bn, would represent some 11% of GDP onenvironmental affairs, he pointed out, which was clearly unrealistic.He stressed that most of the finance for achieving environmentallysustainable development would have to come from the countriesthemselves and much of it from the private or municipal sectors.Among the challenges facing the CEE countries, Mr Murphy said, were aneed to realise that they had to internalise environmental costs, aneed to embrace principles such as cleaner production and wasteminimisation, and the importance of environmental product standards.He argued that it was particularly important to the EBRD that thecountries did not divide into two, with an advanced minority havingprospects of early accession and a less advanced majority fallingbehind.  He also said that the investment cycle currently offered awindow of opportunity which had to be seized by the countriesthemselves.Gyula Bandi, of University Eotvos Lorand, Budapest, said that theenvironment was still not a high priority issue for the HungarianGovernment, although he hoped that the introduction of Hungary's newEnvironmental Protection Act (in force from December 1995) (ELR023/5,020/7) might push it up the priority list.  Even the Act, he argued,tended to allow economic considerations to override environmentalrequirements, with concepts such as "if the present economic situationallows" and a general lack of acceptance that there would be costs toindustry.  A key problem, he said, was there was still no coreprogramme or strategy, within which to order priorities and, inaddition, a recent resolution to restructure governmentresponsibilities had created uncertainty about who the competentauthorities for various environmental matters would be.Stanislaw Wajda, an adviser to the Polish Environment Minister,reported that the Polish Government was working on a framework lawwhich was launched in June last year, was due to be completed by June1996 and should be sent to the country's Parliament by the end of 1997. He said that Poland faced problems such as a lack of legal expertiseand of analytical materials on EU laws, and was missing workingrelations with EU experts and direct insight into the legislativeprocess within the EU.  He felt that observer status would be helpfuland he drew attention to a refusal of such status which had occurred in1994 when Poland approached the EU's network of enforcement officials,known as the Chester or IMPEL Network (ELR006/15, 005/15, 001/9). Atthe time, the response had been that the request was premature, but heargued that that ought to be re-considered.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EMERGING FROM SOVIET RULEAn important feature of the development of environmental law in theBaltic states is that, unlike the countries of central Europe, they areemerging from 50 years within the Soviet Union.  They have thereforehad to develop a whole framework of national law, as well as rules fora market economy, since they obtained independence in 1991.  Theyreached approximation agreements with the EU in 1995, so are very muchat the beginning of the process of adjusting their environmental lawsand regulations, the conference (this issue p7) was told by GrettaGoldenman, of Oppenheimer Wolff & Donnelly, Brussels.In Lithuania, she reported, a unit has been set up within the Ministryof Environmental Protection to deal with the approximation process, butthe Ministry has access to very little expertise in environmental lawand would benefit greatly from closer contact with experts in moreadvanced countries.  For that reason, she said, the LithuanianGovernment has recently been exploring close working ties with one ormore EU member states, to learn from their experience.  In themeantime, a substantial amount of legislation is in draft, coveringsubjects like environmental impact assessment and waste management, anda framework law on environmental protection was passed in 1992.  Anenvironmental strategy was also recently prepared for submission to theSofia Environment for Europe conference last October (ELR025/6).Legislators were having to struggle in this field, Ms Goldenman said,with a background of Soviet regulations on subjects like ambient airand water quality, which were so strict that they were virtuallyunachievable.  The result in the past, she said, was that statutory"maximum allowable pollution values" were routinely supplemented by"temporary allowable pollution limits" issued by the authorities toreflect what was actually being released by a plant.  Charges andpenalties for pollution were consequently very low, leaving almost noincentive at all for enterprises to invest in pollution reduction.One of the anomalies in Lithuania, and also in Latvia and Estonia, hasbeen that the privatisation process has up to now involved sellingenterprises separately from the land on which they stand, Ms Goldenmantold ELR.  This is because the country's Constitution limits ownershipof land to citizens of Lithuania and foreign embassies.  In order tobecome members of the EU this has to be changed, she said, and aConstitutional amendment partially removing that obstacle was beingdebated in the Lithuanian Parliament in December.  An inter-ministerialworking group set up in April 1995, with some outside representationfrom the business community, she reported, also producedrecommendations in September concerning liability issues in theprivatisation process, focussing particularly on damage which occurredprior to privatisation, when the assets were under state ownership.The Environmental Protection Ministry is currently considering thoserecommendations.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WASTE OFFENCES BRING NEW LAWA series of breaches of waste management authorisations recentlyuncovered by environmental inspectors have persuaded the SlovakEnvironment Ministry (MZPSR) to introduce new measures to tighten upregulation in this field. The Ministry is currently preparing a new Lawon Wastes, part of which will include provisions to make it much moredifficult to "skirt round" the laws and regulations, according to astatement from Environment Minister Josef Zlocha in January.  Therewill also be encouragement for waste incineration as preferable to someother forms of waste disposal.  Mr Zlocha emphasised that the dangerfrom wastes should not be under-estimated, because in the future theycould become an "ecological time bomb".Two cases were cited by the Slovak News Agency in January.  The firstconcerned a company called EHS, part of Slovnaft as, which had assumedresponsibility for handling certain hazardous wastes.  Instead ofdisposing of them in the approved manner, the Ministry discovered17,000 tonnes (t) of the waste in a brickworks yard in Lucenec, nearthe Hungarian border, and 7,000t at a municipal waste site in Trencin,north east of Bratislava. The second case involved Tellus Tellumo, inBratislava, which is alleged to have discharged used mineral oilwithout due regard to its effects on groundwater and to have beenstoring used batteries on site, with possible sulphuric acid leaks.The company had a licence only to transport, rather than store, suchmaterials.  Local and national inspection officials were reported tohave exercised the appropriate sanctions in both cases.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PARLIAMENT RATIFIES BASELBulgaria was added to the list of countries which have ratified theBasel Convention on trans-boundary movements of hazardous wastes andtheir disposal, following a vote in its Parliament on 18 January.  Insupporting the vote, the Government observed that Bulgarian law inrecent years had been brought into line with the provisions of theConvention.  The Environmental Protection Act passed in 1991 andamended in 1992 regulates import and trans-shipment of waste, and isbacked up by foreign trade rules and agreements with the EuropeanUnion.  Bulgaria has also instituted an internal system for licensinghazardous waste disposal.  The Environment Ministry reported thatBulgarian industry generated 14,300 tonnes of hazardous waste in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BC PUBLISHES THIRD SITE DRAFTDraft no 3 of the Contaminated Sites Regulation for the Canadianprovince of British Columbia (BC) was finally published on 4 December.This Regulation is required in order to implement a new contaminatedsite regime under the Waste Management Amendment Act, 1993 (also knownas Bill 26), which was passed in June 1993 (ELR001/6).  The regimeinvolves strict, joint and several, and retroactive liability,compulsory remediation orders, with exemptions for certain parties,limited liability provisions for minor contributors and thosevolunteering to conduct clean ups, allocation panels to assist inapportioning liability, a public registry of site information and siteprofile requirements at the time of specified transactions.  The systemhas been criticised by some business groups, but has also been subjectto prolonged consultation.  The BC Government's view is that the newprovisions clarify issues which were left unresolved under previouslegislation and in so doing provide more defences and exemptions forthe parties likely to be involved.Draft no 2 of the Regulation was circulated for comment in September1994, following a consultation exercise, originally with the intentionthat it should be the final draft prior to implementation and thereforesubject only to minor changes.  By October 1994, however, furtherconsultation had been extended indefinitely following pressure frommunicipal authorities and subsequently other groups concerning clean-upstandards, municipal liability and liability exposures for parties suchas lenders, trustees, developers and the mining industry (ELR014/6,012/4).  The third draft appeared to be imminent in July 1995(ELR024/5, 022/6), but has ultimately taken until December to come out. This time comments were requested within seven weeks (by 22 January)and the BC Government appeared to be resolved finally to push theRegulation through.  The target date for its coming into force wasgiven as spring 1996.The Regulation now contains some 17 Divisions (chapters) coveringsubjects such as site profiles, site registry, fees, contaminated sitedefinition and determination, remediation standards, liability,contaminated soil relocation, remediation plan approval and completion,and orphan sites.  Most of the changes reflect the concerns which wereexpressed about the second draft by various interested groups, so thatmunicipalities in particular get a series of clarifications orconcessions reducing their liability exposures, new exemptions areprovided for trustees, executors, administrators and other fiduciaries,a lower standard of care for receivers and a new system of soilstandard setting is introduced containing four different types ofstandards which are intended to allow more flexibility in theremediation process.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REPORT HOLDS OMAI LIABLE FOR DAMAn inquiry report produced by a commission of the Guyanese Governmenthas suggested that the mine operators, Omai Gold Mines Ltd, should beheld liable for the damage which resulted from the failure of atailings dam at Guyana's largest gold mine in August last year(ELR025/9, 024/19). The report concluded that the company had a legalobligation to ensure that the cyanide-contaminated water in thetailings pond did not escape and would be liable, irrespective of thequality of their work in securing it, if the contaminants were allowedto escape.  On the other hand, the report decided that thecontamination of the Omai and Essequibo rivers caused by the incidentdid not give rise to a serious threat to life and that the naturalbacteriological and biochemical systems in the water courses did notseem to have been severely affected.In the underlying event, some 3m cubic metres of cyanide-contaminatedwaste escaped from the tailings pond at Omai mine, first into the localOmai river, but thereafter into Guyana's largest river, the Essequibo.Initial concerns included possible threats to loggers, native Indians,fish and wildlife along the river, which is much used for drinkingwater and fishing.  Some neighbouring Caribbean countries at one stageimposed bans on Guyana's fish and shrimp catch.  By mid-September,however, the Guyanese Health Ministry had declared the Essequibo safe,following international inspections.  Local inhabitants, nevertheless,are reported to have complained of skin irritations and a coalitiongroup critical of the commission's report has been considering a classaction lawsuit, according to the Montreal Gazette.Omai Gold Mines Ltd is 65% owned by Cambior Inc, Montreal, 30% byGolden Star Resources Ltd, Edmonton (part of a Colorado-based US group)and 5% by the Guyanese Government.  The mine is reportedly the largestopen pit gold mine in South America.  At the beginning of January,Finance Minister Bharrat Jagdeo reported that the country's gold exportearnings were US$27m short of their $135m target in 1995 because of theOmai mine's closure following the spill.  A separate estimate putOmai's losses, in terms of expenses and lost revenue, at C$25m(US$18.2m).  Cambior's share price also fell substantially followingthe incident, with investors noting that the Omai mine had been due toaccount for a sizeable part of the company's gold production in 1995.The commission called for independent geo-technical scrutiny of a newimpoundment under construction at the mine, to confirm its structuralintegrity.  It suggested that the spill was caused by faultyconstruction of an embankment dam holding the liquid waste, resultingin progressive cavities or tunnels in the core of the embankment whichended in catastrophic failure.  Its report did not attempt to apportionblame for the faults.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PARLIAMENT PRESSES FOR LIABILITY DIRECTIVEJust when some observers thought that DGXI's efforts to get a draftdirective on environmental liability on to the books in 1996 wererunning into difficulty (ELR028/9), the European Parliament has steppedin to add a potentially important voice to the calls for such aproposal.  At its plenary meeting in December, the Parliament approveda resolution on the Commission's work programme for 1996 which includesa demand that "a proposal for a directive concerning rules on damage tothe environment" be added to the programme.  When the 1996 workprogramme was published in November, there was no mention of such aninitiative despite several indications during 1995 that DGXI hoped toachieve this, if possible, in the early months of this year.Efforts by DGXI to get approval for such a step from the College ofCommissioners, the forum which brings together all the EuropeanCommissioners, at one of their meetings in December, were abandoned bythe middle of that month, apparently because the EnvironmentCommissioner, Ritt Bjerregaard, felt that the prospects of winningagreement from her fellow Commissioners would be better after theresults were in from the two research projects into aspects ofenvironmental liability which are due for completion soon (ELR024/9,022/8 et al).What gives the Parliament's resolution some bite is that it drawsattention to its own previous resolution in April 1994 (ELR00/), whichcalled upon the Commission to bring forward proposals in this field,and to the fact that the earlier resolution was passed by theParliament under Article 138b of the Treaty, which gives the Parliamentthe power to initiate measures, rather than simply respond to theCouncil and the Commission.  A separate clause in the Decemberresolution stresses that "the legislative programme should includeEuropean Parliament initiatives adopted pursuant to Article 138b of theEC Treaty".  The issue of environmental liability, whatever itspolitical complications, has therefore become embroiled in theParliament's battle to implement the enhanced powers it obtained underthe Maastricht treaty.  Other environmental measures mentioned in theParliament's December resolution included a proposal for "a directiveon soil protection laying down strict provisions on protection againstpollution and sustainable management of the soil (land use, erosion,compaction)" and a "White Paper on the monitoring and application ofCommunity legislation on the environment, including the imposition ofpenalties".Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19964TH INTERNATIONAL ENFORCEMENT CONFERENCEThe fourth in an increasingly important series of internationalconferences on environmental compliance and enforcement will take placeon 22-26 April in Chiang Mai, Thailand.  Over 200 participants haveregistered for this event, representing some 80 countries andinternational organisations.  The previous conference was held inOaxaca, Mexico, in April 1994, attracting 175 people from 70 countries(ELR012/8-11, 011/14, 006/15), and before that the first two in theseries took place in Utrecht, in May 1990, and Budapest, in September1992 (ELR001/10).  Those two brought together representatives from 13and 40 countries, respectively.  The series has been supportedthroughout by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and theDutch Environment Ministry (VROM), together latterly with the UNEnvironment Programme (UNEP), local agencies in the countries visitedand other groups.  There has been a deliberate attempt to spread theactivity geographically by convening each conference in a new region toattract greater participation from that part of the world.What distinguishes these mega-events from some other conferences isthat participation is confined for the most part to active national andlocal officials with enforcement responsibilities, with a minority frominternational agencies and non-governmental organisations (NGOs).  Theflavour of the get-together is therefore very much about action andbuilding enforcement capabilities by sharing experience and extendingsupport across national boundaries.  In that sense, within Europe it isparallelled by the, also increasingly important, Chester or IMPELNetwork, which brings together enforcement officials throughout the EUon a regular basis (ELR006/15, 005/15, 001/9).The conference programme in Chiang Mai includes workshop sessions withsubjects which give an indication of some of the current priorities.They include, among others: establishing international co-operation andregional networks, automation and enforcement, strategic targeting,compliance monitoring, promoting voluntary compliance, measures ofsuccess, public role in enforcement, criminal enforcement (Interpoletc), economic instruments, take-back laws, transboundary illegalshipments of hazardous waste (tricks of the trade) and collaborativeinternational targeting. While much of the work will focus oninstitutional, technical and policy issues, it is worth noting thatinvolving the public in helping to enforce environmental regulationsremains very much on the agenda.  Workshop sessions on this public rolewill include issues such as the role of citizens in identifyingviolators, their role in pursuing enforcement actions or forcinggovernments to pursue violators and the need for public disclosure ofcompliance information.  Alongside this, considerable effort will beput into assisting countries with less advanced environmentalregulatory capacities to increase their effectiveness.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EEA HIGHLIGHTS SOIL & GROUNDWATERSoil and groundwater problems were among the topics highlighted by theEuropean Environment Agency (EEA) in a report published in November aspart of the European Commission's review of its Fifth EnvironmentalAction Programme.  The report was published just before the EEAcelebrated its second anniversary at its Copenhagen headquarters, anoccasion marked by a ceremony attended by 140 people, including theCommission President Jacques Santer, Environment Commissioner RittBjerregaard and senior representatives from all 15 EU member states.The EEA report concluded that EU environmental policy needed to be"accelerated" in order to meet its own environmental objectives.Although progress had been made in reducing some pressures on theenvironment, these were not enough, it said, to improve the generalquality of the environment, even less to achieve sustainability.Successes in recent years had been mainly in dealing with point (iestationary) sources of pollution, especially in the industrial sector.Policies aimed at diffuse sources, such as products, consumers andtransport, it argued, had been much less effective.The report recommended that further attention be given at Europeanlevel to climate change, acidification, urban air quality, waterabstraction and groundwater quality, habitat destruction andfragmentation, and waste management.  It also identified as otherissues which had not been comprehensively tackled at European level thedegradation of soil quality (described as an important naturalresource), coastal management and chemicals in the environment.  Withinthe 151-page report, the EEA suggested that more attention should begiven to the efficiency of environmental policies and called for aparticular focus on the transport sector, where it foresaw exceptionalpressures on the environment as a result of growth trends in freightand passenger road transport.Mr Santer told the Agency's anniversary gathering that he wanted theCommission to be "at the leading edge of environmental policies" andthat he saw the EEA's work in developing accurate data on environmentaltrends as part of a drive to change attitudes across Europe.  MsBjerregaard said that the issues identified in the EEA report would betaken up in the Commission's own proposals for advancing the 5th ActionProgramme.  She drew attention to the fact that moves towards greateruse of economic instruments in this field were being hampered by therequirement for unanimity at the Council of Ministers on policies withfiscal provisions and she observed that the unanimity requirement mightbe reconsidered during the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC)(this issue p4).Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EEA INTERNET SITE LAUNCHEDA European Environment Agency (EEA) Internet site was launched byEuropean Commission President Jacques Santer at the Agency's secondanniversary celebrations on 13 November.  The World Wide Web site, athttp://www.eea.dk/, is intended to play a key role in making EEAinformation available to the general public.  The initial contents willbe relatively limited, but there are plans to add more publications andmany EEA databases, with the newest items advertised at the main homepage of the site.  Within the first month after its launch, the EEAreported that there had been 1,800 accesses to the home page and atotal of over 30,000 file retrievals from the whole site.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REFINERY FINED RECORD S$150,000A S$150,000 (US$105,783) fine imposed by the Port of SingaporeAuthority against the Singapore Refinery Co in connection with an oilspill at its Pulau Merlimau refinery last August is the highest so farimposed in Singapore for an oil spill.  The penalty was imposed underthe Prevention of Pollution at Sea Act, which provides for fines up toS$500,000 and prison terms of up to two years.  Previously, the highestfine for this kind of incident had been S$30,000.The August spill is reported to have resulted from a pipeline valvebeing accidentally left open following maintenance activities.  Some300 tonnes of oil subsequently leaked into the sea when pumpingrestarted.  The oil apparently leaked into an adjoining drain andthence into the storm water system and the sea.  It then spread over anarea of approximately 60 sq km and is said to have cost S$1.7m to cleanup.  A further S$6,000 in fines had previously been levied under theTrade Effluents Regulations.The company, a joint venture involving Caltex, BP and SingaporePetroleum Ltd, had sought a lesser penalty on the grounds that it hadco-operated fully once the leak was detected and had done its utmost toclean up the damage.  Since the incident, it told The Straits Times, ithad revised operating procedures, improved storm water inspectionbefore it enters the sea, installed guard basins and oil detectiondevices, provided additional training for staff, and reviewed emergencyresponse systems, organising an external audit to verify theimprovements.  A spokesman told the paper that the company was ISOcertified and had worked quickly to implement all the recommendationsof the inquiries conducted after the spill.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW EPA AUDITING/SELF-REPORTING POLICYThe US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued a new policyconcerning environmental auditing and reporting of statutoryviolations, which offers some incentives to companies to reportthemselves when they discover such infractions, but also leavesquestion marks about the advisability of doing so.  The policystatement, "Incentives for Self- Policing: Discovery, Disclosure,Correction and Prevention of Violations", was published in the FederalRegister on 22 December and came into effect on 22 January.  It is theculmination of a period of consultation about this subject which beganin the summer of 1994 (ELR020/11, 013/11).Hitherto, official guidance has been based on a series of policystatements issued by the EPA and the Department of Justice from 1986onwards, which stated that the regulators would not routinely seekcompanies' audit reports in the course of their enforcement work andthat activities such as self-auditing and voluntary disclosure would betaken into account in decisions about prosecutions and penalties.  Theunderlying policy, however, reserved for the authorities the discretionto demand such reports when they deemed it appropriate and was thesubject of much corporate concern because of the uncertainty which thiscaused.In recent years, business groups have been arguing in favour of a newform of legal privilege to protect such internal review documents,widely known as the "self-evaluative" privilege.  Several US stateshave introduced such a concept at state level and there is case lawsupporting it in private civil actions relating to fields such asmedical malpractice, but it is not recognised so far in the federal, ormany of the state, courts in the context of environmental actions.  TheEPA announced in March 1995 that it would not support a new statutoryaudit privilege in this field, for fear that that could "promotesecrecy, expand litigation and compromise enforcement actions".  Duringthe consultation process, environmental groups had lobbied the Agencyfor total transparency of the audit process, with public participationand disclosure throughout.  Companies, in contrast, tend to feel thatmore is achieved in terms of environmental protection if audit reportsremain internal.What the EPA decided to offer instead was a policy of reduced civilpenalties and waiving of criminal proceedings where organisationsdisclosed their own violations and promptly corrected them.  Thediscretion to ask for audit material would remain, but would only beexercised where there was independent evidence of a potentialviolation.  The incentive system now coming into effect specifiesconditions under which the "gravity-based" component of a civil penaltycan be reduced by either 100% or 75%.  Such civil penalties areassessed in two parts: first, in terms of the net economic benefitwhich the company concerned is deemed to have gained as a result ofviolating certain regulations and, second, a "gravity-based" elementintended to reflect the degree of seriousness involved.  The first willcontinue to be imposed in full under the new policy, but the second maybe reduced or eliminated where companies meet specified standards.A recent briefing put out by the Washington DC office of lawyersMorgan, Lewis & Bockius, gives a good summary of the new policy'sprovisions.  To secure a 100% reduction of the gravity-based penalty,nine conditions have to be met: the violation must be discoveredthrough an environmental audit or "due diligence" compliance programme;it must be identified voluntarily; it must be fully disclosed to theEPA within 10 days of discovery; it must be discovered and disclosedindependent of any government, third party or "whistleblower" action;it must be corrected within 60 days, or longer with EPA agreement, withcorrection certified to the EPA; the company must agree to take stepsto prevent a recurrence; the violation must not be a repeat of aprevious violation; it must not have caused "serious actual harm" norpresented "an imminent and substantial endangerment" nor violated theterms of a previous order or consent decree; and the company must co-operate with the EPA's investigation of the matter.  Morgan, Lewis &Bockius point out that this will allow companies to benefit from thepenalty reduction even where the violation is of a kind that is subjectto mandatory reporting.The policy then gives a detailed definition of environmental duediligence sufficient to achieve the reduction, based on the company'ssystematic efforts, appropriate to the size of the business, toprevent, detect and correct violations through all of a six-point listof measures.  It also offers more limited 75% reductions where thecompany does not have an audit or due diligence programme meeting theEPA criteria, but fulfils all the other conditions on the nine-pointlist.Alex Karlin, of Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, told ELR that the EPA waseffectively offering companies a carrot to encourage voluntarydisclosure where no mandatory duty to disclose existed.  He cautioned,however, that companies would have to look carefully at each case anddecide whether it was better to come forward and accept a highprobability of a penalty, albeit reduced, or not to report in theknowledge that no one might ever find out or, if they did some years inthe future, the problem would already have been fixed.  Under thelatter circumstances, he said, the only thing missing would have been avoluntary report to the authorities, who might by that time take theview that it was not worth re-opening penalty proceedings.  Thedecision, he suggested, would be fact-specific, based on the nature ofthe violation and the likelihood of it coming out anyway.The most important pre-requisite, Mr Karlin emphasised, was to fix theproblem immediately or as soon as possible.  Having done that, heargued, the self-reporting question would become a smaller issue.  Henoted, nevertheless, that the "gravity-based" element in a penaltyassessed by the EPA could be as large as $1.4m or $2m, so thereductions on offer could not be dismissed.  He also said that existingcompany audit or compliance programmes ought now to be checked againstthe new EPA definitions to make sure that they would qualify forreductions under the scheme.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCOUNTING FORUM ADVISES ON REPORTINGPressure for fuller reporting of environmental factors by companiesreceived a further boost in December, when a potentially influentialadvisory document on the best ways to treat environmental expendituresand liabilities in company accounts and annual reports within theEuropean Union was produced by an expert body known as the AccountingAdvisory Forum.  The Forum comprises individual experts selected on apersonal basis to advise the European Commission on accountancymatters.  It is not a standard-setting body.  The document, entitled"Environmental Issues in Financial Reporting", is therefore intended tostimulate discussion on the issues among "standard-setters, preparers,users and auditors of accounts" in member states.The subject was raised in the Commission's Fifth Environmental ActionProgramme, "Towards Sustainability", published in 1992, and the Forumwas asked by the Commission to give an opinion on how to improvereporting in this field, "so that a better insight is provided into thecompany's attitude towards the environment and the impact ofenvironmental risks and liabilities on its financial position."  Thedocument is not concerned with separate environmental reports producedby companies, except insofar as it recommends that the existence ofthese should be referred to in accounts and annual reports as a sourceof further information.Using the framework of general provisions in the 4th and 7th CompanyLaw Directives on annual and consolidated accounts (78/660/EEC and83/349/EEC), the document acknowledges that environmental liabilitiesand risks entail special uncertainties relating to factors such aschanges in clean-up technologies, future legislation and the extent ornature of the clean up required.  Nevertheless, it argues that suchliabilities and risks qualify for recognition as a provision in thebalance sheet if the company has a legal or contractual obligation toprevent, reduce or repair environmental damage, or if its management iscommitted to such action through things like statements of policy orintention, industry practice or public expectations, or communicationof such a decision either internally or externally.The amount of a provision, it suggests, should be based on reasonableestimates of the loss, if necessary within a range, with a contingentliability note where it is possible that the loss will be greater thanexpected.  If no reasonable estimate can be made, which the documentdescribes as "rare circumstances", "the company should at leastdisclose the nature of the contingent liability as well as thecircumstances and risks involved in the notes to the accounts."  Theamount recorded as a company's expected future environmentalexpenditures should, the document says, be sufficient "to cover thefull costs of the damage to the environment for which the company isresponsible, irrespective of the date at which the activity is ceased."Except where long-term de-commissioning costs for such facilities asdrilling platforms or nuclear power stations can be clearlydistinguished from other liability provisions, the Forum interprets the4th Directive as requiring that the full charge should be included inthe profit and loss account as soon as it arises, and not spread overseveral years.  This is despite the fact that the Forum recognises thatnew legislation or discovery of unexpected liabilities may involveaccumulated expenditures which are so large that they distort thecompany's accounts in that year, making it difficult to interpret itsunderlying economic performance.The document defines criteria for capitalising environmentalexpenditures and it recommends more generally that gross liabilitiesand expected recoveries, through counter-claims, insurance cover orsimilar agreements, be shown separately in the balance sheet, ratherthan presenting liabilities in net form.  In terms of disclosure, thedocument says that environmental issues should only be disclosed inaccounts and annual reports "to the extent that they are material tothe financial performance or financial position of the undertaking",with exemptions where member states have introduced them for small andmedium-size companies.It suggests that the notes on the accounts should include the amountcapitalised and analysis of the amount charged to the profit and lossaccount "in a manner appropriate to the nature and size of businessand/or the types of environmental issues relevant to the enterprise",including factors as prevention, reduction and repair of environmentaldamage.  The notes should also, it states, cover costs incurred asfines or penalties for non-compliance and compensation to third partiesfor loss or injury (which the Forum excludes from its "narrow"definition of environmental expenditures).  In the annual report, theForum argues, information could include a description of the issueswhich are relevant to the financial position and the undertaking'sresponse to them, the enterprise's environmental policy, improvementsthat have been made in key areas, available government incentives, theextent of measures which are in the process of implementation and areference to any other information provided in a separate environmentalreport.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS POSTPONEDA Decree issued at the beginning of January has postponed the deadlinespreviously set for operators of certain high risk installations inFrance to obtain financial guarantees to cover factors such as accidentand pollution response measures, site restoration after closure andsite monitoring and security.  The deadline for such guarantees hadbeen 13 December 1995, but the French Environment Ministry announcedshortly before that that implementation would be delayed.  Under Decreeno 96-18 of 5 January 1996, the guarantee requirements are stillbrought into effect from 14 December 1995 for all new waste storagefacilities and mining operations (ie, those whose initial authorisationis after that date), but the deadline for such sites which were alreadyin operation is postponed until 14 June 1999.  New industrialfacilities will have until 14 December 1997 to obtain such guarantees,while it appears that no date has been set for existing industrialfacilities.These provisions come under Article 23 of the 1976 ClassifiedInstallations Law, as amended by Decree no 94-848 of 9 June 1994(ELR011/3).  The 1994 Decree specified elements of the differentcategories of installation which had to be covered, required allguarantees to be renewed at least three months before their expiry andtied them to particular operators, so that any change of ownership orcontrol would require a new guarantee.  Patrick Thieffry, of Thieffry &Associes, Paris, told a conference in Vienna in November (this issuep7) that the reason for delay was that qualifying financial securitieswere generally not available in France as yet from banks or insurersand no alternative fund had been established, as permitted under thelaw.  A few such guarantees had been issued, he said, but only on acase-by-case basis and at a local level.Mr Thieffry placed all this in the context of increasingly tightpolicing of the so-called classified installations, which include alarge number of relatively high risk plants in France.  He referred tocase law under the 1976 Law which showed that French courts will upholdorders against current operators requiring them to restore a site to"such a condition that it presents none of the hazards orinconveniences" which the law seeks to eliminate.  He observed thatthis responsibility was irrespective of whether the operator was incharge of the site at the time that the relevant pollution occurred andthat the requirement extended to events occurring before 1976, with theConseil d'Etat linking it to a prior 1917 Law on ClassifiedInstallations.Mr Thieffry cited as an example the case of a Marrion Merrel Dow sitein Yvelines, where the company was having to conduct a major clean-upoperation even though it only acquired the site in 1981 while the toxicchemicals involved had been dumped between 1965 and 1969.  In thatcase, over 80 tonnes of various toxic chemicals, 300 tonnes of aceticacid and 650 tonnes of alcohol had been deposited in a basin, fromwhich it had leaked into chalky soil and spread, with a vulnerablewater course nearby. ELR understands that the pollution only came tolight when Marrion Merrel Dow was in the process of selling the site toa new owner in 1992 and resulted in the contaminated part of the sitehaving to be withdrawn from the sale, pending satisfactory clean up.The operation is expected to last seven years and to include 15drilling operations to divert the flow of pollutants away from theperimeter and removal of some 2,500 tonnes of contaminated soil, MrThieffry said.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ISO PUBLISHES SUPERFUND REPORTThe US Insurance Services Office (ISO), New York, an industry bodyserving the property/casualty insurance industry, has published areport* on the Superfund hazardous substance clean-up law, which iscurrently subject to Congressional attempts at reform (ELR027/3, 026/1& 3, et al).  The report, entitled "Superfund and the Insurance IssuesSurrounding Abandoned Hazardous Waste Sites" was published on 29December.  It gives a range of estimates for the long-term costs toinsurers from such waste sites, based on previous studies, of between$25bn and $608bn, although it notes that most recent estimates are atthe low end of the range and that discounting for net present valuewould substantially reduce the numbers.  It places these figuresalongside the total US property/casualty insurance industry's statutorysurplus at the end of 1994 of $191bn, but it notes that a small numberof large writers of commercial liability insurance are likely to bearmost of the cost.  The combined surplus of the 35 most exposed to theselosses stood at $85bn.The report highlights as prime insurer concerns about Superfund:adverse court decisions which find unintended cover in old insurancepolicies, difficulty in establishing plausible estimates of liabilitiesand reserves due to conflicting court rulings and other factors, unfaircost allocation among potentially responsible parties (PRPs) and theirinsurers, and high litigation costs related to coverage disputes andpolicyholder defence.  It cites a number of studies into transactioncosts in the Superfund process, including legal costs, and highlights a1994 Government Accounting Office GAO survey which found that suchcosts represented approximately one-third of PRPs' costs and an A MBest study in the same year which estimated the insurance industry'slitigation cost share at 45%.The report reviews the range of reform options currently on thepolitical agenda, focussing particularly on elimination of retroactiveliability and joint and several liability, revision of clean-upstandards and remedy selection, and delegation of clean-up authority tothe states.  It concludes that many of the proposed reforms wouldreduce environmental liabilities for industry and for insurers, butmany could also increase expenses for the federal government.  In thatcontext, it notes that the potential payers of the taxes which thegovernment would be likely to raise to meet those costs, especially thepetroleum, chemical and insurance industries, disagree on the bestapproach.  Overall, the report suggests that Superfund and clean up ofhazardous waste will continue to be difficult issues for insurers,public policy-makers and society as a whole, and that the size of therequired clean up and the question of who should pay will remain thefocus of debate for many years to come.* "Superfund and the Insurance Issues Surrounding Abandoned HazardousWaste Sites", available from the Insurance Services Office Inc, 7 WorldTrade Center - 14th Floor, New York, NY 10048-1199.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SPATE OF OIL/CHEMICAL SPILLSAnyone taking a snapshot of recent events in Russia could be forgivenfor thinking that something close to an epidemic of oil spills andother leaks was taking place.  The incidents have been of varying sizesand the overall significance of them is hard to gauge.  Nevertheless,there seems little doubt that the general condition of the pipelinesystem falls well short of what would be required in most OECDcountries and reports from depots elsewhere in Russia and the formerSoviet bloc suggest a routine disregard in the past for basicenvironmental standards during operations such as oil delivery at railterminals and refineries.The most serious spill in recent weeks seems to have been one inDecember in the republic of Bashkortostan, at the southern end of theUrals, where a 700mm oil pipeline, more than 30 years old and runningalong the bottom of the river Belaya, was found to have burst on 26December near the capital city of Ufa, south-west of Sverdlovsk.Initial reports indicated that a 100 tonne (t) oil slick was presentingdifficulties because of severe weather conditions which were preventingthe use of specialised recovery equipment and even attempts to burn offthe oil.  According to news agency reports in early January, oil was bythen being removed by means of buckets through holes in the ice whichcovered the river.  Only some 15t had been recovered a week after theincident and there were fears that the oil might eventually reach theKama river and ultimately the Volga and the Caspian Sea.  Emergencyservices were reported to be building a protective shield nearBlagoveshchensk, 40km downstream from Ufa, to try to stop thathappening and both Bashkortostan and neighbouring Tatarstan had issuedpollution warnings.A few days later, however, the Bashkortostan Environment Minister,Rustem Khamitov, declared that the pipeline's owner had "seriouslyviolated the truth" in saying that 100t of oil had been lost; thereality was that a much larger quantity had escaped, he said, and thecrucial objective was to recover and neutralise as much as possiblebefore the spring thaw in 50-70 days time.  According to Reuters, thestate pipeline monopoly Transneft had declared two days after theincident that the leak had been dealt with, but Tass was now reportingthat 160 workers were still struggling to control the leak.  The pipehad apparently been shut off, booms put across the river and the oilset on fire to stop it spreading.  Some 664t of oil and water were saidto have been collected, of which up to 15% was oil.  At the same time,oil was reported to have reached Tatarstan, 160km from Ufa.By mid-January, weak ice on the river was forcing the authorities toresort to wider oil burning, leading Mr Khamitov to go on television toreassure people whose homes were being "covered with smoke" as the firespread over a large area.  The pipeline company was by then claimingthat 468t of oil had escaped, but other estimates put the figure at upto 2,400t.  On the other hand, according to Trud newspaper, pollutionreadings in the Belaya which showed concentrations of petroleumproducts five times maximum permissible levels had to be put in thecontext of routine chemical contamination of the river and commonbackground levels of petroleum products of 2-3 times the officiallimits in winter and up to 10 times in summer.  A Greenpeacerepresentative claimed that leaks from Russia's ageing pipeline networkwere so routine now that they resulted in the loss of between 2% and10% of the country's oil each year, representing total leaks of 20-50million tonnes (mt) a year.On 26 January, a Tatarstan environment official told a press conferencein Kazan that, extrapolating from the concentrations reaching the Tatartown of Aktanysh, it appeared that 12,000-13,000t of oil must haveleaked into the Belaya.  The Interfax news agency was quoted as sayingthat divers had still not located the precise point of the leak becauseof silting in the river and were therefore raising the pipe to thesurface for inspection.  Meanwhile, some 150km upstream of the Ufa oilspill, a serious leak of phenol occurred on 19 January at the Salavatoil refinery, involving the loss of around 2 cubic metres of this toxicsubstance.  The spill was initially turning into a snow-like solid inthe severe frost and efforts were being made to recover it in thatcondition before a thaw allowed it to dissipate into the Belaya.In the same month that all this was going on, a number of other seriousincidents were also reported.  On 24 December, some 400t of oil leakedfrom the Ukhta-Yaroslavl pipeline in the northern Komi republic,although the plume from this seemed to have been contained within anarea of around 5,000 square metres.  On 16 January, a second spill wasdiscovered in the same pipeline, this time near the town of Kotlas, inArchangel region. Some 70t of oil were reported to have escaped, but itappeared that none had reached the Severnaya Dvina river and work wasprogressing to collect and burn it off.  On 11 January, a bulldozerbreached part of Surgut-Polotsk pipeline in the Perm region,immediately north of Bashkortostan, releasing according to one estimate242t of oil.  On 16 January, it was reported that a slick extendingover 2.5km had been discovered on the Syzranka river in Samara region,west of Tatarstan.  This seemed to have leaked from an underwaterstretch of the Syzran-Zolnoye pipeline, possibly as a result ofcorrosion. The total quantity of oil leaked was not known, but againthe huge river Volga was threatened as the slick occurred only 8km fromthe meeting of the two rivers.The Baltic republic of Latvia has also been experiencing some similarproblems.  In November, 100t of diesel escaped from a pipeline linkingcentral Russia with the Latvian port of Ventspils, apparently theresult of a breach made by thieves some 12km east of Ventspils.  Asenior Latvian official called for a return to regular inspection ofhis country's pipelines, which he said had been left without anysupervision and had become an easy target for petroleum thieves whodamaged the pipelines.  On 16 January, a leak of petroleum productsfrom a wharf in Ventspils was reported to have reached the Baltic.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WASTE TREATMENT DISPUTEA plan by the Industrial Estate Authority of Thailand (IEAT) to providemobile waste treatment units at all the country's industrial estates isreported to have running into difficulty as a result of a previousgovernment contract with a Thai-US joint venture, Genco, to buildThailand's first modern hazardous waste facility in Rayong province.That contract gave Genco the sole right to operate hazardous wasteplants, according to FT Water Briefing.  Genco had planned to have itsplant up and running by early 1996, but had to stop work late last yearin the face of opposition from local residents who fear pollution tolocal streams.  A government-run treatment plant in Bankhunthien hasbeen working at only 10% of its 110,000 tonne capacity, apparentlybecause the majority of factories evade laws requiring treatment of alltoxic waste and pay for illegal dumping.  An estimated 1m tonnes oftoxic waste is produced each year in Thailand.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-27IA059-000325-B010-42http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev12.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000908 text/html 52822HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:06:58 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:24 GMTContent-length: 52633Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev12.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ** GENERAL INTEREST REPORTS ** ASSESSMENT OF THE LOSS AND DEGRADATION OF ECOSYSTEMS IN THE U.S. (110 words) REMOTE SENSING AS APPLIED TO POLLUTION MONITORING (129 words) ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION IN THE U.S. (307 words) PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY AND THE ENVIRONMENT (223 words) POLLUTION PREVENTION STRATEGY FOR INDUSTRY AND CONSUMERS (122 words) SITE REMEDIATION CASE STUDIES (98 words) ANALYSIS OF HAZARDS INVOLVING COMPRESSED GAS FUELING AT RETAIL SERVICE STATIONS (150 words) JUDGING THE HEALTH RISKS OF ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES (232 words) ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES USING LIDAR (294 words) ** AIR POLLUTION PROBLEMS AND REMEDIATION ** CARBON MONOXIDE EXPOSURES INSIDE OF AUTOMOBILES (236 words) SURVEY OF WORKER HEALTH SYMPTOMS AND INDOOR AIR IN OFFICE BUILDINGS (150 words) USING GAS REBURNING TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE ATMOSPHERIC NOx EMISSIONS FROM FURNACES AND KILNS (148 words) GAS REBURN TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE NOx EMISSIONS IN TANGENTIALLY-FIRED BOILERS [951321] (121 words) ** FOOD & AGRICULTURE PROBLEMS AND REMEDIATION ** PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN FOODS: A DATABASE FOR COMPUTERS (224 words) ** WASTE SITES, DISPOSAL, PROBLEMS, AND REMEDIATION ** MANAGING BOTTOM-SEDIMENTS CONTAINING TOXIC SUBSTANCES (80 words) REMOVING PCBs FROM CONTAMINATED SOIL USING THE CF SYSTEM(tm) SOLVENT EXTRACTION PROCESS (149 words) SOLVENT EXTRACTION FOR SEPARATING HAZARDOUS WASTE-SITE CONTAMINANTS (131 words) CONTAMINATED SOIL RESTORATION USING VAPOR EXTRACTION (162 words) VACUUM VAPOR EXTRACTION FOR INNOVATIVE SITE REMEDIATION (98 words) IN SITU RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) HEATING TO ENHANCE VAPOR EXTRACTION OF CONTAMINANTS FROM SOIL (150 words) ** MUNICIPAL WASTE PROBLEMS AND REMEDIATION ** OXYGEN-ENRICHED CO-INCINERATION OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) AND SEWAGE SLUDGE (265 words) ** BIOLOGICAL REMEDIATION OF WASTES ** BIO-OXIDATION TREATMENT OF PETROLEUM-CONTAMINATED SOIL (136 words) A VIDEO PRIMER ON BIOREMEDIATION TECHNOLOGIES (151 words) DECOMPOSITION OF TOXIC MATERIALS BY BIOREMEDIATION (139 words) ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS AND IMPACTS INVOLVING THE RELEASE OF NON-INDIGENOUS MICROORGANISMS (98 words) ** WATER TREATMENT, PROBLEMS, AND REMEDIATION ** PATENTS CONCERNING WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS FOR SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS (139 words) ADVISORY GROUPS IN WATER QUALITY PLANNING (74 words) NONPOINT WATER QUALITY POLLUTION FROM AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, AND MINING (74 words) ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT (64 words) ALTERNATIVE FINANCING FOR STATE WATER PROGRAMS (155 words) WATER POLLUTION EFFECTS OF METALS ON FRESH WATER FISH (129 words) ** RADIATION; RADIOACTIVE WASTES ** CANDIDATE PROCESSES FOR IN SITU TREATMENT OF MIXED VOC AND RADIOACTIVE CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER (201 words) MODULAR RISK ANALYSIS FOR ASSESSING SITES CONTAINING MULTIPLE MIXED RADIOACTIVE WASTES (185 words) WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH 104,000,000 CUBIC FEET OF LOW LEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTE (211 words) FUTURE EPA REGULATORY ISSUES INVOLVING ENVIRONMENTAL RADIATION (104 words) THE POTENTIAL RISKS OF NUCLEAR SHIPS (161 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ASSESSMENT OF THE LOSS AND DEGRADATION OF ECOSYSTEMS INTHE U.S.This (National Biological Service) report: presentsestimates of declines of natural ecosystems in theU.S.; provides a rationale for ecosystem-levelconservation; discusses decline and threat as criteriafor conservation; and relates ecosystem losses toendangerment at species and population levels.  Itsuggests that integrated conservation plans bedeveloped for all ecosystems in each ecoregion of theU.S., starting with types and regions that sustainedthe greatest losses and are at greatest risk of furtherloss.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960101; Feb. 1995, 63 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996REMOTE SENSING AS APPLIED TO POLLUTION MONITORINGThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns the use of remote sensors to aid in themonitoring of air and water pollution.  It addressesthe use of lasers, optical radar systems, aerialphotography, and satellite observations.  The reportconsists of a collection of abstracts of availablereports, studies, papers, and other documentation, withreferences for their acquisition and extensive indexingto make it easy to find exactly what you want.  It willbe updated to include the latest information availableat the time you place your order.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960102; latest 250 citations, updated to the date ofyour order.  Price: $319.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION IN THE U.S.At its core, environmental restoration -- defined asthe cleanup of contaminants from past activities --depends on a series of decisions about the nature andextent of contamination, the risk to human health andthe environment, and the potential effectiveness ofremediation techniques and technologies to reduce therisk to acceptable levels.  The effectiveness withwhich these decisions are made has significant impacton the cost and duration of the cleanup efforts.  Thedecisions must often be made on the basis of incompleteand uncertain data.  Emerging environmental informationand data acquisition technologies, together withappropriate strategies to support decision-making, arebeginning to change the way environmental restorationoccurs in the U.S.Past environmental restoration activities too oftenrelied on prescriptive data collection activities togenerate the information upon which decisions weremade.  Retrospective studies of such activities showthat often data were gathered for the purpose ofreducing the risk in decision-making, but little truereduction in risk was realized and large amounts ofresources were consumed.  Recent examination of thefailures in the U.S. to achieve many complete cleanups,despite the investment of large sums and time, pointsto the inability to have decisions made efficiently.The solution to the problem involves both regulatorychange to allow more flexibility in decision-making andthe introduction of technology to improvedecision-making.  This (Argonne National Laboratory)paper reviews recent assessments made of cleanupprocesses and the application of strategies andtechnologies to enhance decision-making for cleanup.It provides examples of the decision-making approachesand the technologies that have been employed to speedup characterization and to optimize the implementationof remediation.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960103; 1995, 12 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY AND THE ENVIRONMENTFrom the ozone hole and the greenhouse effect, toplastics recycling and hazardous waste disposal,society faces a number of issues requiring anunprecedented understanding of the properties ofmolecules.  We are coming to realize that theenvironment is a coupled set of chemical systems.  Itsdynamics determine the welfare of the biosphere and ofhumans in particular.  These chemical systems aregoverned by fundamental molecular interactions, andthey present chemists with an unparalleled challenge.The application of current concepts of molecularbehavior and of up-to-date experimental andcomputational techniques can provide us withenvironmental insights needed to: mitigate past damage;anticipate the impact of current human activity; andavoid future insults to the environment.Environmental chemistry encompasses a number ofseparate, yet interlocking, areas of research.  In allof these areas, progress is limited by an inadequateunderstanding of the underlying chemical processesinvolved.  Participation of all chemical approaches(experimental, theoretical, and computational) and ofall disciplines of chemistry (organic, inorganic,physical, analytical, and biochemistry) will berequired to provide the necessary fundamentalunderstanding.  This (Battelle Pacific NorthwestLaboratories) paper discusses physical chemistry andthe environment.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960104; Aug. 1994, 13 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996POLLUTION PREVENTION STRATEGY FOR INDUSTRY ANDCONSUMERSThis (Van Nostrand Reinhold) publication deals withprosperity without pollution and pollution preventionstrategies for everyone.  Its contents are as follows:Pollution prevention pays for everyone; What pollutionprevention is - What waste recycling and otherstrategies are not; Achieving success by overcomingobstacles; Data tell the story - too much waste; Theozone groan - do we still have time; Harm to the farmand home from chemical pesticides; Changing consumption- reducing garbage; Household toxic products - thinkingmore and buying less; No time to waste.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960105; 1991, 400 pp.  Price: $429.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996SITE REMEDIATION CASE STUDIESThis (Federal Remediation Technologies Roundtable)report is a collection of abstracts summarizing 37 casestudies of site remediation projects prepared byfederal agencies.  The case studies were undertaken todocument the results and lessons learned from earlytechnology applications.  They help to establishbenchmark data on cost and performance, which shouldlead to greater confidence in the selection and use ofcleanup technologies.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960106; Mar. 1995, 112 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ANALYSIS OF HAZARDS INVOLVING COMPRESSED GAS FUELING ATRETAIL SERVICE STATIONSAn evaluation of the hazards associated with operationsof a typical compressed natural gas (CNG) fuelingstation is presented (by Total Petroleum Inc.).  Theevaluation includes: identification of a typical CNGfueling system; a comparison of the typical system withANSI/NFPA (American National StandardsInstitute/National Fire Protection Association)Standard 52 Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) Vehicular FuelSystem requirements; a review of CNG industry safetyexperience as identified in current literature; hazardidentification of potential internal and externalevents leading to potential accidents; and an analysisof potential accident scenarios as determined from thehazard evaluation.  The study considers CNG dispensingequipment and associated equipment, including thecompressor station, storage vessels, and fill pressure-sensing system.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960107; Apr. 1995, 156 pp.  Price: $179.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996JUDGING THE HEALTH RISKS OF ENERGY TECHNOLOGIESThis (Brookhaven National Laboratory) report providesperspective on the various risks to which man isroutinely exposed.  It serves as a basis forunderstanding the meaning of quantitative riskestimates and for comparing new or newly-discoveredrisks with other better-understood risks.  Specificemphasis is placed on the health risks of energytechnologies.  The report is not a risk assessment, nordoes it contain instructions on how to do a riskassessment; rather, it provides background informationon how most of us think about risks and why it isdifficult to do it rationally.  It provides aphilosophy and data to use to do a better job ofjudging risks more rationally.  It also provides anoverview of where the risks of energy technologies fitwithin the spectrum of all risks.  Much of thequantitative information provided is on the relativerisk of dying of various causes.  This is not becausethe risk of dying is seen as the most important kind ofrisk, but because the statistics on mortality rates bycause are the highest-quality data available on healthrisks in the general population.  (Although the reportis dated Sep. 1992, it was revised in May 1994.)(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950305; Sep. 1992, 107 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES USING LIDARThis translation of a Doctoral thesis from Sweden (LundUniversity) concerns the application of lidartechniques in environmental studies.  Lidarmeasurements are performed with a mobile lidar system,based on a Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser, to measure mercuryfluxes on emissions from chlor-alkali plants in Swedenand Italy.  An Italian cinnabar mining area (wheremining activities stopped in 1982) is mapped, and highfluxes of atomic mercury vapor are detected.Comparative measurements are also made using aconventional gold-amalgamation-point monitor.Plumes from geothermal plants in Italy are alsomonitored, and it is found that the amount of mercuryemitted is much higher than expected.  Lidarmeasurements are also performed on the gas plumesemerging from the Italian volcanoes Etna, Stromboli,and Vulcano, using a lidar system on a ship that madetraverses under the plumes.A vertically-sounding ozone lidar system fortropospheric measurements has also been constructed,based on a KrF excimer laser whose output isRaman-shifted in hydrogen to obtain wavelengths of  277and 313 nm.  Comparisons with two other ozonemonitoring systems -- a ND:YAG/dye laser based thelidar system, and a differential absorption opticalsystem (DOAS) -- are carried out.  The mobile lidarsystem is integrated with a spectrally-resolvingoptical multi-channel system and a multi-color imagingsystem, to remotely detect fluorescence from vegetationand water.  It is found that the fluorescence spectrafrom vegetation exposed to environmental stress aredifferent from the spectra detected from controlvegetation.  Fluorescence images are recorded fromdistances up to 100 m.  The thesis contains157 references and 15 figures.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND508TB; Apr. 1994, 90 pp.  Price: $149.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARBON MONOXIDE EXPOSURES INSIDE OF AUTOMOBILESThis (EPA) paper deals with carbon monoxide (CO)exposures measured inside a motor vehicle during88 standardized drives on a major urban arterialhighway (El Camino Real) having a traffic volume of30,500-45,000 vehicles per day, over a 13-1/2 monthperiod.  For the 88 trips, the mean CO concentrationwas 9.8 ppm, with a standard deviation of 5.8 ppm.  Afairly-strong seasonal trend exists for the co-variatesthat were examined: ambient CO at 2 fixed stations;atmospheric stability; seasonal trend function; time ofday; average surrounding vehicle count; trip duration;proportion of time stopped at lights; and instrumenttype.  A model consisting of only a single measure oftraffic volume and a seasonal trend component, hassubstantial predictive power; by contrast, the ambientCO levels, although partially correlated with averageexposures, contributed comparatively little predictivepower to the model.  The study shows that: (1) the massbalance equation can relate exterior CO concentrationsas a function of time, to interior CO concentrations;(2) CO exposures on urban arterial highways vary withseason; (3) momentary CO experienced behind red lightsvary with the intersection; and (4) an averaging-timemodel can simulate exposures during short trips(20 minutes or less) on urban arterial highways.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND511H; 1994, 11 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996SURVEY OF WORKER HEALTH SYMPTOMS AND INDOOR AIR INOFFICE BUILDINGSThis (EPA) paper reports the results of a questionnaireon health symptoms, workplace conditions, and perceivedindoor air quality that was administered to a total of3948 employees of the EPA working in 3 office buildingsin Washington, DC, to determine the personal orworkplace characteristics associated with healthsymptoms.  A principal-components analysis of 32 healthsymptoms identified 12 health factors, each generallyassociated with a particular body system (eyes, nose,throat, chest, central nervous system, etc.).  The  12health factors have been regressed linearly on  50-100personal, workplace, and spatial characteristicsidentified from the questionnaire and buildingblueprints.  Significant variables (p <0.01) areincluded in a second logistic regression to determine afinal model.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH941208; June 1992, 14 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996USING GAS REBURNING TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE ATMOSPHERICNOx EMISSIONS FROM FURNACES AND KILNSThis (Energy and Environmental Analysis Inc.) reportanalyzes a number of industrial processes and assessesthe suitability of using natural gas reburningtechnology to achieve reduced NOx emissions.  In gasreburning, a small amount of gas -- typically 10-15% ofthe total fuel input -- is injected above the primaryfuel zone to create a fuel-rich reburn zone where NOxis reduced.  Gas reburning has the capability to reduceNOx emissions by 50-65%, but its use in particularapplications is dependent on specific process andcombustion parameters.  The report identifies fiveindustrial processes as being suitable for natural gasreburning: glass melting furnaces; cement kilns; reheatfurnaces; process heaters; and waste-heat recoverysystems.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND513KA; Apr. 1994, 46 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996GAS REBURN TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE NOx EMISSIONS INTANGENTIALLY-FIRED BOILERS [951321]There are several ways that owners oftangentially-fired boilers can reduce nitrogen oxides(NOx) emissions, in order to comply with the Clean AirAct Amendments of 1990.  This (ABB CombustionEngineering Services Inc.) report presents anddiscusses the development of a close-coupled gas reburntechnology for this purpose.  Close-coupled gas reburntechnology has the potential to be a relativelylower-cost derivative of standard reburning technology.A utility scale feasibility, test, and evaluationprogram is reported that examines the technology's NOxreduction capability and its boiler-performanceimpacts.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND513KB; Dec. 1994, 171 pp.  Price: $199.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN FOODS: A DATABASE FOR COMPUTERSThis (FDA) database, consisting of three 3-1/2 inch DOSdiskettes, provides comprehensive information on theU.S. Food and Drug Administration's monitoring,coverage, and findings of pesticide residues in foodsunder the regulatory monitoring (i.e., toleranceenforcement) component of the FDA pesticide program forFY 1993.  It covers domestically produced and importedfoods representing about 100 countries.  The databasecontains three sections.  The first section is a largedetailed data file that presents FDA pesticidemonitoring coverage and findings by country/foodproduct/pesticide combination.  The other two sectionsare smaller summary files that provide an overview bycountry/pesticide combination without regard topesticide, and by country/pesticide combination withoutregard to product.  They are accompanied by a searchprogram and report formats that enable users to performsimple searches and generate reports.  The raw data byindividual sample, from which the three files arecompiled, are also provided.  The diskettes containtext only; users must provide their own search andretrieval software.  They are formatted in Dbase IIIPlus.  Memory requirement is 640 K, and an IBMcompatible 486 computer is recommended for practicalprocessing speed.  The files are compressed, 1.44 Mhigh-density.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950107; 1993, 3 diskettes.  Price: $699.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996MANAGING BOTTOM-SEDIMENTS CONTAINING TOXIC SUBSTANCESThis (Army Corps of Engineers) report contains theproceedings of a joint U.S/Japan experts' meeting onmanagement of bottom sediments containing toxicsubstances (Nov. 19-21, 1991, San Pedro, CA).  Themeeting provided a forum for in-depth discussions onthe dredging and disposal of contaminated sediments.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950115; May 1994, 345 pp.  Price: $369.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996REMOVING PCBs FROM CONTAMINATED SOIL USING THE CFSYSTEM(tm) SOLVENT EXTRACTION PROCESSThis (Science Applications International Corp.) reportcovers a treatability study of the removal of PCBs fromcontaminated soil using the CF System(tm) SolventExtraction Process.  Soil samples were obtained fromthe Springfield Township Superfund Site, DavisburgMichigan, taken from a specific area of that siteknown to have some of the highest concentrations ofpolychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).  The samples wereshipped to Hazen Research Corporation, Golden,Colorado, where CF-System's Solvent Extraction pilotplant is located.  The results show that the process iseffective in reducing the concentration of PCBs in sitesoils.  Removal efficiencies range from a low of 91.4%when two extraction cycles are used, to 99.4% when fiveextraction cycles are used.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960116; Apr. 1995, 85 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996SOLVENT EXTRACTION FOR SEPARATING HAZARDOUS WASTE-SITECONTAMINANTSThis (Science Applications International) bulletindeals with solvent extraction, which does not destroyhazardous contaminants, but is a means of separatingthose contaminants from soils, sludges, and sediments,thereby reducing the volume of the hazardous materialthat must be treated.  Generally, it is used as part ofa series of unit operations, and it can reduce theoverall cost for managing a particular site.  Thebulletin provides information on: the applicability ofthe technology; the types of residuals produced; thelatest performance data; site requirements; the statusof the technology; and sources for further information.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950116; Apr. 1994, 11 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONTAMINATED SOIL RESTORATION USING VAPOR EXTRACTIONThis Master's thesis (from the University of Texas)presents a review of vapor extraction technology forremediation of contaminated soils.  Effectiveremediation of sites contaminated with VOCs (volatileorganic compounds) requires a sound understanding ofregulatory issues, technology options, and the sitehydrogeology.  A technology that is increasingly beingused for the remediation of VOC-contaminated sites issoil vapor extraction.  Soil vapor extraction, alsoknown as soil venting and soil air stripping, allowsremediation of VOC contamination without the need forexcavation.  In soil vapor extraction, a vacuum pump orblower moves air through the soil near the contaminatedzone.  As contaminated air is removed, cleaner airmoves through the soil to replace it.  This airmovement can also promote microbial degradation ofcontaminants at many sites.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950117; May 1993, 77 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996VACUUM VAPOR EXTRACTION FOR INNOVATIVE SITE REMEDIATIONThis (Consortium for the American Academy ofEnvironmental Engineers) report deals with vacuum vaporextraction, an innovative site and waste remediationtechnology that, with other innovative processes, isthe culmination of a multi-organizational effortinvolving more than 100 experiments over a two-yearperiod.  It provides the experienced practicingprofessional with guidance on application of thisinnovative processes, which is considered ready forfull-scale application.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960119; 1994, 222 pp.  Price: $249.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996IN SITU RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) HEATING TO ENHANCE VAPOREXTRACTION OF CONTAMINANTS FROM SOILThis (Westinghouse Savannah River Co.) report presentsand discusses a field demonstration program involvingin situ radio frequency heating to investigate itseffectiveness as an enhancement to vacuum extraction ofresidual solvents (primarily trichloroethylene andperchloroethylene) held in vadose zone clay deposits.Conventional soil vacuum extraction techniques aremass-transfer limited because of the low permeabilitiesof the clays.  By selectively heating the clays totemperatures at or above 100 C, the release ortransport of the solvent vapors are enhanced as aresult of several factors, including: an increase inthe contaminant vapor pressure; an increase indiffusivity; and an increase in the effectivepermeability of the formation caused by the release ofwater vapor.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950118; Jan. 1994, 130 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996OXYGEN-ENRICHED CO-INCINERATION OF MUNICIPAL SOLIDWASTE (MSW) AND SEWAGE SLUDGEThis (NREL) report deals with co-incineration of MSWand sewage sludge.  Federal regulations banning oceandumping of sewage sludge, coupled with stricterregulations on the disposal of sewage sludge inlandfills, have forced municipalities (especially thosein the northeast U.S.) to consider alternate methodsfor disposal of this solid waste.  Co-incineration ofMSW and sludge has proven to be economically attractivein both Europe and Japan, but has not yet proven to bea viable sludge disposal technology in the U.S.,because of a history of operational problems inexisting facilities.  The most prevalent problem in co-incinerating MSW and a dewatered sewage sludge (15% to25% solids) is incomplete sludge combustion.Incomplete combustion is primarily a function of sludgeparticle problems that occur when the surface of thesludge particle dries and hardens while the inner massis unaffected.  This phenomenon is commonly referred toin the industry as the "hamburger effect."This report details a new process being developed forthe disposal of a dewatered sewage sludge.  It providesa comprehensive summary of the pilot demonstration testprogram for oxygen-enriched co-incineration of MSW andsewage sludge, including description of: the pilot testfacility; the instrumentation; the methods of datacollection; data analyses; how the tests were executed;and the test results.  The report also providesrecommendations for the future development of thistechnology in the current marketplace.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950217; Jan. 1994, 146 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996BIO-OXIDATION TREATMENT OF PETROLEUM-CONTAMINATED SOILThe need for effective treatment, throughout the U.S.,of petroleum-contaminated soil has escalated due to theincrease in the number of underground storage tank(UST) systems being upgraded in response to EPAregulations.  Remedial options for excavatedcontaminated soil have, in the past, been limited todisposal in land treatment facilities or treatment bythermal processes.  This (EPA) report reviews andassesses the state of the art of bio-oxidationtechnologies, focusing on above-ground soil mounds.  Itcovers: the factors that affect biodegradation; thetypes of biotreatment systems; a survey of constructionand performance characteristics; design considerations;cost estimates; and research recommendations.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950221; Oct. 1992, 17 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996A VIDEO PRIMER ON BIOREMEDIATION TECHNOLOGIESThis (EPA) 36-minute VHS color videotape programprovides: an introduction to the basic concepts behindbioremediation; an overview of how the technology iscurrently being used; a perspective on the futurepotential of the technology; and answers to somecommonly raised questions about bioremediation.  It istargeted to a technical audience, particularly thoseinvolved with environmental issues, but does not assumeany prior knowledge of biological processes.  Theobjective of the program is to familiarize the viewerwith the essential concepts of this technology and toprovide a basis for understanding technical discussionsin this area.  The video should be useful forengineers, scientists, managers, site owners, andregulators involved in site remediation.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: VHS Video No.NH950223; Aug. 1993, 36 minutes in color.  Price:$219.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996DECOMPOSITION OF TOXIC MATERIALS BY BIOREMEDIATIONThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns the decomposition of toxic materials bybiological means, including for example, bacterialdecomposition of: jet fuel; wood preservatives;explosives; crude oil; halogenated organics; dieselfuel; aviation fuel; creosote; and more.  It alsocovers the enhancement of decomposition rates byaddition of nutrients.  The report contains acollection of abstracts of available reports, studies,papers, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.  It will be updatedto include the latest information available at the timeyou place your order.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950224; minimum of 137 citations as of July 1994.Price: $279.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS AND IMPACTS INVOLVING THERELEASE OF NON-INDIGENOUS MICROORGANISMSThis (Environmental Research Laboratory) paperdescribes the EPA's research program in biotechnologyrisk assessment involving a study of the fate andeffects of non-indigenous microorganisms in aquatic andterrestrial environments.  Information from the studiescan be used to assess the risk of biotechnologicalproducts -- both genetically engineered or natural, butnon-indigenous -- in the environment.  Examples ofresearch are cited in the report.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950301; 1994, 14 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996PATENTS CONCERNING WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS FOR SWIMMINGPOOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBSThis report (from the U.S. Patent BibliographicDatabase) consists of a collection of up to 250selected patent abstracts concerning water treatmentcompositions, processes, and systems for swimmingpools, spas, and hot tubs.  The many inventions relateto, for example: the design and fabrication ofchlorinators, sterilizers, purifiers, and sanitizers;filters with electrolytic action; chemical dispensingsystems; hydrochlorinating systems; and more.  Thereport, which contains extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want, will be updated toinclude abstracts of the most current issued patentsavailable at the time you place your order.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960126; latest 50-250 patent abstracts, updated to thedate of your order.  Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ADVISORY GROUPS IN WATER QUALITY PLANNINGThis (Pennsylvania State University) document is anintroduction to the field of advisory groups in waterquality planning, for persons with a non-technicalbackground.  It presents information on advisory groupsand their functions, organization, and impact on waterquality planning.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960127; 1995, 20 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996NONPOINT WATER QUALITY POLLUTION FROM AGRICULTURE,FORESTRY, AND MININGThis (Pennsylvania State University) instructor's guideintroduces the field of nonpoint source pollution topersons with non-technical backgrounds.  It providesinstructors with activities and worksheets to aid inteaching about nonpoint source pollution of water fromagriculture, forestry, and mining.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960128; 1995, 25 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WASTEWATERMANAGEMENTThis (Pennsylvania State University) document presentsan introduction to the field of environmentalassessment for persons with a nontechnical background,and includes information on the environmental impactsof wastewater management.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960129; 1995, 24 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ALTERNATIVE FINANCING FOR STATE WATER PROGRAMSThis (EPA) paper examines the need for increasedfunding to support implementation of state programrequirements under the Clean Water Act and the SafeDrinking Water Act.  It identifies alternativefinancing mechanisms that can be used, together withgeneral revenues, to fund state water quality programs.It also describes several financial management optionsthat are designed to maintain control over, and provideflexibility in, managing program resources, as well asinstitutional arrangements that can offset programcosts and leverage state resources.  It lists stepsthat EPA can take to support the use of alternativefinancing mechanisms by states, and to assist states inclosing the funding gap in water programs.  (This 1989report has recently been re-announced and re-releasedby EPA.)(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960130; 1989, 50 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996WATER POLLUTION EFFECTS OF METALS ON FRESH WATER FISHThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns laboratory and field studies regarding theeffects of metals on fresh water fish.  Topics include,among others: the toxicity effects on fish species;bioaccumulation; fish physiology; acidification anddetoxification; aquatic ecosystems; water qualitymanagement; environmental monitoring systems;pollution effects on food chains; and more.  The reportcontains a collection of up to 250 abstracts ofavailable reports, studies, papers, and otherdocumentation, with references for their acquisitionand extensive indexing to make it easy to find exactlywhat you want.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960131 latest 50-250 citations, updated to the date ofyour order.  Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996CANDIDATE PROCESSES FOR IN SITU TREATMENT OF MIXED VOCAND RADIOACTIVE CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATERThis (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) report describesthe screening and preliminary evaluation of candidatetreatment for use in treating mixed contaminantvolatile organic compounds (VOCs) and radionuclides ingroundwater.  Treating mixed contaminants presentsunusual difficulties.  Typically, VOCs are the mostabundant contaminants, but the presence ofradionuclides results in additional health concernsthat must be addressed, usually by a treatment approachdifferent from that used for VOCs.  Furthermore, thepresence of radionuclides may yield mixed solid wastesif the VOCs are treated by conventional means.These issues are specifically addressed in theevaluation of candidate treatment processes for testingin this program.  Moreover, because no research orearly development of a particular process would beperformed, the technology review also focuses ontechnologies that could be readily adapted andintegrated for use with mixed contaminants.  Theobjective is to couple emerging or available processesinto treatment modules for use in situ.  The findingsreported in this document encompass all activitiesthrough the treatment process evaluations.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960132; Oct. 1994, 112 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996MODULAR RISK ANALYSIS FOR ASSESSING SITES CONTAININGMULTIPLE MIXED RADIOACTIVE WASTESThis (Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) reportconcerns modular risk analysis for assessing mixedwaste sites.  Human-health impacts, especially to thesurrounding public, are extremely difficult to assessat installations that contain multiple waste sites anda variety of mixed waste constituents (e.g., organic,inorganic, and radioactive wastes).  These assessmentsmust address: different constituents; multiple wastesites; multiple release patterns; different transportpathways (i.e., groundwater, surface water, air, andoverland soil); different receptor types and locations;various times of interest; population distributions;land-use patterns; baseline assessments; a variety ofexposure scenarios; etc.  Utilizing a modular/GIS(geographical information system)-based approachovercomes difficulties in (1) analyzing a wide varietyof scenarios for multiple mixed waste sites and (2)communicating results from a complex human-heath-impactanalysis by capturing the essence of the assessment ina relatively elegant manner -- so the meaning of theresults can be quickly conveyed to all who review them.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960133; June 1994, 33 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH 104,000,000 CUBIC FEET OF LOWLEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTEThe Fernald Site, a DOE uranium metal productionfacility that ceased production in 1989, is now beingremediated by the DOE under terms of a consentagreement with the EPA and the State of Ohio.  It isestimated that the cleanup will generate 104,000,000cubic feet of low-level radioactive waste, includingconstruction debris, pit sludge, radium residue, and ahuge volume of uranium-contaminated soil.  The wastehandling strategy for this huge volume of wasteincludes minimizing remedial waste generation,recycling material when economically feasible,free-releasing clean material, and volume reduction.It is anticipated that large-scale radium residuevitrification and sludge drying equipment/facilitieswill be constructed onsite for waste treatment prior tooff-site disposal.  Fernald waste disposition willinclude both onsite disposal (if approved under CERCLA)and off-site disposal at both commercial and DOE wastedisposal facilities.  The waste disposition strategyselected reflects a diverse variety of technical,political, regulatory, and economic factors.  This(Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Corp.)paper describes the current views at Fernald on whatcan be done with 104,000,000 cubic feet of Fernaldwaste.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960134; 1995, 14 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996FUTURE EPA REGULATORY ISSUES INVOLVING ENVIRONMENTALRADIATIONThis (EPA) report concerns future issues and challengesin the study, management, and regulation ofenvironmental radiation.  It focuses on seven majortopics: (1) nuclear energy production and environmentalquality; (2) radioactive waste management; (3)non-ionizing radiation; (4) dose-response models andpopulation susceptibility; (5) radon in indoor air; (6)control of nuclear materials from dismantled warheads;and (7) institutional readiness to deal with futureissues in environmental radiation.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960135; Mar. 1995, 63 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE POTENTIAL RISKS OF NUCLEAR SHIPSThis translation from Denmark (Technical University ofDenmark) represents an evaluation of the potentialrisks of nuclear ships.  Reasons are given why nuclearship accidents will not lead to accidents of themagnitude of the Chernobyl accident.  This is due tothe much lower content of radioactive material and todifferent reactor designs.  A review is given of thetypes of nuclear ship accidents that have actuallyoccurred, with extra consideration given to reactivityaccidents and loss of coolant accidents that could leadto serious radiation consequences for the crew and theenvironment.  The report also discusses the long-termrisks of sunken nuclear ships and sea-disposed reactorcompartments.  Based on available accident data, anattempt is made to estimate the probability of futureserious nuclear ship accidents.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960136; July 1994, 22 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List WT03-B36-28IA059-000325-B010-74http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev62.html 205.156.212.5 19970115000940 text/html 43041HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:07:42 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:44 GMTContent-length: 42852Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev62.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet JANUARY 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (441 words) UKRAINE, G-7 FINALLY AGREE TO REMEDIATE CHERNOBYL (402 words) NORWAY, RUSSIA WILL COMBINE EFFORTS TO CLEAN UP SPENT FUEL NEAR BORDER (145 words) LOCKHEED TAKES-ON CLEANUP SPARGING FROM HORIZONTAL WELLS ATTACKS VOC PLUME IN PINELLAS, FLA. (771 words) OAK RIDGE OFFERS FIELD SITES FOR COLLABORATION, RESEARCH (744 words) MODULARIZATION, AUTOMATION CUT N.Y. SUPERFUND SITE CLEANUP COSTS (433 words) GETTING INTO THE ACT AGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS ANNOUNCE ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP COOPERATION (255 words) GEL COMPOUND AUSTRALIAN RESEARCHERS PREVENT FUELS FROM REACHING DOWN UNDER (751 words) ENVIRO HAZ TECH OF PA. MOBILE INJECTION TREATMENT FOR DENSE CONTAMINATED SOIL (641 words) RADIATION ASSESSMENT ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE (524 words) INFO FOR INVESTMENT? RECENT EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTS KEY TO BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES (681 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDSBioremediation Shifts: FIND/SVP Inc., a New York-basedworldwide consulting and research firm, recently published a170-page report, The Market for Bioremediation Products andServices. The study focuses on the restoration market astrends shift from research to actual cleanup. Since itsbirth in the mid-1980s, the remediation market has grownrapidly. "Bioremediation is not only the mostenvironmentally benign cleanup technology, it is often theleast expensive and the fastest. At a recently documentedgroundwater contamination site, non-biological cleanupmethods would have taken up to 50 years to purify the waterand surrounding soils, while bioremediation took only twoyears to do the job."   But there are "formidable challenges" despite the growingnumber of sites that require cleanup. The report puts intoperspective the mood of the 104th congress which appearsready to eliminate the Environmental Protection Agency(EPA). There also is a complicated entanglement ofregulations that inhibit growth and practical application ofresearch. "Not only is hazardous waste assessment andcleanup frequently a complex process, negotiating thebureaucratic bidding process can be even more daunting."Ethical implications surrounding the introduction ofgenetically engineered life forms to degrade contaminationare another area of concern.   These formidable challenges are not enough, however, toprevent a compound annual growth rate of 16 percent to theyear 2000, according to FIND/SVP. Although the mood incongress is hostile to EPA, there is support for militarysite cleanup and the timing is such that results fromresearch are ready for large-scale implementation. "Thedevelopment of many new cost-effective and time-savingbioremediation technologies...will [be favored] over othercleanup methods." FIND/SVP also predicts cleanupresponsibilities will shift from federal to state andprivate-party payers. The report should prove beneficial tobusinesses that seek to expand and streamline efforts in afairly optimistic market. The Market for Bioremediation andServices is priced at $2,250 and can be obtained bycontacting FIND/SVP, Department RGV, 625 Avenue of theAmericas, New York, NY 10011-2002. To see the table ofcontents, visit Web site http://www.findsvp.cpm/. For moreinformation, call David Weiss at FIND/SVP at (212) 807-2604.EMERGING MARKETS: Interest in environmental goods andservices continues to grow in Central Europe and the formerEastern Bloc despite political and economic unrest. Manycountries like the Czech and Slovak Republics, Hungary andPoland are adopting Western-style environmental regulations.Privatization also has put cleanup and preventative concernsin the hands of individuals rather than unaccountable,state-run bureaucracies. Still, creating a climate conduciveto sustaining a development ethic is difficult in tighteconomic times. Pollution prevention and remediationprograms could slow without adequate funding or enforcementof regulations.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996UKRAINE, G-7 FINALLY AGREETO REMEDIATE CHERNOBYL   Closure and remediation of Ukraine's troubled Chernobylnuclear power plant may soon begin as a result of the Dec.20 accord between Kiev and the Group of Seven (G-7) mostindustrialized countries. Meeting in Ottawa, the partiessigned a memorandum of understanding that $2.3 billion ininternational financial aid would be made available to helpUkraine close Chernobyl by 2000, according to a statementissued after the event.   Canada presently holds the G-7 chairmanship and the dealwas signed by Canadian Environment Minister Sheila Copps andUkrainian Environment Minister Yuri Kostenko. The EuropeanUnion also is a signatory.   In addition to closure and remediation, the plan callsfor the development of replacement energy sources, includingthe construction of two water-cooled reactors, the statementsays. The two new reactors meet all Western safetystandards, officials said. Western nuclear officialsrepeatedly have said they would like all the graphite-moderated RBMK reactors to be dismantled, replaced withwater-cooled units or otherwise upgraded to meetInternational Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) standards. Theproblem, they say, is funding.   "The closure of Chernobyl will be an important steptoward improving nuclear safety, not only in Central andEastern Europe, but throughout the entire world as well,''the statement quotes Copps as saying.   Kostenko has criticized Western governments for focusingtoo much attention on Chernobyl while ignoring safetyconcerns associated with the former Soviet Union's 11similar graphite-moderated reactors. Following the signing,however, he appealed to the West to be promptly forthcomingwith the financial assistance. The Ukraine EnvironmentMinister said he is concerned about a meltdown occurring atRussia's Khorsk facility which, because it is near Ukraine,would be as devastating to Ukraine citizens as was theChernobyl accident.   Although not legally binding, the MOU creates a backdropon which concrete closure plans can be based, Kostenko said.The fact the deal is not binding prompted outrage fromenvironmental groups, which said such errors as failing toset a specific shutdown date are major problems. In itsstatement, Greenpeace International said offering to helpUkraine finish work on two more reactors wascounterproductive.   Aid package specifics include: $498 million in grantsfrom G-7 member states, $349 million of which will go tonuclear safety and decommissioning; and $1.8 billion in loanfinancing from international agencies. Of the total $2.3billion, nearly $1.9 billion will be invested in new energy.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996NORWAY, RUSSIA WILL COMBINE EFFORTSTO CLEAN UP SPENT FUEL NEAR BORDER   In a bid to dispel concerns about radiation hazards posedby waste facilities on Russia's Kola Peninsula and NovayaZemlya Island, Moscow and Oslo agreed to cooperate onroutine inspections and public notifications. In anagreement reached in Moscow Dec. 15 between Russian DefenseMinister Pavel Grachev and Norwegian Defense MinisterJoergen Kosmo, the two countries will work together tomonitor and eventually dispose of military nuclear waste,especially spent fuel held near the Norwegian border.   Russian authorities have denied there are any majorradiation risks on Kola or Novaya Zemlya and want to usecooperation with an internationally trusted state likeNorway to help dispel some of the negative press. Althoughno concrete evidence of radiation leaks has been reported,people working with such organizations as Norway's Bellonaenvironmental group say Russian authorities deny thempermission to inspect many military sites.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996LOCKHEED TAKES-ON CLEANUPSPARGING FROM HORIZONTAL WELLSATTACKS VOC PLUME IN PINELLAS, FLA.   An ambitious air sparging system at Lockheed-Martin'sPinellas Plant, near Largo, Fla., aims at remediating anentire vinyl chloride plume. Since September, the processhas dramatically reduced contaminant concentrations at allmonitoring wells. Air sparging consists of injectingcompressed air below the water table. As air bubbles upward,volatile compounds partition into the gas phase and arecarried out of the ground water by rising air. Although airsparging has been the subject of much research, often insmall field test cells, large-scale deployment of thetechnology has been rare. The ground water contaminant plumebeing remediated is ideal for  a  pilot  study,  said  BrentWeesner, engineer in charge of the project at Lockheed-Martin's Pinellas Plant near Largo, Fla. The plume is about175 feet long and 75 feet wide, and contains vinyl chlorideat concentrations up to 40 ppb. The plume is well-characterized. It occurs in an aquifer consisting of veryfine sand about 30 feet thick. A survey using numerousHydrocone probes defined the bottom of the aquiferaccurately. The plume is confined mostly to the upperportion of the aquifer, as shown by Hydrocone samples. Allbut two of about 30 samples taken at 25 feet depth showed novinyl chloride.Forget the Monitoring   Weesner's concept was to go straight for remediation ofthe plume, rather than taking the more conventional approachof carrying out extensive monitoring. Costs for air spargingwere expected to be similar to those for an extendedmonitoring program.   Seven horizontal wells were installed at a design depthof 28 feet beneath the plume. Lengths ranged from 460 to 560feet. Wells were drilled from two locations using the "rivercrossing" method, in which the drill string was brought backto the surface at the far end of the drill run. This allowedpulling the casing through the borehole with a cable, ratherthan pushing it into a blind hole from the drillinglocation.   Well installation was relatively uneventful, Weesnersaid, in part because of "a great team effort" by thecontractors, GTS Inc., Meriden, Conn. (203-238-4567) andConsutec, Tampa, Fla. (813-889-7181). The pipe-pulling headused at first allowed sand to enter the end of the casing.The contractors designed a better pulling head and had itbuilt locally.Special Slotting   The well casing consisted of two high-densitypolyethylene (HDPE) pipes, of 2-inch and 4-inch diameters,with sand pre-packed between them. Inner and outer casingshad 15 mil slots, cut parallel to the length of the casingrather than across the casing. Although lengthwise slots areunusual, they were used in this case to preserve the tensilestrength of the casing, because it had to be pulled throughthe borehole. Consutec developed special slotting methodsfor this job.   Another unusual feature of the installation is that theseven horizontal wells are divided into 15 control zones forair injection, with one to three control zones per well.Each control zone is separated from adjacent parts of thesame well, and has its own air control and metering equip-ment. This arrangement allows concentrating the spargingefforts in the most contaminated portions of the plume, andavoids wasting air on portions that have already beencleaned up. One well with only a single control section wasplaced in the middle of the plume so that if sparging hadnot worked as planned, the well could have been pumped tocontrol the spread of the plume.   Sparge air is collected by a system of pipes laid intrenches 2 feet deep and backfilled with pea gravel. Pumpsdraw the air to a treatment pad, where a carbon filtrationsystem traps the vinyl chloride for later destruction.   Results have been very encouraging so far. Spargingoperations started in early September. By October, samplingshowed 1.9 ppb vinyl chloride in one of 19 monitoring wells,and no detectable concentration in the other 18 wells.Weesner was concerned, however, that filter packs in themonitoring wells might act as conduits for air, so thatsparging would be most effective close to the wells - inother words, the well samples might not be representative ofmost of the aquifer.   During the November sampling, well purging was moreintensive to assure representative sampling. The spargingsystem was shut down on a Tuesday, and wells were purgedboth Wednesday and Thursday. This time, concentrations werehigher, but still much lower than before sparging - vinylchloride concentrations of 1.0 ppb, 1.2 ppb, and 1.9 ppbwere detected in three wells, and none in the remaining 16wells.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996OAK RIDGE OFFERS FIELD SITESFOR COLLABORATION, RESEARCH   DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, near Oak Ridge,Tenn., is offering use of previously studied field sites atthe laboratory for collaborative ground water research.Research at these sites has focused on water and contaminantmovement in heterogeneous fractured media. Some of thespecific sites available are:   Walker Branch Watershed and Melton Branch Watersheds:These small watersheds (0.47 ha and 0.62 ha, respectively)are particularly suitable for studies of subsurfacetransport processes. Each has a trench excavated across itsoutflow region. Trenches are 2.5 m deep and 16 m long, andcontain six pans pressed against the face of the trench tocollect subsurface seepage outflow. A line source for tracerdistribution is buried at the top of each site. Transects ofsolution samplers, tensiometers and piezometers are locatedthroughout the site. Much of the data-collection equipmentis interfaced for computerized data collection.   West Bear Creek Valley Tracer Test Site: This site wasdeveloped for investigating new ground water tracertechniques. It is located in an uncontaminated area, and hasbeen instrumented with more than 70 piezometers, some ofthem multi-level, and a rain gauge. Water levels andtemperatures have been recorded at 30 minute intervals fortwo years. During the last three years, three principaltests have been conducted at this field site:A one-year dissolved-gas tracer test using helium and neonto test the effect of matrix diffusion on solute transport;A natural-gradient test that used injection of colloid-sizetracers, including bacteriophage, microbes and microspheres,to measure fracture-flow velocities; andA test using microspheres labeled with DNA as tracers offracture flow.   Fractured Rock Sampling Protocol Site: This site has beenused for tracer tests to study ground water sampling methodsin fractured media. At the site, 5 to 6 m of soil andsaprolite overlies folded and fractured shale and limestone.The site has an injection/pumping well screened from 6 to 20m, three pairs of wells screened from 5 to 7 m and 18 to 20m, and three multilevel wells with five sampling portsinstalled close to the pairs of wells. Many data areavailable from the site, including six pumping tests,natural water levels, tracer tests using bromide, sulfurhexafluoride and colloids, continuous core from three holes,bore-hole flowmeter measurements, point dilution tests,mineralogical data, field parameters, and geochemicalanalyses.   Tritium Test Site: In 1977, 50 curies of tritium werereleased in a open borehole in a fractured shale. Tritiumwas monitored in the injection well and in five monitoringwells for the first five years, with an additional samplingafter 16 years (1993). Efforts to remove the tritium bypumping were unsuccessful. A large amount of tritium wasstill present after 16 years. Results of this test have beeninterpreted to indicate the severe limitations of pump-and-treat methods.   Contact: Gary Jacobs, Head of the Earth and EngineeringSciences Section, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak RidgeNational Laboratory; (423) 576-0567; fax: (423) 576-3989; e-mail: gkj@ornl.gov. More details are available on the WorldWide Web at http://www.esd.ornl.gov/   The trend toward fast, field-based assessment of soil andground water contamination received a boost from a newstandard developed by the American Society for Testing andMaterials (ASTM). The standard, PS 3, Provisional StandardGuide for Accelerated Site Characterization of SuspectedPetroleum Release, is aimed at petroleum-contaminated sites,but clearly indicates the growing interest in rapid sitecharacterization. The standard does not offer prescriptiveadvice for cleanups. Instead, it lists tools than can beused to collect samples and tests to analyze the samples.The standard also provides guidance on conducting sitecharacterizations.   In the past, field investigators at contaminated sitesusually drilled borings, took samples and had them analyzedin a laboratory. This produced data that were often veryaccurate, but at the cost of waiting weeks for results.Often the results showed that additional samples wereneeded, and a drilling rig had to be re-mobilized to thesite.   "The task group believes that it is better to get moredata in a matter of days, even though it may be of slightlyless quality, than a few data points with a higher qualityfor which you might have to go back and forth to the siteover the course of a couple of years," said Gilberto Alvarezof Subcommittee E50.01, part of ASTM Committee E-50 onEnvironmental Assessment.   Contact: Gilberto Alvarez, EPA, (312) 886-6143.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996MODULARIZATION, AUTOMATION CUTN.Y. SUPERFUND SITE CLEANUP COSTS   Capital and operating costs for ground water and soilcleanup at a Long Island Superfund site have been minimizedby modularization and automation, said Steve McInerney,senior process engineer and project manager for Retec Co.,Concord Mass. The Shore Realty Superfund Site is a formerhandling facility at Glenwood Landing in Hempstead Harbor,N.Y., and was heavily contaminated with petroleum andsolvent hydrocarbons during 36 years of operation.   Retec selected four technologies for site cleanup - soilvapor extraction, air sparging, ground water pump and treat,and bioremediation. The ground water system captures freeproduct at the downgradient side of the site. EPA's pre-construction estimate of construction cost was $2.3 million.Actual construction costs, however, were $2 million, asavings of about 15 percent.Components Pre-Assembled   McInerney attributed a significant part of the saving tomodular construction of treatment plant components. Tanks,mixers, pumps and other components were pre-assembled into afew modules at the factory, rather than being assembledpiece by piece at the site. Although this somewhat increasedthe cost of the components, it allowed greater savings inthe cost of installation at the site.   Electrical power and control wiring also were assembledand terminated in boxes on the modules. Each module thus hadonly two connection points where it was tied into power andcontrol wiring. Except for the thermal oxidation unit thatdestroys vapor-phase contaminants, no controls wereinstalled on the modules. All units were tied to controlslocated on a central panel.Estimates Exeeded Actuals   Operating costs were estimated at $500,000 per year atthe feasibility study stage, but actual costs are about$300,000 per year. One reason for lower costs is carefulcontrol of electrical consumption. About half the totaloperating costs are for a large compressor that drives thesparging system. Retec has put much effort into optimizingthe system operation. Sparging rates are kept as low aspossible, and sparging is pulsed to increase systemefficiency.   The plant is highly automated to keep operating costslow. The plant is computer-operated; the human operatorvisits the plant as needed. If a problem develops, thecomputer system automat-ically calls the plant operator'sbeeper and notifies the operator of the problem's severity -from level 1, for minor problems, to level 4, for a totalautomatic shutdown. The computer system also continuouslycollects data from the system for monitoring its operation.McInerney downloads these data by telephone every two tothree weeks for inspection of the plant's operations andcontinuing efficiency.   Contact: Steve McInerney, Retec; (508) 371-1422.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996GETTING INTO THE ACTAGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS ANNOUNCEENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP COOPERATION   The American Crop Protection Association (ACPA) and theAgricultural Retailers Association (ARA) announced jointguidelines to assist the environmental cleanup of retailagricultural chemical dealer sites. These sites often havebeen sources of ground water contamination because of spillsand improper waste disposal.   The guidelines call for both voluntary and fee-basedreimbursement mechanisms aimed at accelerating assessmentand remediation of contaminated sites. Common elements ofthe guidelines, whether voluntary or fee-based, include thefollowing:Confidential environmental audits;Cleanup standards keyed to the future use of the site; andAcceptance by state authorities of completed remedialprograms.Incentives   Key features of voluntary programs include incentives toproperty owners, provided sites do not represent immediatethreats to health or the environment, and flexible cleanupschedules. Key features of fee-based programs are maximumand minimum balances for the remedial fund, significantfinancial deductibles for dealers and growers who initiatecleanups, ceilings on total reimbursement per remediationand collection of fees at the retail dealer level.   To date, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Illinois have enactedlegislation establishing chemical cleanup programs.Approximately 20 more states, including Ohio andPennsylvania, have established voluntary remediationprograms available to everyone, including dealers, growersand industrial users of agricultural chemicals.   ACPA is a trade organization of manufacturers,formulators and distributors of agricultural crop protectionand pest control products. ARA is an organization thatprovides information and education to retail farm supplydealers.   Contacts: Allan Noe, ACPA; (202) 872-3840, and JimEgenrieder, ARA; (202) 457-0825.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996GEL COMPOUNDAUSTRALIAN RESEARCHERS PREVENTFUELS FROM REACHING DOWN UNDER   Remediators concerned about safe transportation ofhazardous liquids such as organic solvents, can look toresearch being conducted at the University of SouthAustrailia where an in-situ gelation process is beingdeveloped. Techsearch, a non-profit group that functions asa laision with the community, is working with theUniversity's Polymer Science Group at the Ian Wark ResearchInstitute to lessen the risk of hazardous liquid cargowhich, if spilled in large quantities, can cause deleteriousaffects and long-term environmental damage. Explosion,flammability, noxious fumes, poisoning, smoke, odors,irritants and ground water contamination have been a resultof past spills.   By rapidly injecting a mixture of materials into theorganic liquid, chemical cross-linking occurs in a shorttime and a solid network is formed. Solidification preventsthe volatile liquid from escaping holes or ruptures in thewalls of containers damaged during an accident. Gelationalso decreases concentrations of petrol fumes and reducesthe explosion front of fuel which cuts back the possibilityof fire.10 Percent Solid   Geoffrey Swincer and Janis Matisons of the University'sSchool of Chemical Technology discovered the catalyticprocess and tested it in laboratory experiments. Certaincompounds - rapidly reacting polymers, monomers, andfunctional molecules such as silanes - undergo a rapidcross-linking action when in contact with fuels which becometrapped in individual cells. The cellular network thatresults resembles that of a honeycomb structure. Hard orgel-like to the touch, the compound may only be 10 percentsolid, 90 percent liquid, when measured by weight.   The ratio of compound to fuel is relatively low - onepart compound to 30 parts fuel - which is less than 4percent by volume. Swincer and Matisons feel that continuedresearch to produce even more efficient gelling compoundswith lower reactive ratios. They also believe that the realadvantage of the process is its speed and that this factorwill lend itself to successful comercialization. Reactiontimes have been less than one minute in low-level laboratorydemonstrations. Large volumes of fuel can be gelled inruptured tanks or large storage facilities through the useof a progressive injection system. These delivery systemscan be an integral part of any storage facility ortransportation container. The gel forms a cork or sealaround the point of rupture to prevent further outflow, andthe solidification of the liquid fuel into a mass preventsit from running underground or into sewer lines and streams.Damage is quickly limited to the immediate vicinity of thespill.Multi-Point Injection   Conceptualized by Swincer and Matisons, the strategybehind successful delivery of the gel compound intransportation tanks is to create a multi-point injectionsystem, similar to sprinkler systems in large buildings,around the inner circumference of the container. Activationwould occur upon some predetermined signal, via automaticdetection or manually from a control station. Following thesignal, the entire body of fuel would be surrounded by gel,the point of rupture sealed, and the core of the liquidpenetrated. A secondary system of directional nozzles, likethose in fire extinguishers, can be applied to any fuel thathas escaped initial treatment. This backup can be used byocean going tugs and other emergency vehicles.Fuel Recycling   Once the gel compound has done its job, it has to becleaned up with shovels and loaders, or by heavy industrialsuction. A gelled slick at sea can be controlled with boomsbefore being collected and transported by tanker to bedumped or recycled. One significant advantage of the processis that fuel can be retrieved by breaking up the gelstructure in a specially designed mixer followed by aprocess of filtration and distillation. Compared to moreconventional means of cleanup and recycling, the amount offuel lost is far less. Recycling crude after gelation couldbe part of the refining process. Researchers estimateremaining non-toxic solids after recycling to be less than10 percent of volume and suitable for landfill disposal.   Researchers also will have to evaluate potentialexothermic reactions of rapid gelation of large volumes offuels. The production of heat generated from the processdoes not pose a problem in the laboratory, but may in thefield. Evaluating this risk will form part of the nextstudy.   Contact: Jani Matisons or Geoffrey Swincer at the IanWark Research Institute, Warrendi Road, The University ofSouth Australia, The Levels, South Australia 5095,Australia; phone: +61 8 302 3694; fax: +61 8 302 3683.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996ENVIRO HAZ TECH OF PA.MOBILE INJECTION TREATMENTFOR DENSE CONTAMINATED SOILBy Elena Marcheso Moreno   Turning contaminated land into usable construction siteshas great appeal in the competitive world of buildingdevelopment. Enviro Haz-Tech, an environmental remediationcompany in Hegins, Pa., has developed a series of MobileInjection Treatment Units (MITUs) that can help remediatedifficult soil conditions, both on unbuilt and built sites.   Enviro Haz-Tech specializes in treatment of all types ofsoils contaminated with petroleum or other hazardousmaterials. The patented MITU technology particularly appealsto building developers because it can handle densesubsurface contaminated soils under buildings. Cleaning thesoil in place saves developers the costs of transportationand disposal associated with the alternative solution ofdumping the contaminated soil into landfills, orincinerating it.Huge Cost Savings   By actually treating the soil on-site, the MITU systemcan help a land owner save between 40 percent and 60 percentcompared to removing it, Enviro Haz-Tech estimates. Once thetreatment is completed, new soils are not required in orderto develop and build on the site.   Enviro Haz-Tech's soil treatment unit is comprised of aJohn Deere modified hydraulic excavator mounted on a customtrenching unit equipped with a series of interchangeableinjection systems and full vapor recovery. It includesproprietary manifolds, pumps, storage tanks, computers,monitors, and hydraulic controls. The operator canmanipulate all controls from within the cab of the self-contained unit.   In addition, the trencher is completely enclosed and hasair emission collection systems that transfer vapors to on-board treatment equipment. Compliance with air-qualitystandards is achieved through computerized monitoring oforganic and inorganic vapors, and other toxic or combustibleemissions.Soil Injection   The MITU operator excavates contaminated land within apredetermined grid, trenching contaminated soil andinjecting it with hot-air, bio-chemicals, slurries, andstabilization compounds, as required for remediation. Allunits use rotary carbide cutting blades that can penetrateall soils, even dense rock, to depths of 9 meters. A MITUMini model was also developed to inject and mix soils to amaximum depth of 2.5 meters beneath building basements,concrete slabs, and other structures. The unit's carbideteeth rotate at three speeds to  break  up  soilformations   in   46-centimeter widths. Once it has reachedthe required depth, one of a variety of injection unitsdistributes the Enviro mitigating agent into the soil. Soilpasses through the sealed housing, where it is treated.Microbial and nutrient mixtures are delivered into thechamber to enhance bioremediation; hot air to encouragevolatile stripping; cement slurry for slurry wallconstruction; and absorbants to collect free product. Oncethe soil is treated, it is pushed through the undercarriageof the MITU, reappearing as a clean, fine-grained topsoil.In all but the most difficult site conditions, the MITU cantreat up to 55 metric tons per hour.MITU Versatility   In the past, bioremediation strategies have succeededonly when employed on porous or semi-porous soils. The newMITU approach handles all types of soils, according toEnviro Haz-Tech. In addition to vapor recovery, oilscontaminated with metals or pesticides can be cleaned withthis multiple injection system, which has the ability toinject remediation agents in the necessary form-solid,liquid, gas, or slurry.   When the MITU completes its job, the land left canimmediately be used for buildings that will be occupied bypeople. The company recently completed a clean-up project inPottsville, Pa., on a site when petroleum had beendistributed. Although the storage tanks were no longerpresent, the site was contaminated by past seepage ofpetroleum, kerosene, and bunker fuel. Enviro Haz-Techcleaned upthe site, which is now being developed for a100,000 mixed-use warehouse and shopping mall project.   For more information about the MITU system, or to inquireabout domestic and international joint ventures. Contact:Bruce Bruso at EHT/CBA (717) 682-8742.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996RADIATION ASSESSMENTARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLIONTO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTEby Gordon Feller   The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little hasbeen awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the formerSoviet republic of Belarus solve environmental problemsrelated to its former Strategic Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense NuclearAgency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat Reduction(CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugarlegislation intended to assist the countries of the formerSoviet Union in the elimination, and to prevent theproliferation, of weapons of mass destruction.   Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel toassess the radiation and conventional environmental damageat sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles werebased, transported, operated, or maintained, and help thecountry restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclearstate and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.   Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number ofdifferent technical resources within the program to providetraining and technical assistance to the Belarus officialsand experts. The consultants will work with the Belaruspersonnel to analyze the environmental problems at onemissile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee theBelarus technicians as they do environmental restorationwork at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transferenough knowledge to Belarus so that they can complete theenvironmental restoration work at the remaining sites.   Potential environmental problems include heavy metal andlow-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around thesites' perimeters which have unexploded ordnances. As partof the effort to transfer expertise in the environmentalrestoration field, Arthur D. Little will conductinternational conferences co-sponsored by DNA and theBelarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the worldwill be invited to Belarus to discuss a variety ofenvironmental restoration experiences, technologies, andmanagement issues.   As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed inl993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarusto assist in development of the Environmental RestorationProject. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugarinclude assistance in defense conversion, export controlsystems and training, government-to-governmentcommunications links, and emergency response equipment andtraining.   Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has anespecially high water table and active groundwater movement,which can exacerbate groundwater pollution. Otherorganizations involved with Arthur D. Little on theEnvironmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps ofEngineers Waterways Experiment Station, Los Alamos TechnicalAssociates, Technology Management Company, the EnvironmentalChemical Corp., the Environmental Hazards SpecialistsInternational, Environmental Careers Organizations, theWorld Environment Center, and Clean Sites, Inc.   Arthur D. Little, which conducted the largestenvironmental impact assessment ever conducted in the FormerSoviet Union by a Western company, has handled more than3,000 environmental audits and assessments in 30 countriesthroughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered inCambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around theworld. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,health, and safety consulting; management consulting; andtechnology and product development.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996INFO FOR INVESTMENT?RECENT EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTSKEY TO BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIESRussia Having Trouble With CFCs: Russia is asking for moretime to cut ozone-threatening substances. At a majorinternational conference of government representativesconvened in Vienna to review the 1987 Montreal Protocol onozone protection, Russian Federation Environment MinisterViktor Danilov-Danilyan said Russia needs more time and alarger pool of investment aid in order to developsubstitutes to ozone-harming substances such aschlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Under the Montreal Protocol,signed by 150 countries, such industrialized countries asRussia are to stop producing CFCs by 1996 and the rest ofthe signatories by 2010. Minister Danilov-Danilyan said theRussian Federation is now producing only half the ozone-threatening chemicals it was in 1987, but he added that thedrop was a by-product of the fall in industrial output. Theminister was quick to point out that he and his governmentwould  have  preferred  to  be able to meet the deadline, asother governments are doing, but that the economicconditions prevailing within his country are making itimpossible for the principal factories from even payingtheir workers, let alone their taxes and electric bills. Itwill be impossible for the Russian government to force suchenterprises, even if they are state-owned (and many are not)to comply with the protocol when the ministry has nofinancial capacity to support the enterprise's change-overto non-CFC production or usage.German, Swiss, Finnish Waste: Germany and Switzerland havedecided not to send spent nuclear fuel to Krasnoyarsk-26 forprocessing, Krasnoyarsk Krai Deputy Governor Sergei Arinchinwas quoted as saying. The waste would have been processed atthe RT-2 plant - still under construction - in the formerlysecret nuclear center in Siberia. The Russian authoritieshad hoped to finance the project by accepting foreign waste,enabling them to process their own stocks. The Swiss andGerman pullout will deal a major blow to the project. Thedecision is likely to be hailed by environmental groups,which have strongly opposed the importation of nuclearmaterials, arguing that Russia's waste storage sites arealready overflowing. Meanwhile, a trainload of spent nuclearfuel from a Finnish nuclear power plant reportedly hasarrived in Russia for processing at the Mayak plant inChelyabinsk-65. An English translation of the KomsomolskayaPravda newspaper says it is not yet clear whether thenuclear residue remaining after processing will be shippedback to Finland or kept inside the Russian Federation.Nuclear Safety Threatened: Nuclear safety may be threatenedby workers at Russia's nuclear power plants, who say theymay shut down the facilities unless they receive overduewage payments. Officials say they have scheduled warningprotests, but it is not clear what form they will take.Energy consumers owe nuclear power plants about 2.5 trillionrubles (US$555 million), and on average workers have notbeen paid for three months, according to the deputy head ofRosenergoatom in Moscow.German Assistance: A German company has signed a contractwith Russia's Kursk nuclear power plant to construct anuclear waste storage facility and to provide 240 containersto store the plant's radioactive waste. The German Companyfor Nuclear Containers, a Nukem subsidiary, will controlproduction quality, train specialists and provide the know-how for production. According to Gosatomnadzor, Russia'snuclear safety agency, the solid waste storage facilities atthe Kursk plant are full.Troubled Kazakhstan: The amount of radioactive wasteaccumulating at uranium mining and processing plants inKazakhstan reportedly is reaching alarming proportions.Since this large, very poor Central Asian country becameindependent in 1991, the quantity of radioactive wastestored in Kazakhstan has grown to 219 million metric tons.The republic's Ministry of Ecology and Biological Resourcesclaims the aggregate radioactivity from the waste comes to250,000 curies, which is "many times more than the acceptednorm." Kazakhstan does not have the means to deal with thewaste because under the Soviet Union's regime disposal was anational responsibility carried out by the government inMoscow. Today, there are neither any Kazakh laws norbilateral agreements with Russia which adequately addressthis type of nuclear waste disposal dilemma.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-29IA059-000325-B010-113http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev70.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001005 text/html 21457HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:08:20 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 08-Jan-97 21:54:55 GMTContent-length: 21267Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev70.html Sample Issue Copyright EUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet October 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FOODSTUFFS: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND COUNCIL AGREE ON LABELLING (891 words) DEREGULATING PUBLIC SERVICES IN THE INTEREST OF CONSUMERS. (177 words) CRESSON PUTS CASE FOR BETTER FOCUSED RESEARCH PROGRAMME (362 words) STEEL CANS RECYCLING RATE EXCEEDS 40% (206 words) EIB LENDS TURKEY ECU 50 MILLION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. (141 words) INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL OF THE SEA INVESTS JUDGES. (216 words) ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT: MAKING A COME-BACK (180 words) CHEMICAL INDUSTRY: COMMISSION RIGHT TO REFUSE CFC IMPORT LICENCE, SAYS COURT (720 words) CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996FOODSTUFFS: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND COUNCIL AGREE ON LABELLINGfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486Delegations from the European Parliament and the Council of Ministersreached a compromise on October 16 - through the Conciliation Committee -on the labelling and advertising of foodstuffs, thus settling a row overthe proposed amendments to Directive 79/112/EEC). The Parliament claimsthe agreement reflects its commitment to the principle of free trade inthe Union, as stated in the ruling by the European Court of Justice onOctober 26, 1995 in the "bearnaise sauce case", and whose scope theCouncil appeared anxious to limit. By contrast, negotiations between theParliament and Council on the labelling of novel foods have yet to beconcluded and are being pursued.On June 15, 1995, the Council of Ministers adopted a common position onthe amendment of Articles 3 (list of requisite details for inclusion inlabelling), 6 (single ingredient foods), 7 (quantitative declaration ofingredients), and 14 (language used on labelling) of the proposal for aDirective. On October 25, 1995, the Schnellhardt report (EPP, Germany) wasapproved in second reading by the European Parliament, which adopted fiveamendments: one to Article 1 of Directive 79/112 (trade name of a food),three to Article 6 (list of ingredients), and one amendment to Article 7(quantitative declaration of ingredients). With the Council unwilling toaccept three of the five amendments tabled by the plenary session, theconciliation procedure was initiated on December 22, 1995.In its ruling on the "bearnaise sauce" case, the Court of Justice deemedGermany to be in breach of Article 30 of the EC Treaty, which prohibitsquantitative restrictions on imports, and all measures having equivalenteffect. In Germany, the traditional recipe for bearnaise sauce is based onbutter and eggs. The authorities demanded that imported saucesmanufactured according to a different recipe should bear the mention"bearnaise sauce made from vegetable oil" and not the generic name"bearnaise sauce". The Court ruled that Germany has no right to demandsuch an indication on labelling of the product, as the term "bearnaisesauce" is quite sufficient.The joint text to emerge from the conciliation talks provides for aproduct to be sold in other Member States under the legal name it carriesin the Member State of production - except in very exceptional cases. Thecompromise takes account of pressure from certain Member States followingthe "bearnaise sauce" ruling, by stipulating that the trade name can becomplemented by additional information printed adjacently. On the expressdemand of the European Parliament delegation, these provisions are howeverincluded under certain conditions: the list of ingredients (and otherprovisions of the Directive) must not prevent consumers in the MemberState where a product is marketed from determining the real nature of thefood, and there must be no risk of confusion with other products.MEPs believe this provision will have little impact in practice, as the"bearnaise sauce" ruling clearly indicates that a list of ingredientsshould be sufficient to prevent any confusion on the part of the consumer.Moreover, the text of the Treaty must take precedence over secondarylegislation.In respect of people suffering from allergies, the Parliament securedCouncil approval for clear labelling of the specific vegetable origin ofstarches entering into the composition of products and likely to containgluten.It now remains for the two institutions to formally adopt this compromise,the Council by qualified majority, the European Parliament by a simplemajority. However, the Parliament's delegation emphasised that it will notrecommend its adoption by the plenary session unless the EuropeanCommission pledges to bring forward a specific proposal on the labellingof alcoholic beverages, which are not covered by the present Directive.Novel foods.Are novel foods (a term covering genetically-modified products: soyabeans, sugar beet, flavour-saver tomatoes, etc.) different fromtraditional foods and if so, to what extent? This question fuelled a firstexchange of views between delegations from the European Parliament and theCouncil on October 16 at the Conciliation Committee.Parliament is demanding that food labels should inform consumers of allthe characteristics and properties that distinguish a novel food or foodingredient from an existing equivalent food or ingredient. The Council ofMinisters believes such information is only justified where there is a"significant" difference with the traditional food.The Conciliation Committee will have to settle the issue and, under thecontext of co-decision procedure, draw up a compromise text for a proposalfor a Regulation on the marketing in the Community of novel foods and foodingredients. In second reading on March 12, 1995, the European Parliamentadopted six amendments to the common position approved by the Council onOctober 23, 1995. Compromise proposals are currently being examined andthe delegations may reach an agreement in the coming weeks.This Regulation must guarantee that novel foods and food ingredientspresent no risk to public health or the environment and are the object ofdetailed labelling. It will also define procedures on the European levelfor the marketing of these products throughout the Community. It says thatgenetic engineering must only be used to improve the taste, flavour andshelf life of products, or to protect against insect attack or ensureresistance to herbicides.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996DEREGULATING PUBLIC SERVICES IN THE INTEREST OF CONSUMERS.from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486Just as France was reaffirming the importance of the inclusion of publicservices in the Maastricht Treaty, at the European Council in Dublin onOctober 5, Rome was hosting an International Forum on "the deregulation ofpublic and consumer services", organised on the initiative of the EuropeanCommission and Italy's competition and markets authority. Following onfrom its recent Communication on general interest services in Europe, theCommission was anxious to relaunch the deregulation debate by emphasisingEuropean citizens' interests (and expectations), in the presence ofrepresentatives of institutions, industry, utilities and consumerassociations. Faced with the reticence of certain Member States andsectors concerned, the Commission has put its faith in thecitizen-consumer to support the ongoing process. But the man in the streetstill has to be convinced of the advantages to be gained from deregulatingpublic services, and reassured of the maintenance of "unalienable" generalinterest services. The Rome meeting was intended at a first step towardsthis goal.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996CRESSON PUTS CASE FOR BETTER FOCUSED RESEARCH PROGRAMMEfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486Addressing a gathering at the University of Bonn, in Germany, on October16, Edith Cresson, the European Commissioner with responsibility forResearch, argued that the 5th European Framework Programme on Research andTechnological Development (RTD) (1999-2002) must not be a mere extensionof its predecessors. The Commissioner emphasised the importance ofevolving away from research focusing exclusively on technologicalperformance, and towards research focusing better on economic and socialneeds. The Commission guidelines for the 5th Framework Programme werepresented in September in the form of a working paper ("Inventingtomorrow") designed to launch the debate.Mrs Cresson highlighted her own creed on European research policy whichshould, first and foremost, serve the needs of society. She insisted thisgoal is not at variance with the need for strong basic research in Europe:contemporary research is indeed characterised by an increasingly rapidconvergence of theoretical breakthroughs and practical results.Turning to the place of research/industry Task Forces in the 5th FrameworkProgramme, Mrs Cresson indicated they should in principle remain assupport structures for projects targeted at themes of great social andeconomic importance. She also highlighted the relations between RTDpolicy, regional and cohesion policy, an issue of much concern in Germany,insisting that "while Union research actions can contribute directly tostrengthening the economic and social cohesion of different regions,seeking to obtain this effect by sacrificing the criteria of scientificexcellence would be a grave error". It would, she argues, be moreappropriate to "coordinate the implementation of research programmes andregional policy actions".The European Commissioner recalled the timetable for the introduction ofthe 5th Framework Programme:- The Commission will present a more detailed working paper before theyear's end, describing in greater depth the scientific and technologicalobjectives to be pursued and the procedures for implementation; thisdocument will however remain sufficiently open to stimulate a genuinepolicy debate on the options proposed.- A formal proposal will be presented at the beginning of 1997, with aview to its adoption at the beginning of 1998.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996STEEL CANS RECYCLING RATE EXCEEDS 40%from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The recycling rate for steel cans in Europe reached 41% in 1995, anincrease of more than 20% in just one year, according to APEAL, theAssociation of European Packaging Steel Producers. This puts the industrywell above the target of 15% for all materials set out in the Directive onpackaging and packaging wastes. The Association claims that about amillion tonnes of steel were collected and recycled last year. Germany issetting the trend in Europe with a recycling rate of 67%, followed by theNetherlands (58%), France (40%) and Belgium (30%). Spain and Britain aretrailing somewhat with 17 and 16% respectively. APEAL forecasts thatrecycling rates will reach 65% by 2005. In Europe, food tins account for50% of steel packaging, industrial packaging such as drums for 20%,beverage cans 10%, aerosols 10%, and other objects 5%.The members of APEAL are: the British Steel Tinplate (GB), CockerillSambre (B), Corporacion Siderurgica Nacional (Sp), Hoogovens PackagingSteel (Nl), ICMI (I), Norsk Blikkvalseverk (N), Rasselstein Hoesch (Ger),Sollac (F).APEAL, 89 avenue Louise, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium. Tel: (+32) 2/537 91 51,fax: (+32) 2/537 86 49Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996EIB LENDS TURKEY ECU 50 MILLION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The European Investment Bank is lending ECU 50 million for anenvironmental protection project in Turkey. The loan is being advanced toIzmit Greater Municipality to help cover the cost of collection andtreatment of industrial effluents in the province of Kocaeli, one of themost industrialised provinces in Turkey. The project will halt thecontamination of local rivers and thereby will help to protect and improvewater quality in the Gulf of Izmit (Marmara Sea). Financing is grantedunder the environmental section of the "Off-Protocol Facility", benefitingfrom a 3% interest subsidy from the Community Budget, under the EU'sRedirected Mediterranean Policy, designed to support investment in thefields of regional cooperation and environment protection, developinglinks at regional levels and with the Union's economy.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL OF THE SEA INVESTS JUDGES.from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The investiture of the 21 judges who are to sit on the InternationalTribunal of the Sea, a United Nations institution set up to arbitratedisputes over fishing, navigation and pollution, was held in the Germantown of Hamburg on October 18. The ceremony was attended by UNSecretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who called on more countries tosign the Tribunal's Charter. Notable exceptions include the United Statesand Britain, while France and Russia have still to ratify the document.The basis for the Tribunal's work, the Agreement on the Law of the Sea hasthus far been signed by 107 of the UN's 185 member countries. MrBoutros-Ghali explained that the Tribunal will be charged withimplementing provisional measures where the marine environment isseriously threatened, and should lead to a more rapid resolution ofdisputes over fisheries, navigation and pollution. It will also have thepower to order the release of impounded vessels, against the deposit of aguarantee. The Tribunal's rulings will not be subject to appeal. Wheredisputes arise, States will be free to appeal either to the Tribunal or tothe International Court of Justice in the Hague. The Tribunal is chairedby Thomas Mensah of Ghana.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT: MAKING A COME-BACKfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The European Commission is said to be pondering the idea of resuscitatinga proposal that has been deeply buried for several years now and seeks toensure that the environment is taken into account at the start of thedecision-making chain. European Commissioner for the Environment RittBjerregaard is inciting her colleagues to adopt the draft environmentalimpact assessment Directive for the policies, plans and programmes of theMember States. It is scheduled to appear on the provisional agenda for theCommissioners' October 30 meeting. The existing Directive on theenvironmental impact assessment of public and private projects proposes animpact assessment much further up the political decision-making chain. MrsBjerregaard's new Directive is intended to ensure the Member States'programmes and strategies are effectively vetted for their environmentalimpact. Green MEPs and environmental protection lobbies have accused theCommission of holding up the proposal, pending a decision on the majortrans-European transport networks, which they claim would by their verynature contravene the proposal.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996CHEMICAL INDUSTRY: COMMISSION RIGHT TO REFUSE CFC IMPORT LICENCE, SAYSCOURTfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486In an October 16 ruling, the Court of First Instance of the EuropeanCommunities dismissed an appeal by Efisol of France against the EuropeanCommission's refusal to grant it a licence to import chlorofluorocarbons11 (CFC 11) in 1994. After obtaining an import quota of 1,800 tonnes ofCFCs for 1994, Efisol expected the Commission to grant it an importlicence as is usual following attribution of a quota. The Commissiondeclined to do so. Efisol, meanwhile, had already ordered and transportedsome of the CFCs in question at a cost of over two million French Francs.The Court found that Efisol had acted unwisely, but admitted that theCommission had not acted entirely correctly either.Under Regulation 594/91, trade within the EU of CFCs imported from thirdcountries is subject to quotas granted by the Commission to the firms inquestion (CFCs are now banned in the EU). The quota, however, must besupplemented by an import licence granted by the Commission for CFCs to beimported. A firm desiring a licence must submit an application to theCommission describing the substances it wishes to import, the quantity andthe use to which they will be put. The various possible uses provided foron the application form include "feedstock in the manufacture of otherchemicals".After an exchange of letters between Efisol and the Commission, the Frenchcompany indicated that the CFCs to be imported would be used as "feedstockin the manufacture of other chemicals", specifically polyurethane foam.The Commission did not react rapidly enough to the provision of what waslater found to be inaccurate or even erroneous information by Efisol. CFCsare not completely destroyed or broken down during the manufacture ofpolyurethane foam and therefore this process does not meet the definitionof the "manufacture of other chemicals". It was the French Ministry thatinformed the Commission that the imported CFCs would not be used toproduce other chemicals.Efisol placed orders with its Russian suppliers on February 17 and 20,1994, only a few days after submitting its application for a licence onFebruary 15 and before it had received a response. On February 24, theCommission informed Efisol of its refusal to grant the import licences.One train was already rolling towards France carrying a cargo of CFCs 11and another was headed for Russia to pick up another load. When informalnegotiations failed, Efisol demanded compensation for the costs oftransporting the first load and running the empty train and for lostproduction and sales. The Commission claimed that Efisol had "attempted tomislead the Commission as to the exact use to which the substances were tobe put" and had "purchased orders from its Russian supplier (...) beforethe Commission denied the application for the licence". The parties arealso at loggerheads over the issue of whether a licence shouldautomatically be granted following the attribution of a quota. TheCommission considered the two separate actions.The Court found against Efisol, which claimed that the Commission hadviolated the principle of legitimate expectations, arguing that once thequota had been allocated, the Commission was required to issue a licence.The Court said that a "cautious and informed operator would not haveinitiated rail transport of the cargoes ordered without waiting for theCommission's decision and without taking the necessary steps to protectits interests if its application for a licence was refused". The importrights granted with the attribution of a quota become effective only whenthe import licence is granted, the Court said. By placing orders only twodays after applying for a licence, the "the complainant put itself indanger". The Court further ruled that it is scientifically inaccurate todescribe polyurethane foam as a "chemical". However, the Commission"applied Community Regulations incorrectly" by granting Efisol a quota forthis type of use, the Court said. "The Commission's behaviour was not inkeeping with Community Regulations and thus could not have raisedjustified hopes on the part of the complainant". Since "the emergence ofconflict was fuelled by the Commission's action", the Commission wasordered to pay all the legal costs.* Case T-336/94, ruling of October 16, 1996Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List WT03-B36-30IA059-000325-B010-144http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev57.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001041 text/html 51397HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:08:39 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:40 GMTContent-length: 51208Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev57.html Sample Issue Copyright E & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet JUNE 25, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Calif. operators push environmental plan (1035 words) Enviros face united front in badlands battle (593 words) NRC touts 'super' environmental agency (373 words) Emissions-control process patented (562 words) Indiana considers bird netting rules (315 words) ERCB calls for drilling waste management (389 words) DOE seeks input to production strategy (347 words) Twenty-five operators fined $130,800 (414 words) SVE leads in EPA market survey (327 words) OSPRA audits on schedule (241 words) 1992 saw record EPA fines (87 words) Correction (118 words) Controversial well draws ire (236 words) Edwards signs oilfield bill (169 words) Environmental patents (246 words) EPA to update regs (159 words) MMS releases Gulf reports (351 words) BDM forms Russian venture (63 words) Alberta mulls new well fee (222 words) EPA issues PM-10 rule (144 words) Wildlife centers planned (88 words) Expanded UIC regs opposed (260 words) Calendar (239 words) CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Calif. operators push environmental plan     Western States Petroleum Assn. has unveiled ablueprint for California's Kern County that may enableoil and gas producers, environmentalists, endangeredplants and animals, and county, state and federalgovernment officials to co-exist peacefully andbeneficially.     The specifics of the plan are contained in a WSPA"white paper" designed to be consistent with theprotection of endangered species outlined in a 1989memorandum of understanding among Kern County,the California Fish & Game Dept.'s oil, gas andgeothermal division and the federal Fish & WildlifeService and Bureau of Land Management.     "It's a great first step," said WSPA's MikeEmanuel, of the white paper's chances of leadingtoward an agreement among the parties involved.     Other principles guiding development of the paperincluded meeting requirements of the federal andCalifornia endangered species acts while allowing foreconomic growth and development in Kern County;providing a reliable process for landowners tocompensate for or mitigate impacts on sensitivespecies; and distributing the conservation burdenbroadly and fairly among public and privatelandowners, based on the impact of their activities onsensitive species.     A look at the makeup of Kern County'senvironment makes clear the need for some kind ofcoordinating plan. Oil fields in the county account forabout 592,000 b/d, or two out of every three barrelsproduced in California. Kern County blankets thesouthern end of the San Joaquin Valley, which wasrecently described in a guide book as follows: "Nonational park, no recreation area, no wildlife refugeanywhere in the contiguous 48 states has a widervariety of rare and endangered birds, animals and plantlife than can be found in the southern San JoaquinValley."     WSPA's paper calls for providing incentives forpreservation and development to occur in patterns thatpreserve large, connected blocks of highly valuedhabitat. The plan would divide the valley floor into fourzones, including three for which compensation fordevelopment would be required and a fourth in whichno compensation would be required because of theabsence of valuable habitat.     The latter area, a "gray zone," represents heavilydisturbed areas that do not fit into the overallconservation strategy, such as oil fields with wellspacing of four acres or less.     Compensation for other zones would be based on aratio no greater than 3-to-1, which would be used tocalculate the level of compensation required.Compensation for development within the three zoneswould be in the form of credits generated by thepermanent preservation of habitat, granting ofconservation easements or other specified measures.     Red, green and white zones would be used todetermine the habitat value of any parcel within theplan area in terms of habitat units (h.u.).     Three habitat units per acre would be offered for ared zone, the lands of highest value for conservationpurposes; two units for a green zone, land lessimportant than a red zone but still valuable forconservation purposes, particularly to provideconnectivity across the reserve system; and one habitatunit for a white zone, covering a large area with widelyvarying, but typically low, biological values that couldnot contribute significantly to long-term conservationstrategy.     White zone lands generally would not be availablefor compensation.     A formula would be adopted for adjusting habitatunit values based on consideration of connectivity withother habitat. Landowners would receive transferablehabitat unit credits for granting land for preservationpurposes or taking other specified conservationactions.     A monitoring plan would be established, creatingthe ability to adjust the valley floor habitat conservationplan over time as necessary to meet conservationgoals.     Landowners who preserve habitat would receivecredits based on the habitat unit value of the landpreserved, and owners who disturb habitat wouldcompensate based on the habitat unit value of the areadisturbed at the compensation ratio.     If the ratio is 3-to-1, compensation for taking ineach of the three zones would be as follows:     ** Red zone (worth 3 h.u./acre) -- Compensatewith 9 h.u./acre of impact, which could be done witheither 3 acres in the red zone or 4.5 acres in the greenzone.     ** Green zone (worth 2 h.u./acre) -- Compensatewith 6 h.u./acre of impact, which could be either 2acres in the red zone or 3 acres in the green zone.     ** White zone (worth 1 h.u./acre) -- Compensatewith 3 h.u./acre of impact, which could be done witheither 1 acre in the red zone or 1.5 acres in the greenzone.     While the approach doesn't place an absolute cap ondevelopment in any one zone, it effectively would capthe total loss of habitat value at 25%, because at a 3-to-1 compensation ratio, 75% of the habitat value wouldbe protected from development.     The approach based on habitat value would providea more meaningful conservation than one based onacreage, according to WSPA, because the habitat valuemeasure provides strong incentives to compensate inlarge, connected areas of highly valued habitat, as wellas strong disincentives to disturb those areas.     The plan also recognizes habitat that is restored toan established standard. If an oil field is restored to theestablished standard after abandonment, therebyundoing a habitat disturbance for which habitat creditswere previously provided as compensation, thelandowner could reuse those credits.     Among conservation advantages claimed for theapproach are providing incentives that will result in avery high percentage of habitat preserved in the mostsensitive areas, strong positive incentives to restoreland to native habitat after it has been put to atemporary industrial use such as oil operations, andstrong incentives for habitat to be preserved in large,connected configurations.     Among economic advantages claimed for the planare providing both large and small landowners a timelyand predictable means of obtaining value for high-value habitat on their property; a timely, predictableand flexible means of compensating for habitat losswith minimal costly survey requirements; a certainequity among landowners with lands of differenthabitat quality; and ways for landowners to minimizetheir compensation requirements over time by doing agood job of cleaning up after themselves by restoringland to native habitat.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Enviros face united front in badlands battle     An unlikely coalition of oil and gas producers,ranchers, business people, politicians, and Indians havejoined forces in North Dakota to oppose a plan to turna huge chunk of the state's western badlands into awilderness preserve.     At issue is a proposal by wildlife andenvironmental groups spearheaded by the Sierra Clubthat Congress declare 191,000 acres in the state as awilderness area. Eighty-two percent of that lies in theLittle Missouri National Grasslands area of thebadlands. The remaining acreage is in the SheyenneGrasslands near Lisbon, N.D., and the J. Clark SalyerNational Wildlife Refuge in McHenry and Bottineaucounties.     The proposal, detailed in the environmental groups'publication "Badlands on the Brink," would allowhunting, hiking, camping and livestock grazing, butwould ban further oil and gas development. Motorizedvehicles would be banned except for ranchers makingrepairs and improvements.     More than 100 opponents of the plan got togetherlast week in Dickinson, N.D., to talk strategy. They areworried that strict preservation will damage oil andcattle businesses and eventually doom Dickinson andother, smaller towns in that part of the state.     The proposal was dealt a blow at the meeting whenthe Three Affiliated Tribes, a Native American grouplisted by the Sierra Club as a sponsor of the plan,withdrew its support and said it will cancel its SierraClub membership.     "It's going to take a lot of the economicdevelopment away from the tribe, and oil developmentand cattle ranching," said tribal Vice Chairman IvanJohnson. He said the tribe didn't know it was listed asa sponsor for the wilderness proposal until tribalofficials started fielding calls from area ranchers.     County, city and school boards in the westernsection of North Dakota depend on taxes from oil andgas revenues to fund their budgets. Five countieswould be affected by the wilderness plan. For the state,oil tax revenues made up 10% of the 1989-91 generalfund budget.     Mike Armstrong of Dickinson, an independent oilproducer, said at the meeting it's natural for oil and gasoperators and ranchers to join forces. "We need toprotect the resources they're trying to take from ourstate. All this land is open to public use now, exceptthe private land."     Those at the meeting decided to start a letter-writingcampaign to the state's congressional delegation andadvocated "arm twisting" North Dakota Gov. EdSchafer to join their cause.     The group -- which still needs a name -- will form aworking association of ranchers, oil and gas producers,businesses and government officials. They plan tocompile resolutions from groups opposed to the plan,gather economic impact statistics and print a brochuredefending badlands development.     Alice Benitiz, lands director for the RockyMountain Oil & Gas Assn., attended the meeting andtold E&PE the Sierra Club's push to have thegrasslands designated as a wilderness area smacked of"sour grapes."     Benitiz said, "The badlands and other areas ofNorth Dakota have been studied for almost 20 yearsby the U.S. Forest Service to determine their suitabilityas wilderness areas." And each time, she said, theagency had decided the region could not be managedas wilderness because of the level of development andimportance of oil and gas production and ranching tosurrounding communities.     "The environmental groups have failed through thevery public process in which they were involved to getthe Forest Service to halt oil and gas activity," she said."And this mechanism [legislation] is the only way theyhave left."Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993NRC touts 'super' environmental agency     The National Research Council has proposed in areport due out later this summer that the U.S. makesweeping and fundamental changes in the way ithandles environmental problems.     Entitled Research to Protect, Restore and Managethe Environment, the 241-page study takes dead aim atthe way the federal government conductsenvironmental research. Existing programs are poorlystructured, uncoordinated and hampered by the lack ofclear leadership at the highest levels of government, theNRC report said.     NRC recommended establishment of a nationalenvironmental council, chaired by the vice president,composed of the heads of the federal environmentalagencies, and aided by advisory committees made upof representatives from the scientific community, thepublic, state government, and the private sector.     The council would provide leadership andcoordination among federal agencies for environmentalresearch and oversee implementation of a national planto identify a research agenda and the responsibilities ofindividual agencies.     NRC also proposed the creation of anenvironmental assessment center to convey policyoptions to the national environmental council,Congress and the involved parties. If the U.S. is tomake major improvements in the quality of itsenvironmental research and policy programs, NRCsaid EPA has to be elevated to cabinet status with theNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin., the U.S.Geological Survey and parts of NASA becoming partof a Dept. of the Environment.     Washington distributes about $5 billion annually tomore than 20 federal agencies for environmentalresearch. But, NRC points out, there "is nocomprehensive national environmental research plan tocoordinate the efforts" of the agencies.     "Moreover, no agency has the mission to developsuch a plan, nor is any existing agency able tocoordinate and oversee a national environmentalresearch plan if one were designed," the report adds.     Science and engineering "have the tools to addressenvironmental problems of enormous consequence toour social and economic well being," the study said."But we aren't using those tools most effectively."     Bridges between policy, management and scienceare weak, the report said. And there is no organizedsystem to communicate assessments of environmentalproblems to decision-makers and policy-setters.     To order a copy of the report, contact the NationalAcademy Press at 800-624-6242.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Emissions-control process patented     Radian Corp. and the Gas Research Institute havecompleted work on an emissions-control process fortriethylene glycol dehydrators that maximizesemissions recovery while retaining hydrocarbons forresale.     The process, know as Recovery-BTEX, or R- BTEX,was developed by Radian as part of research on glycoldehydrators sponsored by GRI. Radian's Phil Lowellrecently patented the process (U.S. Patent No.5,209,762); the patent rights have been assigned to GRI.     R-BTEX addresses the issue that all natural gas,whether it's produced directly from the sourceformation or from a storage reservoir, contains somewater that must be removed to prevent hydrateformation and minimize corrosion duringtransmission. Glycol dehydrators remove water fromthe gas stream, but in the process also remove somevolatile organic compounds (VOCs); among them arebenzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylene, collectivelyknown as BTEX.     When glycol is regenerated, absorbed water isboiled off along with the volatile hydrocarbons,including BTEX, and released into the atmosphere.     In 1989, Louisiana's Environmental Quality Dept.spearheaded an effort to quantify the amount of BTEXand other VOCs released from glycol dehydrators. Thedepartment surveyed more than 200 glycoldehydrators processing at least 5 mmcf/day of naturalgas that were operated by producing, processing,pipeline and storage companies.     The study found that levels of BTEX and otherVOCs from glycol units were high enough to be aconcern for the industry. There are an estimated 30,000glycol dehydrators in use in the U.S. The Clean AirAct has potentially wide-ranging consequences forglycol units because BTEX are included in the list of189 air toxic pollutants and may be emitted at levelsthat would cause many glycol units to be defined asmajor sources.     If so, the units would be required to use andcomply with the maximum achievable controltechnology (MACT) standards. And while MACTtechnologies are considered state-of-the-art andefficient, industry contends they are not necessarilydesigned to be cost-effective.     Radian's process is based on the establishedtechnologies of stripping, condensation and phaseseparation. GRI says R-BTEX provides a cost-effective alternative for controlling BTEX emissions.R-BTEX is designed for new or retrofit applications.     Since the water recovered from the gas is used asthe coolant, the process operates at condensertemperatures below those reached using air cooling.And in most cases, that makes possible a 95%recovery of hydrocarbons as saleable liquids. R-BTEXcan control BTEX emissions by as much as 99.9% ifvented BTEX is controlled at the condenser vent andflash tank.     Researchers said the blowdown water from the R-BTEX cooling tower has a very low concentration ofdissolved organics and can sometimes be directlydischarged without further treatment.     Two tests were conducted last year using two gas-processing scenarios to evaluate the effect of gaspressure, BTEX concentration, glycol recirculationrate, and reboiler temperature on process performance.For each test, the production rate was 75 mcf/day ofgas.     One test was conducted in a high-pressure field of900 psi with gas containing 750 ppm BTEX. Theother was carried out in a lower pressure field of 400psi with gas containing 300 BTEX.     In the first case, researchers recovered 9.2 b/d ofBTEX with emissions of 0.78 lbs/day. In the secondtest, 7.4 b/d were removed with emissions of 0.63lbs/day of BTEX.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Indiana considers bird netting rules     The Indiana Natural Resources Dept. is drawing upregulations for mandatory covers on drilling andproduction reserve pits.     Sparking the movement is an incident that occurredthis spring north of Princeton, Ind., in Gibson County.Two wood ducks were pulled from a pit by officialsfrom the department and the U.S. Fish and WildlifeService. The ducks later died.     Their deaths spurred a criminal inquiry and receivedwidespread publicity in the Illinois Basin. The incidentwas also discussed at last month's meeting of theIndependent Petroleum Assn. of America inWashington.     Migratory birds and other wildlife are protected byfederal laws under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act andthe Endangered Species Act. But Jim Slutz, head ofthe department's Oil and Gas Division, said it is oftenup to the individual state to enforce the oil industry'scompliance with regulations.     He promised strong action in this and other reservepit events in Indiana, including steep fines and civil andcriminal charges. Federal violations also carry stiffpenalties and fines.     To date, oilfield operations in the Midwest andAppalachian states have dodged the bird nettingcontroversy. But state legislation requiring netting onreserve pits is also being considered in Illinois andKentucky, said Craig Howard, president of theIndependent Oil Producers Assn., Tri-State.     "A lot of attention is being given to the EndangeredSpecies Act and the necessity to prevent entry intopits," he said. "It has become a serious issue, eventhough the Gibson county incident is the only one toreceive publicity during the past 40 years."     Department officials have begun to inspect morereserve pits around the state, looking for violations.Howard said some Illinois Basin producers havebegun to install bird netting, or are using storage tanksto recycle drilling fluids or hold produced water to bein compliance with federal laws or any state laws thatmay be forthcoming.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993ERCB calls for drilling waste management     Alberta's Energy Resources Conservation Boardhas directed provincial oil and gas operators to submita waste disposal plan with well license applicationswhen hydrocarbon- or salt-based mud will be used orproduced during drilling.     Re-entry situations that use an oil- or salt-basedrilling fluid system but don't need a well licenseapplication require a waste disposal plan. Producerswill also have to retain the plan in their files because itwill be needed when they apply for a reclamationcertificate afterward.     The plan must indicate the type of hydrocarbon orsalt used in the mud, estimated volume of drillingwaste to be generated, any additives, additionaltreatment processes used such as incineration or reuse,equipment used to reduce soil contamination and wastevolume and method of handling completion fluids.     If an operator intends to use landfarming to disposeof waste, the plan must provide a location and generaldescription of the site indicating:     ** Estimated oil content is resulting soil mix (if oil-        based).     ** Present land use, topography, vegetation type,        soil horizon used for disposal, topsoil depth, and size        of disposal area.     ** Measures used to contain surface and subsurface        migration of contaminants.     ** Procedures, timing and frequency of the        landfarming operation and depth of initial        incorporation into the soil.     ** Schedule for any waste-soil mixture cultivation        or tilling.     ** Type of soil amendments which may be used to        promote biodegradation.     ** Analytical tests and sampling locations which        will be used to determine initial soil-waste quality, and        to monitor hydrocarbon degradation and salt levels.     ** Time required to complete the landfarming        procedure and the criteria used to determine when        completion reached.     ** Proximity to residents other than the landowner.     ** Name and telephone number of person        responsible for the disposal operation.     If the well is to be located on public land, the wastedisposal plan will be reviewed by either the AgricultureDept.; Food, and Rural Development; or theEnvironmental Protection Dept. The plan for wellsdrilled on private land will be reviewed by ERCB'sEnvironment Protection Dept. The plan must beapproved before the operator can spud the well.     According to ERCB, the purpose of the plan is tomake sure the operator "has considered the long-termsoil reclamation steps required when producing aparticular waste type," and to determine where andhow these treatments are being used in the province.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993DOE seeks input to production strategy     The Energy Dept. is asking for input from oil andgas producers as it prepares a domestic oil and gasinitiative to create jobs and increase domesticproduction while protecting the environment.     Speaking at a recent oil and gas waste managementseminar sponsored by the Independent Oil & GasAssn. of Pennsylvania, Nancy Johnson, a DOEprogram manager for environmental research andanalysis, urged operators to comment on the initiative.     DOE Secretary Hazel O'Leary announced theproject in April; the agency hopes to complete its draftstrategy for submission to President Clinton by LaborDay.     Johnson acknowledged oil and gas operators faceincreasing environmental costs and liabilitiesstemming from a constant flow of new and morecomplex regulations. She stressed the importance ofbasing policy analysis on cumulative regulatoryimpact.     For example, a DOE study determined theindustrial waste provisions proposed in a ResourceConservation and Recovery Act bill last year wouldhave resulted in a 9% decrease in oil reserves, a 3%decrease in gas reserves, the loss of 13,000 explorationand production jobs, a $27 billion decrease in federaland state tax revenues and would cost industry $40billion initially plus $5 billion annually for compliance.     Johnson said DOE wants to hear from industrywhat it considers priority concerns, regional issues,research needs, and innovative ideas for problemsolving through federal, state and industry co-operation.     Meanwhile, about three-quarters of DOE'srequested $101 million for natural gas programs isaimed at utilizing fuel cells ($50 million), advancedturbines ($24 million) and other uses ($5 million).Also proposed is some $17 million for resource andextraction programs, $3.4 million for delivery andstorage, and $2.9 million for environmental researchand analysis.     The proposed $80 million petroleum budget targets$70 million for oil recovery programs and $3.6 millionfor environmental research and analysis.     Comments for the domestic oil and gas strategyshould be directed to Len Coburn, Office of Oil andNatural Gas Policy (EP-52); or Donald Juckett, Officeof Fossil Energy (FE-30), Dept. of Energy, 1000Independence Ave. SW, Washington, D.C. 20585.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Twenty-five operators fined $130,800     The Texas Railroad Commission racked up another$130,800 in fines over the last two weeks as it charged25 oil and gas operators with violations of commissionwell plugging and pollution rules.     So far in 1993, the commission has levied$1,312,401.32 in fines, compared to only $543,666 insuch penalties assessed during the same period lastyear.     The following operators were fined for single wellviolations: Atlantic & Gulf Pet Corp. of Houston($3,000), Hash Oil Co. of Albany ($3,000), RCBRecord Co. of San Antonio ($3,000), Kevin FranksEnterprises of Morton ($3,000), Seagull Resources ofCalgary, Alberta ($3,500), and Trinity Valley Oil &Equipment of Houston ($3,000).     Two companies were cited for two-well violations.Sonora Oil Co. of Rockwall was ordered to pay$3,000, and Global Energy & Minerals of Houstonwas penalized $5,000.     Dohn Operating of Ganado was fined $20,000 forfour inactive and unplugged wells; Red RiverHydrocarbons of Scottsdale, Ariz. was assessed$9,000 for four wells; and Gene Creswell of Grahamwas assessed $15,000 for five wells.     In addition, M-P Petroleum Inc. of Houston wasordered to pay $3,500 for discharges of oil and gaswastes; Deryl G. Bolin of Carrizo Springs was fined$1,500 for an unplugged well and for an oil spill;Diamond S Operating of Livingston was ordered topay $4,000 for an unplugged well and for failing tobackfill pits; Kana Resources of Snyder was assessed$6,000 for oil and saltwater discharges; andGoldenwest Oil Co. of Olney was fined $24,500 for10 inactive and unplugged wells and for oil andsaltwater discharges.     Nine operators agreed to pay a penalty withoutadmitting any violation of commission rules. ClaudeRobinson Oil & Gas of Borger was assessed $800 foreight unplugged wells; Keystone Operating Co. ofAlice was penalized $1,500 for four wells; Lorac Inc.of Dallas was ordered to pay $1,500 for one well;Hillin-Simon Oil Co. of Midland was assessed $3,000for injection without a permit; Robert C. Wash of BigSpring was penalized $1,000 for a basic sediment spillat a former tank battery; S.E. Brown Trustee of Alicewas ordered to pay $9,000 for failure to backfill pitsand for injection without a permit; Sandco Oil & Gasof Lafayette, La., was assessed $500 for one inactiveand unplugged well; K&F Oil & Gas Management ofKilgore was penalized $3,000 for an oil and saltwaterspill; and Impact Energy of Kerrville was ordered topay $500 for an unplugged well.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993SVE leads in EPA market survey     An EPA report coming out soon projects thevolume of contaminated soil amenable to soil vaporextraction at 2 1/2 times the amount that could besubjected to in situ bioremediation.     Soil vapor extraction has been used in 17% ofcleanup treatment remedies applied so far but is stillconsidered innovative because information on meetingcleanup targets is hard to get. It's a lot easier to trackwhat's been removed than what's left behind.     So said Walter Kovalick, head of EPA's 4-year-oldTechnology Innovation Office in Superfund and anacting deputy administrator for solid waste andemergency response. He described the new report lastweek at a conference in St. Paul, Minn. The report, 21/2 years in the making, projects market share involumes of soil to be treated by various innovativetechnologies during the next five to eight years.     For example, the soil vacuum extraction (SVE)market was put at 3.2 million cubic yards, in situbioremediation at 1.2 million cubic yards, in situ soilflushing at 980,000 cubic yards, and soil washing at840,000 cubic yards. Kovalick said bioremediation hasbeen lagging, while soil flushing and soil washinghave been moving up.     The market survey focuses on 550 sites at theremedial design stage and 738 that are going throughthe remedial investigation and feasibility study process.     Contamination volumes were aggregated from sitesin various cleanup programs: Superfund, 1,600 to2,000 sites (including 400 to 800 in the discovery orlisting part of the process); RCRA corrective action,3,500; underground storage tanks, 295,000; DefenseDept., 7,313; Energy Dept., 4,000; other federalagencies, 350.     Although no information was available on thenumber of state sites, Kovalick said states had spent$428 million and have cleanup fund balances of $2.2billion.accounted for 61% of thermal treatments.     The report, Cleaning Up the Nation's Waste Sites:Markets and Technical Trends, No. PB93-140762, willbe available from the National Technical InformationService, 703-487-4650. TBack to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993OSPRA audits on schedule     The Texas General Land Office says it hascompleted about half its audits of coastal facilities thathave submitted oil spill contingency plans required bythe state's 1991 Oil Spill Prevention and Response Act(OSPRA).     GLO began the series of random audits in Januaryand to date its 22 inspectors have examined some 300of the 600 oil-handling facilities scattered along theTexas coastline from Louisiana to Mexico, includingproduction sites.     Timothy McKinna, who is in charge of the landoffice's spill division, said the random audits will likelybe completed by the end of August. He told E&PEabout 100 facilities have passed inspection and beencertified by the agency; the remainder are in theprocess of making changes to their plans to bring theminto line.     McKinna said companies' compliance with therequirements of OSPRA has improved as the auditshave progressed. "When we began random on-siteaudits in January, we discovered a variety of problemsthat made plans that looked good on paper unworkablein reality," he said. "Some of the plans were socumbersome that personnel would never have theinclination to study them, much less understand them."     If an operator doesn't have a workable contingencyplan in place, the way in which the land office conductsthe audits doesn't provide much opportunity to cobbleone together. GLO auditors normally give an operatoronly about an hour's notice that they're coming toconduct the inspection.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 19931992 saw record EPA fines     The filing of criminal charges againstenvironmental polluters is the fastest growingcomponent of EPA's enforcement efforts, an agencyreport says.     EPA's just released EnforcementAccomplishments Report for Fiscal Year 1992 saysthe year saw record fines levied for both civil andcriminal environmental violations. The report creditsthe growth of criminal enforcement to the new residentagent offices opened in Houston, Los Angeles,Buffalo, N.Y., St. Louis, and Miami.     To order a copy of the report, call EPA's PublicInformation Center at 202-260-2080.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Correction     In the May 14 issue, E&PE incorrectly statedColorado surface owners were asking that the state Oiland Gas Conservation Commission raise the surfacedamage bond of Gerrity Oil & Gas Corp.       Instead,the case involved wells being drilled by ElkExploration. Gerrity has no applications pending for asurface damage bond increase before the commission.     The case was heard in part at the commission'sApril meeting and continued until its June hearing.After more than 10 hours of hearings, the commissionrecommended a bond in the amount of $15,250(E&PE 6/11).     Covering three wells, the per well bond amount is$5,083, or $83 more than the standard $5,000 requiredfor a single well by the commission's rules.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Controversial well draws ire     The comment period for a Bureau of LandManagement draft environmental impact statementfavorable to the drilling of a controversial proposedexploratory well in South Florida has been extended 90days to Aug. 18.     Shell Oil wants to drill a 18,850-foot directionalwildcat on the Miccosukee Indian reservation under theeverglades in Broward County.     The project has drawn the fire of environmentalistsand state and local officials because the Biscayneaquifer, the region's main underground water supply,begins within five miles of the proposed well. Shellsays the well will not affect the aquifer, butenvironmentalists maintain it will.     The Florida Legislature and South Florida WaterManagement Board have passed resolutions calling onboth the BLM and Bureau of Indian Affairs, the twofederal agencies charged with reviewing and approvingthe EIS, to kill the plan. In addition, Broward Countycommissioners passed a resolution threatening alawsuit if the well is approved. If approved by bothagencies, the final EIS will probably be published nextFebruary or March.     Anticipation of a discovery of hydrocarbons by thewell is low. So far, only 14 of 202 exploratory wells inSouth Florida have produced oil or gas, and the onlywell drilled in Broward County was a duster.     For a copy of the draft EIS, contact Robert Abbey,District Manager, Bureau of Land Management, 411Briarwood Dr., Suite 404, Jackson, Miss. 39206, orcall 601-977-5400.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Edwards signs oilfield bill     Louisiana Gov. Edwin Edwards has signed intolaw the Oilfield Restoration Act to clean up E&P sitesstatewide.     Heavily supported by oil and gas interests, the lawlevies a fee of 1"/barrel on oil and a 0.2"/mcf ofnatural gas produced in the state, with a $10/yr chargefor non-producing wells.     Levied at the wellhead, the fees will be collected inthe same way as the state's severance tax, usingmonthly producer payments. The money will go intothe Oilfield Site Restoration Trust Fund, and willfinance the reclamation of about 2,000 knownorphaned and abandoned sites in Louisiana.Temporarily abandoned or saltwater disposal wells instripper fields are exempt.     There is a $10 million ceiling and a $6 million flooron the fund; it's expected to generate $4-5 million in itsfirst year. The fund will be administered by acommission made up of the Natural Resources Dept.secretary and six others who will be selected by Gov.Edwards from industry and environmentalorganizations.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Environmental patents     M.M. Francis and T.R. Jack have patented aprocess for biodegradation of oily waste in a passivelyaerated bioreactor that contains a porous, substantiallyoleophilic matrix, such as peat. The process may beused to treat the types of oily wastes conventionallydisposed of in landfarming operations. The techniqueprovides the potential to reduce the loss of leachatesand to control the loss of volatiles (Canadian PatentNo. 2,032,610).     F.D. Rowsell has patented a method for collectingand recovering oil spills in water. The spills are treatedwith amine-substituted water-swelling clays added tothe spill in amounts that herd oil into islands separatedby surfaces of water containing no oil. The clays canalso be added to oil spills in an amount that producesquasi-solid, buoyant organoclay-oil flocculate clumpsthat float in the water and can be collected from thesurface (U.S. Patent No. 5,176,831).     J.B. Rodden of Shell Oil Co. has patented a systemfor removal and disposal of minor amounts oforganics from contaminated water. The process uses apump to feed water from the body of contaminatedwater to the system, where indirect heat exchange anddirect steam addition raises its temperature. A strippingvessel uses gas to strip the heated water and removethe volatile contaminants (U.S. Patent No. 5,176,798).     To order a copy of a patent, call 800-247-8678 orwrite Petroleum Abstracts, 600 south College, Tulsa,Okla. 74104-3189.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993EPA to update regs     EPA is proposing to update a portion of the outercontinental shelf air regulations for the OCS lyingoffshore Southern California.     Appearing in the June 18 issue of the FederalRegister (58 FR 33589), the notice says the portions ofthe OCS air regs that are being updated relate to therequirements for OCS sources for which the SantaBarbara Air Pollution Control District, Ventura CountyAPCD and San Luis Obispo APCD are thecorresponding onshore areas. Deadline for commentsis July 19.     The 1990 Clean Air Amendments require EPA toperiodically update the requirements applying to OCSsources located within 25 miles of states' seawardboundaries to keep them consistent with therequirements of the corresponding onshore areas(E&PE 9/4/92).     Comments on the update should be mailed (induplicate if possible) to EPA Air Docket (A-5), Attn:Docket No. A-93-16, Environmental ProtectionAgency, Air and Toxics Division, Region 9, 75Hawthorne St., San Francisco, Calif. 94105.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993MMS releases Gulf reports     The Minerals Management Service has publishedthe following reports dealing with environmentalstudies in the Gulf of Mexico.     Adaptation of the Minerals Management Service'sOil-Weathering Model for Use in the Gulf of MexicoRegion. The report (OCS Study MMS 92-0023) hasbeen extensively modified and adapted for use on apersonal computer. The database is extensive andcontains over 9,000 analyses including Louisianaoffshore fields.     Mississippi-Alabama Shelf Pinnacle Trend HabitatMapping Study.  This report (OCS Study MMS 92-0026), prepared by Continental Shelf Associates,summarizes the geological and biologicalinvestigations in selected blocks offshore Mississippiand Alabama. Bathymetric and side-scan sonarsystems were used to produce hard-bottom featuresand topographic habitats in the study area. Biologicalsurveys were performed to characterize the regions,and data were analyzed to describe biotic zonation asthey pertain to physical characteristics of theenvironment.     Proceedings: 12th Annual Gulf of MexicoInformation Transfer Meeting. This 557-page report(OCS Study MMS 92-0027), summarizes thepresentations given at the meeting. The meetingprovides a forum for "scoping" topics of interest orconcern relative to the environmental assessments orstudies that support offshore oil and gas activities inthe Gulf of Mexico OCS Region.     Gulf of Mexico Regional Studies Plan, Fiscal Year1993. The 216-page report (OCS Study MMS 92-0030) provides a concise description of studiesproposed for funding during FY 1993 for the MMSregion's environmental studies program.     Chemosynthetic Ecosystems Study: LiteratureReview and Data Synthesis. Prepared by Texas A&MUniversity, this study (OCS Study MMS 92-0033)brings together knowledge of chemosyntheticcommunities in the Gulf from the time of theirdiscovery until 1992. It contains sections on historicalperspectives, seep associations and types, regionalgeological settings and origins of petroleum,paleoecology, associated fauna and microflora, generalbiology, community distribution and description, andconceptual models.     When ordering copies of these reports, refer to theMMS numbers in parentheses above. To order, contactMinerals Management Service, Gulf of Mexico OCSRegion, Public Information Unit (MS 5034), 1201Elmwood Park Blvd., New Orleans, La. 70123-2394,telephone 504-736-2519.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993BDM forms Russian venture     BDM International Inc., a diversified technologycompany in the waste cleanup business, has formedEast/West Technology Partners Ltd. to bring advancedtechnology of the former Soviet Union to Westerncustomers.     BDM's partners are Intex Corp. and the Russiancompany Technology Exhibition and Investment Inc.     Among other technologies, the company is offeringa long-lasting catalytic deodorizer that breaks downcertain smellychemicals.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Alberta mulls new well fee     Alberta regulators are considering imposing a one-time fee on first-time drillers in the province andapplying the proceeds to restoration of orphanwellsites.     The Energy Resources Conservation Board saysthe C$10,000 fee would go into a fund to be used toreturn orphan wells in Alberta to an environmentallyacceptable state. Operators with a history of drilling inAlberta will not pay the fee, but any newly formedcompany or any operating in the province for the firsttime will be subject to the charge.     Operators now pay a C$500 well licensing feealong with an orphan well surcharge of C$40 for everywell suspended in 1992. For 1993, this surcharge wasincreased to C$60/well.     The ERCB has identified some 17 orphan wells todate. Costs for each well vary, depending on theamount of work needed to properly abandon and cleanup a site.     The C$10,000 fee is still in the proposal stage, andis not expected to become standard procedure prior tothis summer. However, while Alberta has some 700oil and gas companies registered in the province, anestimated 3,000 companies own all or part of variousAlberta wells.     This leads to difficulty in tracking down someowners, and officials believe this is exactly the kind ofproblem the new orphan well fee could help alleviate.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993EPA issues PM-10 rule     EPA has issued the final rule revising themaximum allowable increase for particulate matterunder the requirements for prevention of significantdeterioration (PSD) of air quality.     Published in the June 3 issue of the FederalRegister (58 FR 31622), the revisions affect theregulations in 40 CFR parts 51 and 52 which specifythe increments for particulate matter with a diameter of10 micrometers (PM-10) or less.     The effective date for the rule varies. For the federalPSD program, the implementation date is June 3,1994. For EPA-approved state PSD programs, therule goes into effect on the date when the state's revisedprogram, containing the new increments, is approvedby EPA.     For additional information, contact Dan Deroeck,Air Quality Management Division (MD-15), Office ofAir Quality Planning and Standards, EPA, ResearchTriangle Park, N.C. 27711, telephone 919-541-5593.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Wildlife centers planned     A permanent network of wildlife rescue andrehabilitation centers, partly financed by interest earnedfrom the state's Oil Spill Prevention and ResponseTrust Fund, may open in California.     Provision for the permanent R&R network foranimals is contained in the amended version of a billsponsored by state Sen. Diane Watson. The centerswould serve the Los Angeles-Long Beach and SanFrancisco areas, as well as San Diego, Port Hueneme,Monterey Bay, and Humboldt Bay.     Additional money would come in the form of$500,000 in federal funds.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Expanded UIC regs opposed     An expansion of the underground injection controlregulations proposed by EPA has drawn criticism byindependent operators.     The Federal Advisory Committee is considering thedraft rule being prepared to cover constructionrequirements for Class 2 wells under the SafeDrinking Water Act.     The rule seeks to expand the area of reviewrequirements to all wells, increase specific wellconstruction requirements, and would mandateincreased mechanical integrity testing.     The expanded requirements were proposed assafeguards to protect drinking water contaminationfrom injected oil and gas wastes. Trade groups like theIndependent Petroleum Assn. of America andPennsylvania's Independent Oil & Gas Assn. contendthe changes are unwarranted and would be particularlyburdensome to smaller producers.     They say studies by the Government AccountingOffice and American Petroleum Institute found onlyfour cases of aquifer contamination from the nation's170,000 active injection wells and 2.2 millionabandoned or inactive wells.     The economic estimate provided in the draft ruleforecasts that up to 65% of the total $124 millioncompliance costs for the first five years would falldisproportionately on "small entities" such as stripperoperations concentrated in geographical areas likeAppalachia.     The independents also point to a 1987 EPA reportto Congress that concluded strippers constitute aspecial subcategory of the oil and gas industry thatshould be considered independently and whichwarrants special regulatory actions tailored to theiroperation.     Barry Russell, IPAA vice president and generalcounsel, told E&PE industry has urged EPA to "goback to the drawing board and recalculate the energyand cost impacts of any UIC program changes."Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Calendar     NORM Survey and Control Certification Course,June 30, New Orleans; July 7, Baton Rouge, La.; July14, Lafayette, La.; July 21, Houston; July 28, NewOrleans. Sponsored by Radiation Technical ServicesInc. For information, call 800-336-3741.     NORM in the Oil and Gas Industry, Aug. 9,Houston; Sept. 20, Dallas; Oct. 4, New Orleans; Nov.8, Houston. Sponsored by Renfro Associates Inc. Forinformation, call 214-596-8807.     Third Annual Symposium on Groundwater andSoil Remediation, Sept. 8-10, Quebec City, Canada.Sponsored by Environment Canada. For information,contact Lise Gendron, Environment Canada, VillagePlace Cartier, 3rd Floor, 425 St. Joseph Blvd., Hull,Quebec K1A 0H3, 819-953-9368, Fax 819-953-7253.     Clean Gulf '93, Sept. 14-16, New Orleans. Thisthird annual conference on oil spill prevention,response and technology in the Gulf Coast region issponsored by Louisiana's Oil Spill Coordinator'sOffice and Texas General Land Office. Forinformation, call Sean Guerre at 713-621-8833.     Soil Remediation for Petroleum Extraction, Sept.21-22, Houston. Two-day short course sponsored byHolliday Environmental Services. For information,call 351-7591.     Second International Conference on Health, Safety& Environment in Oil and Gas Exploration andProduction, Jan. 24-26, 1994, Jakarta, Indonesia.Sponsored the Society of Petroleum Engineers andSociety of Indonesian Petroleum Engineers, theconference is a forum on the environmental, health,and safety issues in worldwide oil and gas E&P. Forinformation, call 214-952-9393.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-31IA059-000325-B010-174http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev31.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001106 text/html 42122HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:09:14 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:32 GMTContent-length: 41933Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev31.html Sample Issue Copyright GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ***FOCUS REPORT*** Global Cooperation on Climate Change: Experts Recommend Paths to Effective Action (1488 words) ***POLICY TRENDS*** United Nations Confirms 1992 World Conference on Environment (215 words) CFC Taxes Now in Effect in US (327 words) China Releases Results of Afforestation Programs (211 words) Mexico City Improves Air Quality by Restricting Driving (290 words) Cairo Conference Sets New Tone of Cooperation Among Countries (268 words) ***SCIENCE UPDATE *** Scientists Lower Estimates of Potential Sea Level Rise (364 words) Researcher Documents Acid Precipitation's Effect on Spruce Seedlings (290 words) Antarctic Ozone Hole Broke Up Earlier Than Expected in 1989 (311 words) Tree-Ring Research Used in Study of Climate Change (355 words) ***INDUSTRY WATCH*** Energy-Efficient Lights are Selling, But Producers Face Challenges (445 words) UK Residential Investment in Energy-Saving Equipment Drops 12% in 1989 (191 words) General Motors Displays Advanced Electric Car (319 words) Carrier Introduces CFC Recycling Unit for Large Chillers (121 words) US EPA Proposes New Controls on Municipal Waste Incinerators (317 words) HOTLINE: (172 words) CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Global Cooperation on Climate Change:  Experts Recommend Paths toEffective Action     This year will mark the beginning of formal negotiationstoward an international framework convention on climate change.Protocols to add specific and binding targets will follow, or mayeven accompany the convention.  What lessons can we learn fromprevious agreements?  What obstacles will negotiators face?  Is aglobal agreement likely to be effective, or could regionalagreements and unilateral actions be stronger in the short term?To help answer these questions, GECR spoke with some of theleading figures in the current drive to define the elements of aconvention on climate change.     The 1985 Vienna Convention on Protection of the Ozone Layer,and the subsequent Montreal Protocol, are widely seen as modelsfor future global environmental agreements.  The ViennaConvention (which itself was partially modeled after the 1977Barcelona Convention) was established as an interim agreementwhen it became apparent that a specific protocol would not yethave wide support; however it was a definite, formal statement ofcommitment by governments to future action on the ozone depletionproblem.  The Montreal Protocol, signed two years later, addedlegally binding deadlines for the reduction of ozone-depletingchemicals.     This two-step process (convention followed by protocol) wasnecessary for the ozone treaty, but should the same procedure befollowed for a climate change agreement?  Why not aim for anaccord that includes protocols, particularly one on CO2?  "Ithink that will delay it," says Ambassador Richard Benedick, thechief US negotiator of the Montreal Protocol, now on detail fromthe US State Department as senior fellow of the ConservationFoundation/World Wildlife Fund in Washington, DC. "People aren'tready for a protocol [on CO2], and I think you have to go througha process to get there.  I believe in partial solutions -- infact, the Montreal Protocol is already a partial solution forclimate change -- and we ought to disaggregate rather thancomplexify.  The framework convention could have some teeth, butwe shouldn't try to cram it up with too much.  It will load downthe convention, and we'll never finish it.  I'd rather go step bystep."     A framework convention will be difficult enough to negotiate(the current goal is to have a convention ready for signature atthe UN's Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992),but producing the relevant protocols could prove an even greaterchallenge.  As Benedick points out, we already have onegreenhouse gas treaty in the Montreal Protocol, but creating anagreement that can reduce carbon dioxide worldwide while stillserving the short- and long-term interests of developed anddeveloping countries will test the limits of the parties'diplomacy, cooperation, and patience.  Carbon dioxide carries farmore economic and political weight than CFCs ever could.     Some observers are concerned that a truly effectiveinternational agreement to limit carbon dioxide emissions won'tbe signed by more than a handful of countries.  According toMichael Grubb of the Royal Institute of International Affairs inLondon, UK, a treaty with any given reduction target would proverelatively easy for parties like the US and the USSR to complywith:  neither currently uses energy efficiently, and they havemany options available to reduce emissions.  But Japan or France,which are already quite energy-efficient in terms of CO2emissions, might argue against such "equal reduction" targetsbecause it would be unfairly expensive for them to take emissionsdown another percentage.  Thus, any agreement based on equalreductions could result in a "lowest common denominator"compromise, which may not be strong enough to address the problemof global emissions.  Richard Benedick says this becomes less ofa problem if the treaty establishes a retroactive baseline yearfor emission levels back to the mid-eighties, for example, socountries can credit their existing energy-efficiency policiestoward the targeted levels.  Still, setting that baseline yearcould be problematic:  Japan began major measures to reduceemissions in the 1970s.  Do we want to go back that far?     This example merely hints at the complexity of establishingtargets that a majority of countries will accept.  And once goalsare established, ways to achieve and enforce them must still besettled.  A number of agencies, groups, and individuals arecurrently analyzing carbon taxes (domestic and international),leasable or tradeable emission permits, and other regulatory orincentive options, to see which ones might be most effective andpolitically feasible.     The idea of a Law of the Atmosphere is gaining some support,although as Peter Faross of the European Commission headquartersin Brussels explained to GECR, "a lot of countries are verysensitive when you try to touch on their sovereignty rights.  Andthe broad and ambitious approach of a full-fledged law for theatmosphere might be a very time-consuming process.  You mayarrive at the point where it's too late to implement thenecessary action because the discussions would last too long."The unsigned Law of the Sea stands in testimony to the politicalunpopularity of international control systems.     Peter Thacher, former deputy executive director of theUnited Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and assistantsecretary general of the UN, who now works with the WorldResources Institute in Washington, DC, says that the appropriateway toward international cooperation on the global warming issueis through a comprehensive action plan, much like the "ActionPlan to Protect Stratospheric Ozone" that UNEP developed forgovernments in 1977.  An action plan for climate change wouldcontain a legal chapter, calling for negotiation and earlyadoption of a framework convention and the first of severalprotocols to deal with individual greenhouse gases, such as CO2.The plan would also have a scientific chapter to implement --with heavy involvement of the International Geosphere-BiosphereProgram -- the intensified research and monitoring that is neededto help bring other greenhouse gases under international control.This calls for an additional chapter to ensure that internationalmechanisms and funding are adequate to mount a stronger globalresearch effort.  "These funds are needed today," Thacher says,"and should not be delayed until treaties are ready."     Thacher acknowledges that negotiating internationalconventions and protocols could take time.  What about otheractions in the meantime?  "I think the `big boys' ought to tacklethis on their own, unilaterally taking steps in their ownself-interest," Thacher told GECR.  The industrialized nationshave their own organs, such as the Organization for EconomicCooperation and Development (OECD), to do this if they want toavoid using the UN.  "They can all benefit by looking at policyimplications of improving energy efficiency.  I think that oughtto get started without waiting for a package deal in which thedeveloped countries are involved.  They ought to get startedbecause that's where the big CO2 cutbacks can be achieved in theshortest time."     Michael Grubb takes a similar view: "You have to askseriously whether you really need to get all countries involvedat this stage, and you may well conclude that you can do morewith less:  70% of global carbon emissions are produced by theUS, Europe (East and West), and the USSR, so you may getsomething useful from a more limited number of countries."  Grubbstresses that global participation is ultimately necessary, butnotes that unilateral, bilateral, and regional efforts could beimportant stepping stones on the way toward that goal.     Conversations with sources at the OECD and the EuropeanCommission indicate that neither body expects to developagreements among its members apart from the UN's global treaties,but both are working on climate change issues on their own andthrough the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).The OECD will hold a meeting in late January among its membercountries to discuss the questions they will need to considerwhen they develop climate change policies.  The discussionsshould help OECD countries work out some of their differences inorder to facilitate the formal IPCC negotiations.  TheInternational Energy Agency (IEA) and the OECD are collaboratingon an energy and greenhouse gas "outlook" up to the year 2005,which will provide the basis for evaluation in 1990 of thepotential for and costs of specific sectoral actions to reduceemissions.  And the European Commission is creating a coherentenergy saving program called SAFE, which it expects to releasethis year.     The IPCC will present the elements of a framework conventionat the Second World Climate Conference (29 October - 7 November1990); formal negotiations will begin then or shortly thereafter.Cooperation will be hard-won, but essential.  In his 1968 essay,"The Tragedy of the Commons," Garrett Hardin wrote that "we arelocked into a system of `fouling our own nest,' so long as webehave only as independent, rational, free-enterprisers." If weknowingly choose not to abandon free enterprise and rationality,then to avoid the tragedy of the global commons we mustcompromise some of our independence.  Global solutions will taketime and will be imperfect, but in the end, it seems they'll bethe ones that matter.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990United Nations Confirms 1992 World Conference on Environment     In late December, the 44th session of the United NationsGeneral Assembly formally approved a proposal to go forward withthe long-planned World Conference on Environment and Developmentto be held in Brazil in 1992.  The conference, which will be thesecond UN-sponsored world meeting on the environment (the firstwas held in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1972), is expected to last twoweeks, and will be timed to coincide with World Environment Day(5 June, 1992).  An open-ended preparatory committee, based inthe UN General Assembly, will meet five times to plan theconference, with the first meeting planned for March 1990 in NewYork.  The committee will hold its subsequent meetings in Genevaand Nairobi, with a final meeting in New York to solidify plans.     During the UN session, developed and developing countrieshad to negotiate the locations of the planning meetings, as wellas which body of the UN would be responsible for planning theconference.  Industrialized countries originally favored theUnited Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as the appropriateplanning group, with meetings to occur in Geneva.  Developingcountries objected to this choice on the grounds that they arenot well represented in Geneva, and they felt that their needswould be better served by a planning committee drawn from theGeneral Assembly.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990CFC Taxes Now in Effect in US     As of 1 January 1990, US producers and importers ofchlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) must pay a base tax of $1.37 per poundof chemical, with adjustments according to the particularchemical's ozone depleting potential.  Importers of productsmanufactured with the use of CFCs (such as automobiles,electronic equipment, refrigerators, etc.) are subject to thetax, which will be passed on to consumers.  The tax wasoriginally sponsored by Representative Peter Stark (Democrat,California), and was incorporated in the Omnibus BudgetReconciliation Act of 1989.  The Internal Revenue Servicereleased initial guidelines on 22 December; final regulationshave not yet been issued.     The base tax will rise incrementally, with an increase to$1.67 per pound in 1992, jumping to $2.65 per pound the followingyear.  From 1995 on, the rate will increase by $.45 annually.Halons, recycled CFCs, CFCs used for manufacturing rigid foaminsulation, and CFCs used as feedstocks (i.e., entirely consumedin the process of producing another chemical) are not currentlycovered by the law.  Manufacturers of CFCs and halons for exportare exempt unless they surpass their current level of exports, inwhich case they must either pay the tax or apply to theEnvironmental Protection Agency for new allowances.  Halon andrigid foam manufacturers will pay the full tax beginning in 1994,but are required to pay a reduced base rate ($.25/pound) from1991 until then.  US companies can still produce ozone-depletingchemicals outside the US without paying the tax, so long as thechemicals are not imported into the US.     Floor stocks are covered by the tax in cases where inventoryis being held for sale or for use in further manufacture.Companies (defined by employer identification number) that holdtotal floor stocks of less than 400 pounds are exempt from thistax.  The GECR Document Service will provide all relevantdocuments (legislation, IRS guidance, a list of products subjectto the tax, etc.).  Call the GECR Hotline for more information,at TEL: +1-617-648-8700.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990China Releases Results of Afforestation Programs     China has planted enough trees in its northern provincesover the past 12 years to increase forest cover by over 25million hectares (250,000 square kilometers), according to aChinese official news agency report released 5 December 1989.The country began the afforestation program in 1977 to "harmonizethe development of agriculture, forests, and animal by-products,and to control sand expansion."  Grain production in areas nowprotected by trees has risen 10% - 30%, and grassland in theregion has increased by 20%.     According to the report, 16.5 million hectares (165,000square kilometers) of forest were planted by airplane, with therest planted manually.  The report states that total forestcoverage in the 13 northern provinces has increased to slightlymore than 7%, up from 5% in 1977.  China plans to spend "severaldecades" constructing additional forest protection systems in theregion.     Because the figures for the total afforested area seem high,GECR checked Chinese-English translation of the figures withseveral sources, but we were not able to get independentconfirmation of the areas from China.  According to WorldResources 1988-89, published by the World Resources Institute inWashington, DC, "China has the world's largest reforestationprogram, planting new forests at the rate of more than 4.5million hectares per year."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Mexico City Improves Air Quality by Restricting Driving     The government of Mexico City, in response to public concernabout winter air pollution levels, has implemented a program torestrict driving in the Mexican capital from 20 November 1989through 28 February 1990.  According to Ramon Ojeda, the city'sdirector of prevention and control of contamination, "each car inthe metropolitan area has to be idle one day a week from Mondaythrough Friday."     Stickers, coded with a color specific to the day that a caris not allowed on the road, have been affixed to license plateson all city-registered vehicles (automobiles andnon-passenger-carrying trucks).  Cars from outside the city arerestricted based on the last digit of their plate number.Weekends are unrestricted, as is the period from 10 pm to 5 amevery night.  Taxis and buses are not included in the program.     According to Ojeda, Mexico City has 2,300,000 vehiclesregistered, and the program has decreased the number of vehicleson the road by over 400,000 per day.  Vehicles caught driving ontheir restricted day are impounded and held for 24 hours.  Ownersmust pay a fine equivalent to one month's minimum wage salary(currently 380,000 pesos, or US $125.00) to recover their cars.Since the program began, the city has issued 7,000 fines, whichOjeda sees as a relatively low figure, and a sign that mostpeople are obeying the rules.  "The public has supported theprogram enthusiastically, and there weren't any complaints,"Ojeda told GECR.  "To the contrary, they want it to continue allyear."  The city's public transportation system seems to belittle affected by the program, since most people are electing tocar-pool.  Ojeda is enthusiastic about the program, saying that"now the skies are clearer:  you can see the volcanoes."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Cairo Conference Sets New Tone of Cooperation Among Countries     The World Conference on Preparing for Climate Change, heldin Cairo, Egypt from 17 - 21 December, 1989, set a new tone forglobal cooperation, according to John Topping, president of theClimate Institute in Washington, DC.  The conference was convenedby the Climate Institute, the United Nations EnvironmentProgramme (UNEP), and the government of Egypt, and wasco-sponsored by 20 international agencies and organizations.     Conference participants released the "Cairo Compact," aproclamation toward a concerted world-wide response to theclimate crisis, which recognizes among other things theresponsibility of all countries, including developing nations, totake measures in their own self-interest to reduce emissions.     This was the first major world conference on climate changeto be held in a developing country, and Topping told GECR that adistinguishing feature of this conference was the strong sense ofcooperation and common purpose -- and a relative lack of the"North-South" tensions that have tended to plague such meetingsin the past.  "The Egyptians set the tone, which allowed it to besuccessful in creating a sense of global commitment," Toppingtold GECR.  The proclamation was initially endorsed by developingcountries as well as the industrialized nations.     The conference focused strongly on adaptive measures, "notbecause emission control isn't critically important -- it is, andwe're obviously very concerned about it -- but the problem isthat a lot of the developing countries will be affected even under astringent emissions control scenario."  Topping says that theconference helped underscore industrialized nations' concern forthe safety and welfare of people in developing countries, notjust concern about their emissions.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Scientists Lower Estimates of Potential Sea Level Rise     Predictions of sea level rise of up to 1.5 meters by theyear 2100 are probably overestimates, according to studiespresented at a recent meeting of the American Geophysical Union(AGU).  Over 4,000 scientists met in San Francisco, California,USA, on 4 - 8 December 1989 to discuss a wide variety of topics,including global warming and sea level rise.     Thirty years of observations of the Antarctic ice sheet haveled Charles R. Bentley, of the University of Wisconsin-Madison,Wisconsin, USA, to conclude that the polar ice cap may actuallybe removing water from the sea, accounting for a sea level dropof 5 mm per year.  Bentley believes that the short-term responseto global warming is increased snowfall over Antarctica aswarming air takes up and holds more water.  This snowaccumulation would outpace any melting of the ice sheet,according to Bentley.  Bentley stresses the importance of viewingthe Antarctic ice sheet as a dynamic system that responds toclimate changes over long periods of time.     Satellite observations by H. Jay Zwally of the NationalAeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Goddard Space FlightCenter, in Greenbelt, Maryland, USA, show that the Greenland icesheet is thickening as a result of increased precipitation, andZwally suggests that the thickening will continue.  Researchconducted by Tad Pfeffer, Mark Meier, and Tissa Illangasekare, ofthe University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA, indicatesthat meltwater runoff from arctic glaciers may take a significantamount of time to reach the ocean as it refreezes while fillingin snowpack pores as deep as 50 meters.     According to Meier, by the year 2050 -- the time atmosphericCO2 is projected to double -- melting of small glaciers may havecontributed about 0.15 meters to sea level rise, thermalexpansion may contribute a 0.2 meter rise, and human factors(such as pumping groundwater into the oceans) may contributeanother 0.2 meter rise.  Greenland would contribute a 0.08 meterfall in sea level, and Antarctica would lower levels by anadditional 0.31 meter.  Meier cautioned that the picture is stillquite uncertain, but that "it's beginning to look now as if searise will lag behind warming by a significant amount."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Researcher Documents Acid Precipitation's Effect on SpruceSeedlings     Acidic clouds that envelope high-elevation forests for up to35% of the year in the eastern US can cause more severe damage totrees than acid rain does, according to Jay Jacobson of the BoyceThompson Institute of Plant Research at Cornell University,Ithaca, New York, USA.  The acid clouds have a pH of 3.5, severaltimes more acidic than acid rain, which has an average pH of 4.The rising and lowering of the clouds over mountaintops causesthe acid measured on tree leaves to become concentrated to pHlevels as low as 2 as the water evaporates, Jacobson told GECR.Jacobson studied the effects of acidified water vapor on redspruce (Pinea rubens) seedlings, a species that dominates manyeastern US mountaintop forests.     In greenhouse and field studies, Jacobson determined thatthe effects of acidic mist depended on the relativeconcentrations of sulfuric and nitric acid.  Acid precipitationgenerally has a higher concentration of sulfuric acid than nitricacid, along with small amounts of ammonium ions.  Sulfuric acidalone was more damaging to needles by causing localized death ofplant tissue and premature loss of needles from the seedlings.Nitric acid mist appeared to influence nutrient relationships byincreasing nitrogen levels and decreasing levels of calcium andmagnesium in the leaves.  However, sulfuric acid mist affectedthe spruce needles at lower concentrations than did nitric acid,Jacobson told GECR.     Jacobson's research is part of the five-year federallyfunded National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program, whichinvolved more than 700 scientists and a half billion dollars inresearch money.  Funding expires this year; Jacobson told GECRthat some of the work is unfinished and inconclusive, but he saysit is unlikely that federal funding for the program will berenewed.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Antarctic Ozone Hole Broke Up Earlier Than Expected in 1989     The 1989 Antarctic ozone hole got off to an earlier andstronger start than the 1987 hole, but it started to break up amonth earlier than expected, according to Mark Schoeberl of theNational Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) GoddardSpace Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, USA.  "The polarvortex in 1989 began to break up in mid-to-late October; in 1987,it held intact all the way through November," Schoeberl toldGECR.  The total amount of ozone "ended up going down to almostexactly the same level as or perhaps slightly higher (by about 10Dobson Units) than 1987."     The breakup of the ozone hole is controlled by two majorfactors, Schoeberl explained: one is the intrinsic resistance tobreakup of the ozone hole caused by the ozone reduction itself,and the other is the nature of the forces that tend to break upthe polar vortices.  These forces are extremely variable fromyear to year and are unpredictable.  A more active dynamicalstratosphere that would tend to break up the hole or prevent itsformation "generally goes with the QBO (the Quasi-BiennialOscillation, a switching of tropical winds from east to west thatoccurs approximately every 27 months)," Schoeberl told GECR, "butthis year was an exception."  Normally, with an easterly QBO, theozone hole is not as deep, as was the case in 1988.  Tropicalwinds were still easterly in 1989, but "the link was brokenbetween the QBO and the zonality of the flow."  The vortex flowtended to follow east-west latitude lines in 1989, keeping thepolar stratosphere quiet enough to cause ozone depletion nearlyas great as in 1987's record-setting hole.  "Then we had a bigdynamical event in October and the hole started to break up."When the polar vortex is disrupted, undepleted air comes into thesystem and ozone levels begin to rise.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Tree-Ring Research Used in Study of Climate Change     Scientists in the US, USSR, China, Argentina, New Zealand,Canada, India, Australia, and Europe are studying the rings oflong-lived trees for clues to historic and prehistoric climatechange.  Certain species of trees can accurately indicate periodsof drought and temperature fluctuations, and may be used toreconstruct past climate events and trends.     Malcolm Hughes, Director of the University of Arizona'sLaboratory of Tree Ring Research in Tucson, Arizona, USA, isstudying the rings of giant sequoias as a potential climaterecord.  The trees can grow to at least 2,600 years old, and theyshow "a good drought signal," with extremely narrow rings in dryyears.  Sequoias can thus show the frequency of severe droughtsin the region surrounding the trees.     Researchers have to select carefully the tree species andthe individuals sampled to ensure that the growth ring responsecan be correlated to the parameter being studied.  "A bristleconepine at a high elevation has a different response than one atlower elevations," David Meko of the Laboratory of Tree RingResearch points out.  Long-lived trees are often few and farbetween, and getting good spacial coverage of a particularspecies can be a problem.  The tree ring record must becalibrated with known instrumental records in order to be usedwith confidence, which can prove difficult if records are scarcefor the parameter (soil temperature, rainfall, etc.) beingmeasured.     Gordon Jacoby, of the Tree Ring Laboratory at Lamont-DohertyLaboratory in New York, USA, says that his group has recentlyreconstructed  northern hemisphere temperatures for a 300-yearperiod using tree rings, and the reconstruction shows a warmingtrend within the last hundred years "that is unusual in thecontext of the 300 year record."  Jacoby was able to sample manyindividuals of the same species (white spruce) over almost 90degrees of longitude.  "We covered about 25% of the circumpolararea in a fairly homogeneous data set."  White spruce is limitedby thermal properties such as air temperature, groundtemperature, and soil temperature, and is moisture-stressed whenthe active zone above the permafrost is extremely cold, reducingthe tree's ability to take up water.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Energy-Efficient Lights are Selling, But Producers FaceChallenges     The market for compact fluorescent lamps, which have typicallife spans of 8,000 to 10,000 hours and can save users 75% ormore of the costs associated with standard incandescent bulbs, is"growing at about 25% per annum," according to Vivienne Charrettof Thorn Lighting in Enfield, UK.  Much of that growth can beattributed to incentive programs by electric utilities, such asrebate offers, options to lease rather than purchase expensivelight bulbs, and giveaways.  Carol O'Neill of Philips LightingCompany's US division in Somerset, New Jersey, told GECR thatgrowth in sales can also be attributed to media attention,efforts by environmental groups, and general concern about globalwarming.  Still, O'Neill says that compact fluorescents, while"experiencing explosive growth," represent a minute percentage ofoverall lighting sales.     Producers face a number of obstacles in their effort tobring compact fluoresents to a wider market.  Amory Lovins,director of research at the Rocky Mountain Institute in OldSnowmass, Colorado, USA, says that "we need to decoupleutilities' profits from their sales so they will no longer berewarded for selling more electricity, nor penalized for sellingless.  And when they do something smart to cut your bill, theyneed to be allowed to keep part of the savings as extra profit."     Other concerns, according to Lovins, include a lack ofproperly trained installation technicians, the fact that no onecurrently provides retrofit components in bundled packaging,limited competition in certain areas (central Europe, Australia,New Zealand) that allows manufacturers to sell at excessivemarkups, and the need for more imaginative marketing.  "I haven'tyet seen any compact fluorescent manufacturer go for the greenmarket by pointing out that each lamp takes a ton of CO2 out ofthe air over its life [when compared with other lamps]," Lovinstold GECR.     Energy-efficient lamps appear to be selling better overallin Europe and the UK than the US.  Vivienne Charrett of Thornclaims this is due to the cost of energy: "The country with theleast penetration of compact fluorescents is France, where thecost of energy is exceptionally low."  Fred Steinmeyer of Osramin Munich, West Germany agrees, saying that Europe recognized theneed to save energy earlier than the US.  Dick Dowhan of GTEconfirms that the difference could be attributed to Europe'searly start on the market, but he also cited Europe's 220-voltsystem as a reason:  customers don't notice as much of adifference between incandescents and compact fluorescents asAmericans do.  Amory Lovins says, "I don't think it has much todo with electricity price.  I think it's a function of utilityparticipation, and least-cost-planning or an equivalent process."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990UK Residential Investment in Energy-Saving Equipment Drops 12% in1989     The British government's scrapping of numerousenergy-efficiency programs in the past two years has directlyaffected domestic purchases of energy-saving  equipment,according to Andrew Warren of the London-based Association forthe Conservation of Energy (ACE).  Using sales figures fromrelevant trade associations, ACE found that residentialinvestment in energy-saving products dropped significantly in1989, down 12% from already declining 1988 levels.     Purchases of weatherstripping (draft proofing) were down15%; double-glazed windows dropped nearly 20%; and economicalheating equipment (energy-efficient boilers, thermostaticradiator valves, etc.) declined by 6%, with Warren forecasting a12% drop.     Warren points out that the cutting of incentives andeducation programs for energy efficiency directly conflicts withUK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's stated commitment to fightglobal warming.  "The policies are going in the wrong direction,"Warren told GECR, "and Thatcher's own government's submission tothe Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) says that ifpresent trends in the UK continue, we will see CO2 emissionsleaping.  We're currently at 579.3 billion tons a year; we'relikely to see rises of 29% - 34% across the next 15 years, and upto 48% - 58% in 30 years."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990General Motors Displays Advanced Electric Car     General Motors Corporation, the world's largest automobilemanufacturer, has unveiled a sophisticated electric car that canaccelerate from 0 - 60 miles per hour (0 - 96 km/h) in eightseconds, and can run for 120 miles (192 km) at highway speedswithout charging the batteries.  Recharging can be accomplishedin several hours by plugging into a conventional wall socket.The prototype vehicle, called the "Impact," could be on themarket by the mid-1990s, but several problems must first beovercome:  operating costs of the vehicle are currently abouttwice those for gasoline-powered cars because the entire batterypack must be replaced (at a cost of US $1,500) every 20,000 miles(32,000 km).  The company has also not yet tested the vehicle'scrash-worthiness.     Spokesmen for General Motors claim that given adequatedemand, the purchase price of the sporty-looking car would besimilar to gasoline-powered vehicles in its class.  The companyhopes to improve the life of the battery pack to bring operatingcosts down to those of conventional cars.  If the vehicle isexported from the US to countries where fuel prices are taxed, orif US fuel prices rose, the "Impact" could prove to be lessexpensive to operate than gasoline-powered models.     Electric cars are a mixed answer to threats of globalwarming:  while they do not burn fossil fuels themselves, thevehicles generally use utility-generated electric power torecharge.  Still, a recent report prepared by the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley, California, USA, suggests that anall-electric vehicle fleet could reduce CO2 emissions by up to43%, depending on the mix of energy sources used by utilities andthe efficiency of the vehicles themselves.  Other alternativesexist:  Solar powered cars are already in use in Europe, and anumber of companies and independent groups are developingversions for the US market.  GECR will report on these and otheralternative-fueled vehicles (such as hydrogen-powered cars) infuture issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Carrier Introduces CFC Recycling Unit for Large Chillers     Carrier Corp. of Syracuse, New York, USA, has developed arefrigerant recovery and recycling system specifically designedto handle large-scale commercial chillers.  The company will sellthe equipment, called the Refrigeration Management System (RMS),worldwide to building owners when they purchase new centrifugalchillers from Carrier, and to owners of existing commercialair-conditioning units.     The RMS units come in two sizes:  one will handle 1,600pounds (720 kg) of CFCs and the larger unit has a capacity of3,300 pounds (1485 kg).  Carrier spokesmen advise that the pricerange for the equipment will be from US $6,000 - $12,000.  Therecycling unit draws a vacuum of 25 inches (62 cm).  For moreinformation, contact Rick Whitmyre at Carrier Corp., TEL:+1-315-432-6000.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990US EPA Proposes New Controls on Municipal Waste Incinerators     On 30 November, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)proposed new controls on municipal waste incinerators that wouldtrap five times more dusty particulates than currently required,along with 90 to 95% of sulfur dioxide and hydrochloric acid, and97% to 99% of airborne metals, such as lead and mercury.  The newproposal also requires "tail gas" cleaning of nitrogen oxides,which contribute to smog and acid rain, on those incineratorswhich process more than 250 tons of trash daily.  This isexpected to reduce the nitrogen oxide emissions by 40%.  Thesenew standards are expected to reduce 90% of the air pollutants by1994, a reduction of more than a quarter million tons annually,according to Robin Woods at EPA.     The proposal requires monitoring and verification ofemissions by trained and certified supervisors.  By 1993, plantswould also be required to recycle 25% of the trash they process.If approved, the new rules would be applied directly to the 150incinerators that will be constructed at 60 US facilities in thenext five years, with the 450 incinerators currently in operationat 200 plants being given several years to make the necessaryimprovements.  Dave Ryan at the EPA told GECR that it may be afull year before this proposal is approved and instituted.     Woods estimates the national costs associated with theproposed standards for new facilities to be $190 millionannually, which represents an increase of $13 per ton ofincinerated trash from the current $60 per ton.  It would cost$320 million a year nationally to improve existing facilities, anincrease of $12 per ton.  In both cases, this translates to anincrease of $20 per year per household.  Public hearings will beheld in Boston on 22-23 January, Detroit on 25-26 January, andSeattle on 30-31 January.  For more information on the publichearings, call Ann Eleanor of the EPA at TEL: +1-919-541-5578.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990HOTLINE:     Michael Grubb's paper "The Greenhouse Effect: NegotiatingTargets" (see this issue's Focus Report) is available for 10 pounds(including postage) from The Royal Institute of InternationalAffairs.  Call TEL: +44-1-930-2233 to order a copy... Anexcellent summary of debt-for-nature exchanges, with a history ofall exchanges completed to date (except for last August'sexchange to preserve wetlands in Zambia), is available fromConservation International in Washington DC.  Call TEL:+1-202-429-5660; FAX: +1-202-887-5188 for more information... USglobal change scientists can be happy:  1990 federal funding forclimate change-related research is five times greater than it wasin 1989.  Much of the growth can be attributed to redefinitionsand shifts of existing programs to fall under the "global change"umbrella.  A total of $664 million will be available, with theDepartment of Energy getting the biggest relative increase ($60million).  Most of the funding ($489 million of it) sits with theNational Aeronautics and Space Administration.     Call the GECR Hotline at +1-617-648-8700 for moreinformation on any news items covered in this issue.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-32IA059-000325-B010-206http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev47.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001211 text/html 6958HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:09:56 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:38 GMTContent-length: 6770Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev47.html Sample Issue Copyright GLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES --------------- Officers Elected at Global Climate Coalition (135 words) --------------------------- Wind Power Plant Construction Expands in Midwest (177 words) -------------------- European Commission Beefs Up Research Budget (256 words) Finns Push Coal at Expense of Nuclear Power (198 words) CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Officers Elected at Global Climate CoalitionWilliam O'Keefe, executive vice president of the American PetroleumInstitute, was recently elected chairman of the Global ClimateCoalition (GCC). O'Keefe will lead the GCC's efforts throughout 1996 to provide business and industry positions to scientific and policy debates regarding climate change.Working closely with executive director John Shales, O'Keefe willdirect GCC's nine committees, while Shales manages the dailybusiness and advocates on behalf of the Coalition.Other newly elected officers include vice chair for policy RobertMcFadden from American Automobile Manufacturers Association, chairof the operating committee Constance Holmes from the National Mining Association, vice chair of the operating committee Robert Beck from Edison Electric Institute and vice chair for the membership Edward Harper from the Association of American Railroads.For details contact Jane Agate at 202/628-3622.(PRNEWSWIRE: 12/22)Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Wind Power Plant Construction Expands in MidwestIn Minnesota, Northern Alternative Energy, Inc. of Minneapolis andMicon Wind Turbines (U.S.) of Marshall are gearing up to expand theSibley, IA wind plant owned by IES Utilities, Inc.  When completed, the project will be the single largest turbine installation in the nation's midsection.The first U.S.-made 600-kW Micon M1500-600/150 turbine will beinstalled by Micon and NAE in Sibley, expanding the facility'scapacity to 925 kW from 325 kW.The annual energy output of the plant is anticipated to top 1.8million kWh after installation of the new turbine.  NAE presidentGreg Jaunich said that this largest single turbine in the Midwest "should demonstrate to utilities in the region the benefits of large, industrial-sized wind turbines for electrical generation."The nacelle and frame of the turbine were constructed by Micon andHutchinson Manufacturing Inc., which also assembled the generatorand its components.  Micon turbines are a Danish design.  The turbine, atop its 150-foot tubular tower, will be made by Thomas & Betts of Red Wing, MI.(WIND ENERGY WEEKLY: 12/25, p.3)Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996European Commission Beefs Up Research BudgetMme. Edith Cresson, European Commissioner for Research, Education and Training recently proposed 318 research and development projectsthat have been approved by the EC as the European Community's participatory offering following the Fourth Framework Convention meeting on climate change.Addressed will be ozone depletion, global warming, floods,earthquakes, contaminated land and sustainable development.  TheEnvironment and Climate program will fund the research.The Environment and Climate program has a budget of ECU 532 million,which represents 4.3 percent of total Fourth Framework Programfunding covering 1994-1998.  Research to understand basic mechanisms of climate and other natural systems and how they impact natural resources will be performed.Technologies will also be developed to monitor, protect andrehabilitate as well as to conduct risk assessment.  Satellitesystems for earth observation and environmental research play a large part in the research.Past climatic changes and dynamics will receive increased attentionto help understand current weather patterns.  The EPICA projectswill complement three successful Greenland ice cap projects by studying ice cores in Antarctica that will allow scientists to interpret earlier climate shifts over a half-million years.Aerosols originating from dust, sea-spray, soot and suspended sulfurdioxide are known to be important in the earth's energy balance.Surrounded by cloud particles, they absorb radiation and also reflect it back into space.  Program ACE-2 will address the role of clouds and aerosols in the climate system and will also continue to look at processes of both natural and manmade aerosols.(EUROPEAN COMMISSION PRESS RELEASE: 12/21)Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Finns Push Coal at Expense of Nuclear PowerA radical overhaul of fuel taxation being undertaken by the Finnishgovernment could see a rise in construction of coal-fired powerplants at the expense of existing nuclear power.  Finland has agreed that it will not expand nuclear power generation nor build more nuclear-based power stations, a strategy that appears to argue for expanded coal-fired energy production.The Finnish move will bring Finnish taxation more into line withneighbors Sweden, Norway and Denmark which tax consumption, notproduction, as has been the case in Finland.  The tax burden on coal- fired production will be reduced by an amount to be determined when the legislature meets this month.Premier Paavo Lipponen told the legislature in December that the newenergy policy took into consideration the unpopularity ofnuclear-based production as well as the need for ways to improve coal- fired generation's cost-efficiency.Lipponen had run for election based on promises of higher taxes oncoal and peat-fired plants, but the about-face, explains AnttiKalliomaki, Finland's Trade and Industry minister, is because Swedish companies would like to export power into Finland because Finnish energy production costs have remained so much higher.(COAL & SYNFUELS TECHNOLOGY: 12/25)Back to Headline List WT03-B36-33IA059-000325-B010-248http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev63.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001311 text/html 64558HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:11:01 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:44 GMTContent-length: 64369Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev63.html Sample Issue Copyright WATER BRIEFING via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PORTUGAL HOPES EU LOAN FUNDING WILL SPARK MINI-HYDRO REVIVAL (762 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW SHOULD SUPPLIERS BE LIABLE FOR DROUGHT CUTS? (945 words) COMPANIES WAIT FOR RAIN AS DROUGHT FEARS PERSISTS (594 words) SPAIN STAYS CAUTIOUS ON DROUGHT DESPITE RAINS (481 words) NEW YORK MEETS STRONG OPPOSITION TO PROPOSED WATER ASSETS SALE (944 words) ASEAN STATES PRESS CHINA TO CO-OPERATE ON MEKONG MANAGEMENT (414 words) NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT QUESTIONS AID FUNDING FOR DAM SCHEMES (490 words) JORDAN SAYS RED-DEAD LINK VITAL-ISRAEL NOT SO SURE (1241 words) AUCKLAND OPTS TO BOOST SUPPLIES WITH $55M PIPELINE FROM WAKATO RIVER (462 words) SAO PAULO SETS LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR MAJOR WASTEWATER PROGRAMME (505 words) PWA CHIEF FACES SECOND INQUIRY OVER CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION (302 words) NEWS MALAYSIA PLANS $1BN SPEND ON WATER SUPPLY 1996 -2000 (53 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW REPORT PROVIDES GOOD REFERENCE TO UK WATER COMPANY PERFORMANCE (457 words) SOUTHERN AND BRISTOL WATER COMPLETE INTERIMS REPORTING SEASON IN UK (433 words) TENDERS ISSUED FOR $38M FORTALEZA TREATMENT PLANT (99 words) EIB LENDS ECU100M VIA POLISH BANKS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEMES (200 words) AMORIM BUYS MAJOR SHARE IN LUSAGUA (109 words) MINISTERS PLAN INCREASED SPENDING ON WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS (285 words) FRENCH GROUPS COMBINE IN BID FOR CONTROL OF MID-KENT WATER (246 words) UWR TO PARTNER JERSEY CITY FOR WATER SYSTEM OPERATION (157 words) WORLD BANK TO FUND $13.5M STUDY FOR REGION'S LARGEST DAM (226 words) CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PORTUGAL HOPES EU LOAN FUNDING WILL SPARK MINI-HYDRO REVIVALCompanies hope that a new European Union-backed government fund willbreathe new life into the mini-hydro power sector in Portugal, whereinvestment has been brought to a virtual standstill by fallingelectricity prices, a shortage of funds and, mainly, lack of supportfrom municipal authorities.Projects have received a welcome impetus in the shape of a Es1.1bn($7.3m) loan from Programa Energia, a fund set up in mid-1995 topromote the diversification, expansion and improvement of energyproduction and use.This first allocation of money from the fund goes to three companiesthat are investing in four small hydro-electric generating plants witha total capacity of just under 30 MW.They are Hidrocorgo, Hidroerg and HDN-Energia do Norte. Another 36similar projects are being evaluated by the Energia programme, which isexpected to mobilise a total investment of Es180bn, mainly focused onstimulating natural gas use, as well as rational energy utilisation anddiversification into renewable energy resources.Hidrocorgo is part of the Enersis group, the biggest mini-hydroconstructor and operator in Portugal, in which Midland ElectricityBoard of the UK has a holding of about 35%. Enersis has so farinstalled 50 MW in 15 mini-hydro plants.Antonio Sa da Costa, head of Portugal's Water Resources Association,told FTWB that since legislation permitting small-scale private energyproduction was introduced in May 1988, mini-hydro generating plantswith a total capacity of 140 MW and involving investments totallingEs30bn have been built in Portugal. Mini-hydro plants are defined ashaving a maximum capacity of 10 MW.The liberalisation led to a rush of project proposals and applicationsfor almost 1,000 licenses to build mini-hydros had been made by 1991.However, by 1993 only 120 licenses had been granted. Sa da Costa saysmany applications were for identical sites, others proved technicallyor economically non-viable, and many prospective investors found thattheir projects would be far more costly than they had anticipated.Companies have also been discouraged from entering the sector by a 40%drop in the price of electricity to industrial consumers from 1988 to1993. Until recently, small producers sold energy to Electricidade dePortugal, the state power utility, at rates based on industrialtariffs. Partly because of this, new construction of mini-hydro plantsalmost came to a halt after 1993, when funding from the EuropeanUnion's Valoren programme ended.However, Sa da Costa says the biggest obstacle to investment in mini-hydros is now a lack of support from municipal authorities andopposition from local populations. "Mini-hydros are one of the mostenvironmentally-friendly means of producing energy," he says. "But alack of information has led to opposition to small hydro plants in manyPortuguese localities, by residents who fear, wrongly, that the plantswill damage their rivers."The transfers of the approval of the water resource and public workscomponents of mini-hydros from a central body to local authorities hasput a further brake on expansion. Only one licence has been grantedsince the change was made in February 1994. "Lack of information andlack of support from water resource bodies are our biggest enemy," saysSa da Costa.Companies will be lobbying Portugal's new Socialist government for amore supportive approach to licensing. Sa da Costas believes that this,together with soft loans from the Energia programme, will stimulaterenewed investment in small-scale hydro-production.Portugal's legislation was changed in November, moving it towards theGerman model in the form of a commitment to pay producers of energyfrom renewable sources higher rates than companies who produce energyfrom fossil fuels. EDP's regulations have also been changed. Mini-hydroproducers were previously paid different rates according to the outputvoltage of the energy they supplied. A single rate has now beenestablished at the top end of the previous scale.A further 150 MW of mini-hydro capacity could be built by 1999.Portugal's total possible capacity is estimated at 300-400 MW. Currentcapacity accounts for 420 GWh a year - enough to supply about 600,000domestic consumers - out of Portugal's total consumption of about 24TWh. This saves the county an estimated Es2bn a year in oil bills.Funds under the Energia programme are loaned at zero interest and haveto be paid back over 12 years. No repayments have to be made for thefirst three years. Plants, costing an average of Es2bn-2.5bn, take amaximum of two years to build. This means companies can pay back theloans from the earnings of their generating plants.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SHOULD SUPPLIERS BE LIABLE FOR DROUGHT CUTS?The latest (proposed) tweak of the regulatory screw must leave the UKwater companies wondering what else they are to made liable for. In aconsultation document published on 20 December the economic regulator,OFWAT, asks for comment on a suggested scheme of compensation paymentsto customers suffering supply cuts as a result of drought.OFWAT is responding to a government request for advice on compensationissues raised by the 1995 drought. The Environment Secretary  soughtthe advice in the face of the changed public attitude to water supply,now seen increasingly as a pure money making operation rather than apublic service; a hostile response to supplier pleas for conservationduring the drought indicated that, now water supply is a commercialoperation, the customer expects no cuts, whatever the reason. Before1989 the heads of the public water authorities would have had littlehesitation in pointing out that such expectations were unrealistic.Provision for supplying water and for carrying away storm sewage isbased on an assessment of risks made from analysis of past rainfallstatistics. On the supply side the infrastructure is sized to guaranteesupplies for particular minimum annual rainfall conditions judgedlikely to occur only once in a certain number of years. Storm sewersare similarly designed for particular likely `return periods', in thiscase looking at the maximum storm intensity and duration likely to beencountered. In both cases more rare events could be catered for, butwith a corresponding increase in infrastructure cost.It is only a little over a year since OFWAT concluded a detailed lookat company business plans and set price limits for the next five years.Those limits are based on certain service standards specified in a`Guaranteed Standards Scheme' (GSS). Suppliers are obliged to paycompensation if any of the standards are breached and all of the itemscovered, such as response times to account queries or consumercomplaints, are clearly within company control. Equally clearlyrainfall is outside company control and supply cuts caused by lack ofrain are not included in the GSS. Nevertheless the basic engineeringunderlying supply infrastructure has a proven record - there have beenno supply cuts under Emergency Drought Orders in England and Walessince 1976.Surely this was a realistic way to look at service provision and, ifcompanies are now to be required to cater for more severe droughtconditions than allowed for in current business plans the new targets,agreed by the economic and resources regulators, must first be clearlystated? If companies were then obliged to guarantee supplies inconditions of, say 75% rather than 80% of average long-term rainfallthey might reasonably be made liable to pay compensation, but only ifthe requisite infrastructure was not provided. This might be done bymore provision for inter-company or inter-regional transfers ratherthan from increased abstractions/infrastructure in the supply areaconcerned.Any open-ended liability for compensation may well provide, as theconsultation paper suggests, "....a powerful financialincentive.......to balance the costs of resources against the costs of(supply) restrictions," but, on the one hand the suggested dailycompensation payment of around #10 (based on average bills) seemslittle enough for the inconvenience that some consumers might suffer;on the other hand many might think that a rare inconvenience arisingfrom the vagaries of nature should not be disguised as something awater company could have prevented.This attitude was certainly apparent last summer when the watercompanies collectively rejected an OFWAT suggestion of compensation onthe grounds that the weather conditions were exceptional. One or twocompanies, not in areas threatened by supply cuts, later offeredcompensation where heavy demand caused loss of supply pressure but,according to the consultation paper, no suppliers have agreed that useof rota cuts or standpipes forced by drought will constitute a reasonfor compensation. That stance  was well judged - although such measureshave not been needed for nearly 20 years the trend in climate-inducedpressure on supplies can be seen from the 22-year record on hosepipebans. Bans on household use of hosepipes are an early step on the pathto conservation when drought conditions threaten. As the illustrationshows bans have been imposed on 10% or more of the population in 5 ofthe last 7 years but in only 3 of the previous 15 years.In commenting on another climate-induced supply problem over theChristmas/New Year period the Socialist opposition spokesman on theenvironment suggested that a higher staffing level in some companies inthe north-east of England might have produced a quicker response tosupply failures. He was talking about pipe bursts caused byexceptionally low temperatures followed by a rapid swing to warmerweather. Although the company pipes concerned will have been laid atdepths regarded as standard for forty or fifty years there was animmediate public outcry accompanied by newspaper and radio reportssuggesting possible fault on the part of the suppliers. Will lowtemperatures be next on the government list for a compulsorycompensation scheme?* The principle recommendations in the consultation paper are :Compensation payments of #10 per customer per day, up to a maximum of#100, for drought-imposed rota cuts or standpipe supply for a day orpart day.Compensation of #25 in any year for frequent poor pressure suppliescaused by drought conditionsAn entitlement for business customers to claim compensation for lossesarising from the imposition of Drought Orders. (Changes needed toprimary legislation)No general compensation for customers affected by hosepipe bans butaffected metered customers  may receive #25 per year compensation.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996COMPANIES WAIT FOR RAIN AS DROUGHT FEARS PERSISTSFor suppliers and the resources regulator, the National RiversAuthority (NRA), drought fears have persisted into the new year afterheavy rainfall in September failed to continue into the later autumnand early winter. Perversely even the heavy rain that did occur missedmuch of the area worst affected by low rainfall last summer. By mid-December many soils were reported far from saturated and groundwaterrecharge and reservoir refilling was declared minimal.The NRA supplied a second resource status report* to the environmentminister in December. The report outlines the measures individualcompanies must take during the coming months to reduce the risk ofsupply interruptions next summer. A central theme is maximumabstractions from rivers to replenish reservoirs during the hoped-forwetter winter months, avoiding the need for environmentally damagingover-abstraction in the lower flow periods of summer. Severn Trent iscurrently involved in a Public Inquiry, facing protests from fishinginterests over proposed increased river abstractions. Yorkshire Water,where some areas remain under real threat of imposed rota cuts, is alsosubject to environmental protests over proposed abstraction increases.The NRA report lists company estimates of the possible 1996 outcomesassuming average and 80% of average rainfall. Only four of the tenmajor utilities express confidence for uninterrupted supplies nextsummer. It might have been more logical to report on a uniform knownrisk, for example the minimum rainfall conditions likely to recur ineach supply region once in ten years. This would mean rainfall of 70%of long term average in some areas and 90% in others. As it is the riskof 80% normal winter rainfall in Anglian region is 1 in 5 years and inthe North East 1 in 16 years.The speed at which the drought overtook England and Wales and theadverse public reaction to enforced supply restrictions has shaken theindustry. Only 10 months ago, in February 1995, even the NRA reportedthat the resources outlook was good. At some time or other in thefollowing summer months 7million people, including business customers,were banned from non-essential water use; 18 million were subjected tohosepipe bans and many suffered interrupted supplies or low flows attimes of peak demand. Now, in mid-winter, hosepipe bans continue inareas supplied by Severn Trent, North West and Yorkshire Water. SomeYorkshire customers may yet see standpipes used and, over large areasof the country, only exceptional rain in the coming 3 months will avertmajor supply inconveniences next summer.Suppliers had good reason to point to exceptional circumstances inrejecting suggestions of compensation payments. The illustration showsa continuous decline in rainfall from March to August. Accompanied byunusual levels of sunshine - above normal in each month to November -and with average temperatures at or above normal, this combined to setevaporation rates at record levels.There have been some positive outcomes. It has brought home to allconcerned, far better than any questionnaire, that the highest customerpriority is not clean bathing beaches or Class I rivers; it is acontinuous adequate water supply. The most immediate effect has been anew look at leakage and a revised company programme to cut losses. Inthe longer term it should send a message to government to maintain arobust approach to any new proposals from Brussels. If things go badlythis summer some revision of the Urban Waste Water Directive programmemay be needed, a matter the government  raised in Brussels in the run-up to the 1994 Prices Review.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SPAIN STAYS CAUTIOUS ON DROUGHT DESPITE RAINSThe wettest December for at least 30 years, following the first reallywet November after four years of the century's worst drought, hasbrought relief to vast areas of central-southern Spain.But experts were in general agreement that the drought was not over byearly January and there would have to be substantial rain this springbefore celebrations could start.In essence, most areas have their short-term domestic consumption needsresolved, but except for the western region  of Extremadura borderingPortugal, irrigation restrictions will continue. This in spite of thefact that many reservoirs in the southern water authorities of theGuadiana, Guadalquivir and Tajo (Tagus) rivers saw dramatic increasesin reserves in little more than two weeks.Some Andalucian dams in the south that were technically dry atChristmas held up to 30% of capacity by 3 January. The average held inthe dams in the southern water authority regions was Guadiana (27.4%),Guadalquivir (24.6%), Sur 24.4%) and Segura (12.5%). In nearly allcases, the figure had been below 10% at Christmas.The 14 dams run by Madrid's Canal de Isabel II water authority sawreserves increase by 27% to over 47% of capacity between Christmas Eveand January 3, but this was still below the 54.4% of exactly a yearbefore in full drought. Canal authorities remained cautious. Madrid'slast hydrological year which ended in September, was the driest since1912.The western half of Spain benefited most from the rain, to such anextent that Portugal had to ask Spain to retain the flow of the Tagusin the Valdecanas y Gabriel and Galan dams to avoid flooding thePortuguese city of Santarem. But in some parts of the south-east -Almeria, Murcia, southern Valencia - the improvement has been minimal.The exploitation directors of the Guadalquivir, Guadiana, Sur andSegura basins in the south, where more than eight million people sufferdaily restrictions, suggested that some restrictions could be eased bymid-January. However, this was less likely in Segura in the far south-east, where hydrographical confederation director Manuel Miron said onJanuary 2. "We have disgustingly splendid weather, with a completelyblue sky and temperatures above 25xC."In the Guadiana region bordering Portugal, confederation chairmanAntonio Alcaraz was jubilant. "For the first time in four years I amgoing to enjoy watching the partial emptying of a dam in Extremadura.We've had two anxious years to get emergency works built around thecity of Badajoz, and now we have too much water." The Guadiana dams inthe Andalucia (or far southern) area held an amazing 79% of capacity onJanuary 3.The Andalucian cities of Seville, Cordoba and Cadiz were likely to seedomestic restrictions eased as local dams filled, but Malaga and mostof the rest of the Costa del Sol will probably continue to sufferrestrictions.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NEW YORK MEETS STRONG OPPOSITION TO PROPOSED WATER ASSETS SALESince the 1970s, New York City (NYC), America's most populated city,has struggled to balance a steadily eroding tax base against the risingcosts of providing municipal services to its eight million residents.The scenario is increasingly duplicated in virtually all large citiesacross the country. As part of the fiscal 1996 budget the Mayorproposed transferring title to its water and sewer system assets to theNew York Water Board (NYWB) for $2.3bn.The NYWB currently leases the water system from the city for a 40-yearterm in return for lease and rental payments. NYWB was established as aseparate entity because state law prohibits a government agency fromissuing debt and at the same time setting rates and collecting userfees, functions the NYWB performs. Although NYWB is considered semi-independent, its seven members are appointed by the Mayor and its staffare city employees.Under the budget proposal, the NYWB will borrow money to make thepurchase, repaying over 30 years with revenues from water charges. Thecity's Water Financing Authority (WFA), set up to finance the buildingand maintenance of the water and wastewater systems, will issue about$2.5 billion of revenue bonds (first and second resolution). NYC willthen retire or annul its current $1.3bn of outstanding generalobligation bonds originally issued for water and sewer projects beforeNYWB was created. The balance of the sale price will be used over thenext four years for critical repairs to a broad range of infrastructurecosting about $200 million annually. It would also eliminate the much-criticised $207 million tax receivables sale programme, under which thecity paid a bank to collect taxes and received an amount equal to thosetaxes a year before their due date.Capital assets involved in the sale are 18 reservoirs in three upstatewatersheds, thousands of miles of tunnels and mains, and 14 sewagetreatment plants. The price tag of $2.3bn was determined, not on thevalue of plant beyond its construction cost, some of which is very old,but on the projected lease payments the NYWB would make over the next30 years, assuming a 7% interest rate. Although there is a school ofthought that believes the proposed sale price doesn't reflect the truemarket value of the water system, which could be determined only bycompetitive bidding, a majority of the city council oppose outrightprivatisation.Proponents of the proposal argue that it means an end to NYWB'spayments to the city. Eliminating these rent payments will providesavings to hold down water rates. Water fees would be used to pay forthe bonds over 30 years, while the rent payments would be unending. Thesale is termed "rate neutral," and ratepayers will have new securitybecause the NYWB, instead of paying a continuing stream of rentalpayments, will owe a finite payment over a defined length of time. NYCcould use the approximate $1bn for capital and other projects, moneythat would have otherwise been borrowed at higher cost.Opponents of the proposal are equally vehement, one of whom is thecity's own Comptroller. For months he has resisted pressure from theMayor and council to sign the documents necessary to execute the bondtransaction. He characterised the proposal as an "illegal gimmick.""It's illegal," he claims, "because the WFA's authority does not extendbeyond borrowing for building and maintenance. It's `"gimmicky' becausewe will pay for the water system twice." Because of statements theMayor has made, the Comptroller also believes some of the $1bn bondrevenue will be used to pay for operating expenses not covered by taxrevenue shortfalls. It was this very practice that brought NYC to thebrink of bankruptcy in the mid 1970s.The New York Times has lined up with the opponents saying that "... thelegal issues are complicated and subject to differing interpretations.But we continue to believe that it would be unwise public policy forthe city to sell a vast and valuable asset to pay for constructionprojects over the next four years ... and the sale poses a potentialthreat to the upstate reservoirs once control of all the system passesfrom NYC ..."There is concern that the state Governor, thought to be sympathetic togreater development of upstate regions housing the reservoirs, couldchange the NYWB composition and weaken the city's control of the threewatersheds that supply its raw water (FTWB, Issue 51, p6).Municipal bond market operators have not forgotten that the city in1975 was plunged into a fiscal crisis when the then mayor borrowedmillions to meet operating expenses. They are watching these recentdevelopments closely as experts were already voicing concerns aboutNYC's existing debt level. In July 1995 Standard & Poors lowered thecity's credit rating in part because of this proposed sale.Court decisions now awaitedIn November the city council sued the city Comptroller in the New YorkState Supreme Court. It has requested a declaratory judgment on theComptroller's authority over the issuance of WFA debt. A ruling isexpected in February.In a further development on 11 December, a coalition of eight New YorkCity and Westchester County civic, housing and environmentalorganisations filed suit in the State Supreme Court in Manhattan toblock the sale. Spearheading these opposing groups is the NaturalResources Defence Council, a national environmental watchdog with astaff of 150 and 170,000 members. Their suit alleges that the proposedsale is illegal because the scheme would, among other things, divertapproximately $1bn in water and sewer monies for unrelated purposes.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ASEAN STATES PRESS CHINA TO CO-OPERATE ON MEKONG MANAGEMENTLeaders of the seven Association of South East Asian Nations agreed topush for the integrated development of the Mekong basin at their summitin Bangkok. China, Laos, Burma and Cambodia will be invited to join aregional forum with ASEAN to channel investment into the six nationsthat depend upon the Mekong for much of their water supply, transport,energy and agricultural needs."We require a more co-ordinated approach, after individual governmentsand institutions have worked separately for the past few years. Thiswill be our first attempt at regional resource co-operation," Thaiprime minister Banharn Silapa-archa told the summit.The move follows Burma's agreement to work with other riverine nationsin developing the basin. This left only China outside the Mekong RiverCommission, a loose grouping of water users that is trying to promotesustainable development of the Mekong. Burma has promised to attendfuture meetings of the Commission, though only as an observer. Planningminister Brigadier-General David Abel said at a Bangkok seminar thatRangoon would join Laos, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam in jointlyexploiting the river's potential. China is regarded as the primetarget, however, because the Mekong originates in Yunnan province andone-quarter of the 4,200-kilometre river is in Chinese territory.Financiers wary of funding further Chinese dams"Beijing is under pressure from international (financial) institutionsto negotiate with downstream countries before they will put up any morecash for dams. There's been too much bad feeling over their earlierschemes," said a European banker based in Bangkok.Water levels in the river dropped alarmingly in 1993 when China openedManwan dam, the first of eight reservoirs it is building on Mekongtributaries, prompting protests from neighbouring countries.The Commission is expected to press China for closer consultation onwater flows from the dams, especially with Laos and Vietnam. Land-locked Laos needs ample water in the dry season to irrigate its ricecrops, and much of the country is now facing a famine because ofinadequate supplies. Vietnam depends upon high river levels to dilutehigh saline levels in the Mekong delta, which is the country's mainfood producer.Initial response from the Chinese has not been too encouraging. Go Xin,vice-manager of Yannan's Environmental Monitoring Centre, told the Thaiseminar that  "The Manwan dam will help purify the water by breakingdown pollutants and will stop erosion of the river bank. It has noeffect upon the water flow downstream."Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT QUESTIONS AID FUNDING FOR DAM SCHEMESNORAD, the Norwegian state development aid agency, has broken its ownrules regarding impartial evaluation of an African hydro power projectwhich is a candidate for development aid funding.The project under scrutiny is the Lower Kihansi development inTanzania, being undertaken by Tanesco, a local utility. A Norwegianfirm, Norplan, has conducted both the technical and the environmentalanalyses of the scheme, although NORAD guidelines say the companiesundertaking those functions should be quite independent of each other.NORAD support for Lower Kihansi was being considered, earlier thisyear, in connection with the possible participation in the project ofNorway's Kvaerner group. It was temporarily blocked on the advice ofNVE, the Norwegian state Water Resources and Energy Administration, andof the Directorate for Natural Resources Management (DN), an arm of theEnvironment Ministry. Both argued that Norplan's first environmentalanalysis was inadequate, and that a new study was needed to decide ifaid was appropriateA second study - again, by Norplan - was completed during the summer.The Norwegian environmental newsletter N & M Bulletin says that NVE hasclassified as "secret" all the documents connected with this lateststudy, but the newsletter "understands" that the second analysis "isjust as poor as the first. The result could be a new rejection by DNand ... NVE.""In its first statement DN expressed great concern about theenvironmental aspects of the hydro power scheme. In the affected areathere are many unique local species which could be completelyexterminated. The high waterfall in the river system creates... aspecially damp climate, which fosters a very rich fauna and flora.Another concern relates to the consequences of road building throughthe jungle, and the impact on the local population, which will feel thepressure from thousands of workers and others connected with the hugedevelopment."Chile project also questionedNorway's Environment Ministry is critical, too, of another giant hydroproject - Chile's Bio-Bio scheme - which has secured NORAD support. InAugust last year - despite strong opposition from Norwegianenvironmentalists - development aid minister Kari Nordheim-Larsenannounced that NORAD would provide so-called mixed credits for Bio-Bio.The newsletter claims to have a copy of an internal EnvironmentMinistry memo which is highly critical of the project, casting it as anexample of a scheme that has been granted support without adequatejustification. The Ministry believes the aid decision was dubious andsuggests `bit by bit' tactics were used to aid an apparently limitedscheme that paved the way for a larger projectThe same memo is sceptical towards third world hydro power projectsgenerally, pointing out that they "often have significant detrimentaleffects both on the environment and on the population groups affected.Far larger population groups, economic interests and environmentalvalues are affected, as a rule, than is the case with developments inour part of the world."Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996JORDAN SAYS RED-DEAD LINK VITAL-ISRAEL NOT SO SUREThe Dead Sea lives down to its name. The only crops that grow around itare fed by a few streams and what's left of the Jordan River aftereveryone in the region has grabbed the bulk of the water and pollutedwhat's left. But regularly, there are heavy downpours on the hills thatflank its Eastern shore. These turn the usually light waters of theWadi Mujib into a raging torrent which pour through clefts in the rockwall into the Dead Sea with only minimal entrapment by a water-shortpopulation in Jordan's arid highlands of Moab.The Jordanian Government is now promoting a scheme to trap the watersof the Mujib and another nearby basin, the Hasa, to promote irrigateddevelopment at the lower end of the Dead Sea where the Jordanian andIsraeli authorities intend to create the Lowest Park on Earth. Zafer al-Alem, a senior official at the Ministry of Water and Irrigation, saysthe Mujib and Hasa entrapment scheme, known by its local name as theSouthern Ghors, should ensure a net gain of 54m cubic metres (mcm) peryear.The Southern Ghors Project is the smallest, but most immediate, ofJordan's major water schemes. But in essence it only helps to postponehard decisions concerning water use and water availability. TheJordanian authorities estimate that before they signed their PeaceTreaty with Israel in October 1994, their country's annual supply ofground and surface water totalled only some 670mcm. And yet, accordingto Mr. Qusei Qteishat, the Secretary General of the Ministry of Waterand Irrigation, by the year 2005 they will need 1,400mcm.Zafer al-Alem estimates that some 215 mcm/year should come Jordan's wayas a result of the Treaty, partly by use of water stored in the Israeli- controlled Sea of Galilee, and partly from new dams on the YarmukRiver that can go ahead given agreement between Israel and Jordan inone case, and Jordan and Syria in the other. In addition, Jordan hopesto complete a second priority project over the next seven years, thetransfer of water from the Disi aquifer in Southern Jordan, via a 310-km pipeline; expected yield 80-100 mcm/y.To make up the remaining 270 mcm/y it believes will be required by theyear 2005, the Ministry is planning an intensive campaign to re-useexisting water. But, as Zafer al- Alem told FTWB, "after ten years, theproblem will re-emerge. Then we will have to complete the Red-DeadCanal."But all these projects cost money and Jordan is not a rich country. Therelatively modest projects for the Southern Ghors are costed at$254.2m, while the Disi pipeline, for which a feasibility study iscurrently under way, is estimated at $405m. As for the Red Sea-Dead Seacanal, this is costed at anything from $3.2bn upwards.Detailed designs for the three dams in the Southern Ghors project atWala, Mujib and Tannur have already been completed, and detaileddesigns for the Mujib weir and conveyer system, the largest singleelement in the project, are due for completion in early 1996.The Jordanians see the Southern Ghors as a progressive project, to beimplemented over an eight-year period. This should make it easier tofinance, since they are looking for three-quarters of the money to comefrom foreign assistance, and donors generally prefer to disburse theiraid over a period of years.Jordan also wants to improve the quality of its water. "We haveambitious plans to clean the Jordan River, which receives a lot ofpollution," says Qteishat. "We plan to secure 10 mcm/y of desalinatedwater from the springs around Tiberias (Sea of Galilee)," which he sayswill be desalinated by Israel and passed on to Jordan. At present, hesays, "Israel pumps salt water out of Tiberias and passes it back tothe Jordan River. We want to make sure that no more waste water goesinto it."Israel plans to do this by constructing what it calls a brine line fromTiberias to the Dead Sea at a cost of $25.8 million. In addition, itwill also construct a desalination plant, possibly at Tabha, near somebrackish springs in the region, or else at Naharayim, near the borderwith Jordan. Such a plant would cost around $23m and, overall, theIsraelis estimate the cost of desalination and improvement of waterquality in the Sea of Galilee as costing them a total of $98.9m overthe five years the project is expected to take. However, as well assupplying Jordan with some 10mcm/y, a further 10-20mcm/y should beavailable for Israeli consumption.While Israel and Jordan are clearly committed in spirit, as well as inlaw, to co-operating in the development of the Jordan Rift Valley, itis clear that the level of cooperation can be expected to varyconsiderably from project to project. The northern schemes are ofimmediate benefit, and of generally definable and limited cost. Thepractical benefits are also immediately obvious. One Jordaniantechnologist involved in preparing his country's water plans, told FTWBthat Jordan expects to receive around 32 mcm/y of Israeli-sourced waterunder the treaty. Almost all of this will be piped directly to Amman,in effect providing almost one-third of the Jordanian capital's watersupply.Given the tensions surrounding water issues in the Middle East,Jordanian-Israeli co-operation on water management and developmentsince the 1994 peace treaty has been remarkable. Yet there are likelyto be some long term problems. The Jordanians are extremely keen on theRed Sea-Dead Sea Canal which they genuinely appear to consider offersthe best prospect of meeting their additional water requirements in theearly 21st century. The project would yield an estimated 400 mcm/yapiece to both Jordan and Israel, with desalination costs, Jordanianofficials aver, kept relatively low because the project can be poweredby the 400 metre level difference between the two seas.However, it is equally clear that the Israelis are not so keen on theproject. One senior Israeli official told FTWB: "We consider this is adream. We want to see the economics clearly in place; so you can seethere is a difference of opinion" between Israel and Jordan.To resolve such differences, the two countries have agreed to hire anexternal consultant to report on the economics of the project. TheJordanians hope the report will demonstrate the Canal's practicalityand financial viability. Since such a project would require massiveforeign aid, they are well aware that the Israelis will have to startbelieving in it themselves if the scheme is to prove a success. For,while aid donors may well be found if they see a real commitment fromboth parties, scepticism from one partner is likely to produceintensified scepticism amongst donors.The key is whether Israel, which has more money to spend on developingor importing alternative supplies, concludes that for political reasons- continuing good relations with Jordan - it can gear itself up tosupport the project with real enthusiasm. At present, this seemsunlikely. For Jordan, with less flexibility in terms of developingalternative water sources, the project is considered vital if it is tomeet its most basic needs; for Israel there is no equivalent pressure.As the Israeli official said: "We believe there is life without the RedSea-Dead Sea Canal."Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AUCKLAND OPTS TO BOOST SUPPLIES WITH $55M PIPELINE FROM WAKATO RIVERAuckland's Watercare Services has opted for a pipeline from the WaikatoRiver to meet future supply needs. In eliminating other optionsWatercare is back to a plan very similar to an emergency proposalfloated at the height of a major drought in 1994. (FTWB, Issue 42, p2).The water would be extracted from the river either by large diameterbankside wells or infiltration galleries and pumped from the existingArdmore treatment station. The project will initially yield 80,000cubic metres a day but would be designed to accommodate the possibilityof a second stage yielding 120,000 cubic metres per day around the year2013.The major difference over the previous emergency proposal is that thisproject will have to go through normal planning permission processes.The application to build the US$55m pipeline is likely to be filed inMarch. It could take a year for all the consents to be granted,following which there will be a 2 year construction period.  In themeantime Watercare Services, which is a corporate entity owned by theAuckland Regional Services Trust, is consulting local communities andMaori tribes about the project.Agreement of the Tainui tribe who claim ownership of the riverbed isnot a foregone conclusion. Nor is the agreement of all the localauthorities who will take the water. The Auckland district of WaitakereCity has considered going it alone with a combination of more efficientwater use and a dam project run by private enterprise.Law changes will ease planning and funding negotiationsNew legislation likely to be in place well before the process ofrequesting planning permission starts will, however, make it easier forWatercare Services to manage without the blessing of the receivinglocal authorities  such as Waitakere.Changes in the law will also provide more flexibility in selectingfunding options for this project and a major wastewater scheme. Infuture, Watercare Services will be able to borrow commercially whereasit currently has to give local authorities the right of first refusalon whether to fund a project and it would be hard for it to proceedwithout the backing of all the local authorities and loan guaranteesfrom them.Watercare will in future also be authorised to reflect investment costsin its pricing by including "the cost of its business requirements inits prices and charges." At present it must set prices at a level whichrecovers only the operating costs including interest and plannedmaintenance and renewals.Recent board changes at Watercare also mean the group is likely to bemore receptive to innovative finance proposals which involve privateoperators, to the contracting out of services and buying in water fromother authorities rather than operating a closed shop monopoly.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SAO PAULO SETS LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR MAJOR WASTEWATER PROGRAMMENew water use legislation in Sao Paulo took a major step forward inDecember with the approval of a master plan by the state council, aconsultative committee for the state assembly. The plan, Plano Estadualde Recursos Hidricos, covers the period 1996 to 1999 and is based onthe user-pays principle and on the French model of administrationwithin river basin boundaries.The next step is for a detailed law to bedrawn up and voted on in the assembly.Sao Paulo state has a population of 33 million and an area the size ofthe United Kingdom. For the purposes of the water resources plan thestate has been divided into 22 river basin administrative areas.Exploitation of state water resources, exclusive of treatment anddistribution, should have been charged for since 1991 according toState Law 7.663 but this has so far been unenforced through lack ofcomplementary detailed legislation.The first basin area to be created and where administration plans aremost advanced covers the Piracicaba, Capivari and Jundai riverssituated just north of the Greater Sao Paulo connurbation. The basincommittee has already received $1.7m towards sanitation and watersupply schemes this year from a state fund, Fehidro, which comes fromroyalty payments to areas flooded for hydroelectric schemes. Fehidroshould have $8.6m available for water schemes in 1996.The Piracicaba/Capivari/Jundai Basin Committee, made up ofrepresentatives from 57 municipalities and non-governmentalenvironmental organisations, has already held seven meetings and drawnup a resources master plan for the period to 2010. Most watercourseswithin the basin have, since 1977, been designated in the poor qualityclasses 3 and 4 and currently serve only to dilute the polluting effectof incoming waste waters. They are estimated to receive polluting loadsequivalent to a  biochemical oxygen demand of around 160 tonnes/day,principally from sugar mills and other large industrial plants and adomestic population of 2.2m.The Plan envisages raising most of the rivers in this industrialisedarea to class 2, drinking water standard, by 2010.The Sao Paulo state government hopes to provide waste water treatmentfor 80% of urban centres in the state by the year 2019. Currently only5% of the state's waste water receives treatment.Minas Gerais announces $825.3m, 4 year planLegal constraints do not appear to be affecting forward planning inMinas Gerais where the state water company Copasa, Companhia deSaneamento de Minas Gerais, has announced an ambitious $825.3m plan forthe period 1996-1999.The principal element of Copasa's plan is the Prosam project involvingwaste water treatment in state capital Belo Horizonte and thedepollution of the city's two main water courses, the Arruda and Onca.This involves building a comprehensive main drainage system and twolarge waste water treatment stations. Amongst other things the planenvisages provision of 356,000 new water supply connections and 154,000drain connections. The company hopes to cut drinking water supplylosses, currently the lowest in Brazil at 27%, down to 25%.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PWA CHIEF FACES SECOND INQUIRY OVER CONTRACT ADMINISTRATIONIn a second indictment by the government within two months the head ofThailand's Provincial Waterworks Authority (PWA) is to be investigatedover alleged mismanagement of a major contract.In this instance the charge concerns late completion of a drinkingwater contract. The PWA head, Visit Lorthirapong is said to have failedto enforce punitive measures against the contractor involved ininstallation of the Nong Khae district pumping station in centralSaraburi province. The work was completed 200 days late, incurring apenalty of $720,000, but no fine was ever collected."If found guilty of abusing his authority by the auditor's office, thePWA governor will face dismissal," said a spokesman for Deputy InteriorMinister Suchart Tancharoen, who ordered the investigation.This is the second charge against Visit  since the current governmentcame to power in early July. He already faces investigation forapparently defying an order by Suchart to delay the signing of a $160-million contract for the Putham Thani water treatment plant. Thatcontract went to Thames Water International of the UK and Karnchang, aThai construction firm. According to industry reports, Suchart hadfavoured a rival syndicate in the bidding. A review of the contract bythe Interior Ministry is nearing completion. Visit has told the inquirypanel that he signed the contract because it had already been approvedby the former government of Chuan Leekpai.Two unsuccessful bidders, led by Italian-Thai Development, Thailand'slargest construction group, and industrial estate operator MDX, lodgedofficial protests against the decision. Italian-Thai is known to haveclose ties to Suchart's Chart Thai party, which forms the core of thegoverning coalition.Visit has been suspended since the row broke, and is not expected toresume his post, even if he is cleared by the two investigations.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MALAYSIA PLANS $1BN SPEND ON WATER SUPPLY 1996 -2000Malaysia's deputy Works Minister said recently that around $1bn will beallocated to water infrastructure expansion in the country's 1996-2000national plan.Minister Datuk Railey Jeffrey said more than the RM2.4bn ($0.94bn) inthe 1991-1995 plan will be needed to satisfy a predicted 73% increasein demand to 11.4bn litres/day by 2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996REPORT PROVIDES GOOD REFERENCE TO UK WATER COMPANY PERFORMANCEBusiness Ratio Plus :Water Companies*   is probably the best collectionof publicly available information on water industry results collatedinto one reference book.The 1995 8th Edition covers the industry in England and Wales. For eachof the 10 regional water service plcs and the 20 or more water supplycompanies it provides a range of good hard fact - contact details,directors' names, turnover by subsidiaries, three full years' balancesheets and profit and loss details. The core businesses of the 10 plcsare treated to the same examination.A reference work of this sort is  out-of-date as soon as it rolls offthe presses, as is the information it includes but, until an on-lineversion is produced it's the best we can reasonably expect.The latest figures relate to the year ending March '95 and the sectorhas had interims, various bids and a long hot summer to cope with sincethen. Further developments up to the end of the third quarter of 1995are covered briefly in the Industry Comment section at the back of thebook. The performance analyses and league table positions are detailedand avoid the need to work them out. The ratios, the meanings of whichare defined, are grouped into six categories; profitability, liquidity,gearing, efficiency, employee performance and exports/sales. Leaguepositions of the individual companies are ranked in the same way. Thusat #1.17bn Thames Water plc had the highest turnover as at 31.3.95 andproduced the largest profit, #303.7m. Severn Trent employs 200 morepeople than Thames and has the greatest total assets of #3.69bn.Apart from Wessex Water which has a pre-tax profit margin of 51.1% noneof the Big 10 finds its way into the top five most profitablecompanies. Indeed eight of them are below the water supply onlycompanies average gross margin of 31.6%. Does this prove that small isbeautiful when it comes to water companies? Investors may find thisanalysis useful and industry players can keep an eye on what the othersare doing; it all depends on where your interest lies.Business Ratio Plus :Water Companies  does not go into the unregulatedbusinesses in any greater detail than to list their turnover. In thelong run this may be where the real differences and investor interestarise. For that we will need annual reports, latest interims and a lotmore specific company research but as far as it goes this is anexcellent basic handbook to the water industry in England and Wales.RW* Business Ratio Plus : Water Companies can be obtained from: ICCBusiness Publications, Freepost,Hampton, Middlesex TW18 1BR.    Tel:0181 783 0922. Fax: 0181 783 1940.  Price:  #195 plus p&pBack to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SOUTHERN AND BRISTOL WATER COMPLETE INTERIMS REPORTING SEASON IN UKSouthern Water plc, the last of the big 10 to report at the interimstage, is showing turnover up to #206.9 million from #190.6 millionlast year.The massive retained profit of #58.7 million, or 28.37% of turnover,continues a trend. The comparable figure was #86.9 million or 22.59% ofsales for the full year to 31 March and #52.5 million or 27.5% at thehalf way stage in 1994. It is not surprising then that Southern intendsto buy back its shares although it might have been more imaginative andexpanded the business rather than shrinking it.In fact it intends to fund the exercise by increasing the dividend byyear end so that the total cost to the company will be the same asbuying its own shares. Even so by then funds in the share premiumaccount and reserves look set to exceed #1bnIn addition to "returning value to shareholders" Southern also intendsto defer the permitted 1% price increase for 1996/7 and bring in a"customer benefit programme" costing #50 million. This will go towards"discretionary" spending on "distribution, foul water flooding andodour control."If Southern can achieve all this in such a drought year, with only ahose-pipe ban by way of emergency measures, is it charging too much forits services or investing too little in the infrastructure? Southernmay end up being praised for its prudence but like other suppliers the1996 outlook may depend on the extent of winter rains.Bristol Water Holdings plc increased turnover to #33.16 million from#31.31 million this time last year. Operating profits were up to #8.25million from #6.54 million in 1994 when they took into account a #1.1million re-reorganisation provision. This has now fed through to thebottom line of #4.78 million and retained profit of #3.75 million.Hopefully this will help ease net borrowings which still run at 68% oftotal shareholders' funds. At the full year they had been 91% and atthe interim stage last year 87%.Meanwhile shareholders' funds have crept up from #43.5 million to #47.7million since 31st March 1995 year end suggesting a move from debt toequity financing although without full view of the underlying numbersthis cannot be verified.Bristol still has large capital projects to fund, particularly theGloucester to Sharpness Canal which it estimates will cost #2 millionby the end of the century.Following restructuring and reduction of the workforce by 15% perhapsBristol is set fair for improved results at the full year.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TENDERS ISSUED FOR $38M FORTALEZA TREATMENT PLANTBrazil's state development bank, BNDES (Banco Nacional deDesenvolvimento Economico e Social) is expected to provide 75% of thefinance for a project to double treatment plant capacity at the Gaviaoreservoir which serves the city of Fortaleza in Ceara state, north eastBrazil.An announcement to this end was made by the bank's director ofprivatisation, Elena Landau on 4 December and tenders for the $37.8mbuild, operate, transfer (BOT) project were issued two days later.Private companies will be paid from water bills from a quarter ofCeara's connections over a period of 15 years.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996EIB LENDS ECU100M VIA POLISH BANKS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEMESA credit line of ECU100m advanced by the European Investment Bank tofour foreign banks operating in Poland -  ABN-AMRO, Creditanstalt, INGBank, and Raiffeisen-Centrobank - is intended broadly for use on`infrastructure' projects.An EIB spokesman told FTWB the intended coverage could range frominstalling telephone lines to building tourist facilities, butenvironmental projects, including water/wastewater treatment schemeswould certainly qualify. Individual loans could range from ECU20,000 toECU 25m. depending on the intermediary bank chosen.The loans would be relatively cheap, with interest charged at 150 basispoints (1.5%) over Libor (London interbank offered rate), and repaymentover up to 11 years.The EIB raises market funds as cheaply as anybody, given its AAA ratingas a supranational institution. Furthermore, by lending through foreignbanks, the EIB has been able to obtain guarantees from the foreignbanks' parents in Amsterdam or Vienna, thereby avoiding thecomplications of extracting a government guarantee from the Polishauthorities, as would have been needed in the case of a Polish bank. Bylending through one single intermediary, the EIB has kept to a minimumthe number of margins that must be added to the basic cost of themoney.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AMORIM BUYS MAJOR SHARE IN LUSAGUAThe Amorim group, Portugal's biggest cork products group and one of thecountry's largest business conglomerates, has acquired 50% of Lusagua,a water company, previously wholly owned by two Spanish groups, Aguasde Barcelona and Canal Isabel.The acquisition, made by increasing Lusagua's capital from Es100m($150,000) to Es200m, represents an important diversification for theAmorim group. The two Spanish companies retain the remaining 50%. Theacquisition was made shortly after Lusagua, in association with anothercompany, Aquagest, was awarded a concession to manage the water supplyand waste water treatment systems of Carvoeiro, the name given to agroup of municipalities centred on Aveiro in northern Portugal.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MINISTERS PLAN INCREASED SPENDING ON WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMSA total of $60 million has been allocated for provincial waste watertreatment plants in Thailand this year (1996), double the 1995expenditure. Included in an $84-million environmental fund, the moneywill be allocated under 1992 legislation that requires provincialgovernments to formulate local action plans."The funding has been raised substantially because of the heavyresponse from provincial administrations. There are at least fivemunicipalities that will begin waste water treatment plants (in 1996),"said Saksit Tridej, a senior official in the Environment Ministry.While the funding comes from the national government, local authoritiesmust conduct feasibility studies and provide land for the plants. Thesystem reverses a previous trend of centralised planning from Bangkok."It's a very effective method, as the government can allocate budgetsto local agencies to tackle pressing environmental problems," saidSaksit. "They are in a better position to know what is needed that weare."Resource studies planned in East and West provincesElsewhere the Industry Ministry has called for feasibility studies onimprovement of supplies to factories in the eastern and westernprovinces following complaints from manufacturers.Industry minister Chaiwat Sinsuwong said East Water, a partiallyprivatised water distributor, would be commissioned to overcomeshortages affecting much of the eastern seaboard, including supplies tostate-run industrial estates."The supplies need to be improved but also the pricing. Everyone iscomplaining that piped water is too expensive in these two areas," hesaid. "What may be needed is better resource management."Efforts to boost supplies have been thwarted by a shortage of suitablesites for reservoirs; the government is considering importing waterfrom Cambodia if new domestic sources cannot be found.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FRENCH GROUPS COMBINE IN BID FOR CONTROL OF MID-KENT WATERGenerale des Eaux's British subsidiary General Utilities, and itsBouygues Group counterpart Saur Water Services have announced that theyintend to launch a takeover bid for the UK`s Mid Kent Water.The French have indicated an offer of #4.40 a share, valuing Mid Kentat some #80m ($126m). But the bid will have to await the approval ofthe UK's Monopolies and Mergers Commission. This is not likely to be astumbling block, given the recent approval of the much more significantbid by Lyonnaise des Eaux for the regional water and sewage utility,Northumbrian Water. One difficulty might arise however from the adviceof the Mid-Kent board that shareholders should reject the bid.The two French-owned companies already hold 39% of Mid Kent, but wouldlike control.  General Utilities already owns Folkestone and DoverWater which serves the area adjacent to Mid-Kent on the east side,while Saur Water Services controls South East Water to  the west of Mid-Kent.Generale and Saur say a takeover would optimise water usage in the areaand thereby reduce the risk of water shortages.South East Water is the largest of the three companies with 618,000clients and an annual turnover of #50.9m. Mid Kent serves  525,000users and Folkestone and Dover, annual turnover #10.4m, serves151,000.In all, General Utilities provides water for 3.1m persons in the UK viafour companies, while Saur Water Services provides for 1.3m persons viatwo companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996UWR TO PARTNER JERSEY CITY FOR WATER SYSTEM OPERATIONUnited Water Resources (UWR), America's second largest investor-ownedwater services company, on 11 December won the contract to manage thewater system of Jersey city, an industrial community across the HudsonRiver from the tip of Manhattan Island. Population to be served isabout 240,000.The contract is subject to public hearings and approval of the NewJersey state public utility. UWR anticipates a successful outcome ofthe approval process and is scheduling a start this Spring. It will bethe largest public-private partnership for a municipal water operationin the country.The company says the proposal will bring major economic benefits toJersey City over five years through operating efficiencies, improvedbilling, job creation, plus the purchase of Jersey City's excess watersupplies.UWR is a holding company whose subsidiaries engage in water-relatedbusinesses, real estate, and environmental testing. It provides waterand wastewater services to about two million people in 13 states.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996WORLD BANK TO FUND $13.5M STUDY FOR REGION'S LARGEST DAMThe World Bank has agreed to fund the second stage of a feasibilitystudy for the Son La hydro-electric dam in Vietnam, which will be thelargest to be constructed in Southeast Asia.Bradley Babson, spokesman for the Bank's mission in Hanoi, said theinvolvement was conditional upon Vietnam using a recognised level ofdesign and construction and protecting ethnic minorities who live inthe area. "We are not financing the dam, but we may provide funds tomake sure that they do the studies for the dam in a way that will fitinternational standards," he said. Expected to take two years, the$13.5m study will look at the environmental impact and socialrepercussions from the relocation of thousands of local residents.An earlier study by Sweden's Sweco consultancy found that the projectwas economically viable, and recommended two sites on the Black River,a tributary of the Red River in northern Hanoi.Expected to have an electricity output of up to 3,794 megawatts, theproject will be twice the size of Hoa Binh dam, 190 kilometresdownstream, which is currently the largest in the region.Meanwhile, construction of a $110-million hydro-power plant has startedat Song Hinh in central Phu Yen province. Work on a series of dams witha power output of 370 million kilowatt hours began in 1991.Back to Headline List WT03-B36-34IA059-000325-B010-292http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev05.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001407 text/html 50479HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:11:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:23 GMTContent-length: 50290Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev05.html Sample Issue Copyright GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEATURES USCG STRIKES A COMPROMISE IN FINAL OSRO GUIDELINES (2378 words) NOAA ADOPTS RESTORATION-BASED NRDA PROCESS IN FINAL RULE (2887 words) BRIEFS UNDERWATER PIPELINE RUPTURE CAUSES MAJOR SPILL IN RUSSIA'S SOUTHERN URAL MOUNTAINS. (318 words) SOLAS AMENDMENTS MANDATE ENHANCED INSPECTION PROGRAM FOR AGING TANKERS AND BULKERS. (345 words) ENVIRONMENT CANADA REPORT EXAMINES BEHAVIOR OF OIL IN COARSE SEDIMENTS. (334 words) WORLD SPILL BRIEFS. (539 words) OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN HOTLINE. (603 words) CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996USCG STRIKES A COMPROMISE IN FINAL OSRO GUIDELINESIn a compromise between the conflicting concerns of the nation'stwo largest oil spill removal organizations (OSROs), theU.S. Coast Guard (USCG) has issued final guidelines on a revampedOSRO classification process that will require responseorganizations to maintain "redundant" quantities of anycontracted or "nondedicated" response resources that they wish tocount toward their classifications. In the weeks preceding therelease of the final guidelines, the National Response Corp.(NRC) and the Marine Spill Response Corp. (MSRC) expressed verydifferent views regarding the way that the revampedclassification system should count nondedicated resources (OPB,15 Dec. 1995, p.1). MSRC, whose response network consistsprimarily of owned or "dedicated" response resources, argued thatnondedicated resources should not be counted toward an OSRO'sclassification unless the OSRO can demonstrate the ability todeploy those resources in a timely manner. In contrast, NRC,which makes extensive use of nondedicated equipment andpersonnel, contended that, for classification purposes, dedicatedand nondedicated resources should be considered equivalent.Under the final guidelines, an OSRO may count nondedicatedresources as part of its response capability, but it must arrangefor access to at least twice as much nondedicated equipment andpersonnel as it needs to meet the guidelines' response resourcestandards. "If an OSRO elects to use nondedicated resources,there must be a redundancy factor of 2 to 1," USCG wrote in thefinal guidelines. "This means that the OSRO must ensure theavailability of nondedicated response resources by contract orother approved means in quantities equal to twice what the OSRO"would be required to maintain if those same resources werededicated, according to USCG. "Ideally, dedicated resourcesprovide more of a timely response 'guarantee' than nondedicatedresources," Admiral James Card explained in a cover letteraccompanying the final guidelines. However, "historically, theresponse industry has depended to varying degrees on nondedicatedresources to perform some critical response functions," accordingto Admiral Card. "To better ensure the availability of thesenondedicated resources, we have required a redundancy factor of2 to 1 when using nondedicated response resources," Admiral Cardwrote.USCG's decision to require a 2 to 1 redundancy factor fornondedicated resources appears to be acceptable to NRC, but notto MSRC. "Everyone was waiting to see how USCG would handle theissue of dedicated and nondedicated resources," NRC PresidentMark Miller told OPB. "I think they have reached a compromisethat addresses the concerns of all of the parties involved,"Miller said. "With the tremendous inventory of dedicated andnondedicated resources that NRC has available, I fully expectthat the program we developed several years ago will stand upunder the new classification system," Miller said. MSRC CorporateRelations Director Greg Rixon told OPB that, although "redundantcontracts may increase the likelihood that nondedicated resourceswill be available in the event of a spill, MSRC still believesthat the only way to positively ensure response capability is tomaintain dedicated resources." In addition, MSRC contends that aredundancy factor of 2 to 1 does not provide sufficient assuranceof equipment availability, according to Rixon. "In our opinion,USCG would be close to achieving a reasonable assurance ofavailability with a redundancy factor of 3 to 1, and wouldprobably reach full assurance with a factor of 4 to 1," Rixonsaid.OSRO classification background: USCG classifies OSROs to helpvessel and facility owners select organizations that are capableof meeting their response planning requirements under the OilPollution Act of 1990 (OPA 90). Section 4202 of OPA 90 requiresvessel and facility owners to develop response plans that"identify and ensure, by contract or other means, theavailability of private personnel and equipment necessary toremove, to the maximum extent practicable, a worst-casedischarge." The OSRO classification process is voluntary;response organizations are not required to apply for OSROclassification. Although vessel and facility owners do not haveto contract with classified OSROs to meet the OPA 90 planningrequirements, plan holders who rely on classified OSROs areexempted from the requirement to document in their plans all ofthe response resources that they intend to contract in the eventof a spill.The newly released final OSRO classification guidelines replacethose contained in Navigation and Vessel Inspection Circular(NVIC) No. 12-92, which USCG issued in December 1992 (OPB,18 Dec. 1992., p.2). "After the implementation of NVIC No. 12-92,weaknesses were identified in the classification process thatprevented the program from realistically representing theresponse capabilities of an OSRO," Admiral Card explained in thecover letter for the final guidelines. USCG held public workshopsin January 1994 and June 1995 to solicit comments on the OSROclassification process and, during September 1995, issued draftguidelines on a revamped system (OPB, 22 Sept. 1995, p.1).According to Admiral Card, USCG received written comments on thedraft guidelines from about 70 organizations during the publiccomment period, which ended on 30 November 1995. "As a result ofthe comments received, and our own review, the draft guidelineshave undergone many changes," Card noted. He claimed that thefinal guidelines will allow USCG to "accurately and consistentlycalculate an OSRO's capability to respond to specific plan holderrequirements.""We continue to stress that using a USCG-classified OSRO does notin any way relieve plan holders of the responsibility to ensurethat their specific response needs are met," Card wrote in hiscover letter. "The revised classification guidelines provide agood indication of an OSRO's response capability by COTP zone,"Card noted. The OSRO classifications "do not, however, representa 'one size fits all' solution," Card wrote. "USCG created thevoluntary OSRO classification program so that facility and vesselresponse plan holders could list USCG-evaluated OSROs in lieu ofproviding voluminous detailed lists of response resources,"according to Admiral Card. "This was, and still is, the onlyregulatory benefit that plan holders receive from utilizing USCG-classified OSROs," Admiral Card explained.Final OSRO classification process: Although USCG has included newrequirements for nondedicated resources and other changes in thefinal guidelines, the final classification process is verysimilar to that outlined in the draft guidelines proposed duringSeptember 1995. Like the draft guidelines, the final guidelinesspecify that USCG will enter information about each OSRO'sresponse resources into a database--the Response ResourceInventory--and then use a computer program to classify theorganization. The program will assign each response organization"geographic-specific" classifications--that is, separateclassifications for each Captain of the Port (COTP) zone in whichthe organization operates. According to USCG, the computerprogram will automatically take into account an OSRO's ability totransport or "cascade" its resources in response to spillsoutside of the COTP zones in which the equipment is stored.For each COTP zone, USCG will assign a response organization oneof five OSRO classifications ranging from A (least capacity) toE (most capacity) in any or all of the following operatingenvironments: rivers and canals, inland regions, the Great Lakes,and oceans. The five classifications will reflect both anorganization's ability to deploy equipment within certain timeframes and its effective daily recovery capacity (EDRC)--afunction of the amount of boom, oil recovery equipment, andtemporary storage that the OSRO can access during a spillresponse. For example, to receive a class C rating in the inlandoperating environment of a particular COTP zone, an OSRO wouldhave to have an EDRC of 10,000 barrels per day. In addition, thatOSRO would have to be capable of mounting a spill response inthat COTP zone within the following time frames: 6 hours for aspill from a facility in a high-volume port; 12 hours for afacility spill in a non-high-volume port; 12 hours for a spillfrom a vessel in a high-volume port; and 24 hours for a vesselspill in a non-high-volume port.Like the draft OSRO classification process, the final OSROclassification process takes into account not only anorganization's total response resources, but also its ability todeploy various types of response equipment together as a"system." According to both the draft and the final guidelines,an organization's EDRC will be determined by the least-capablecomponent of its oil recovery system. For example, if an OSRO hasa temporary storage capacity of 30,000 barrels per day, but hasskimming or vacuum equipment that is capable of recovering only10,000 barrels per day, the OSRO's EDRC will be limited to10,000 barrels per day. During the classification process, USCGmay consider any of the following additional factors: theavailability of trained personnel to operate the organization'sequipment; the suitability of the OSRO's equipment for theenvironments in which it operates; the organization's ability toprovide logistical support for a spill response; and the OSRO'sability to use response techniques other than mechanical recoverymethods.Changes from the draft process: Based on the comments received onthe draft guidelines, USCG made several revisions to the finalOSRO classification process. The final guidelines give each OSROthe option to apply for classifications in a particular COTP zonebased on its resources in a city in the zone other than the cityin which the COTP office is located. In contrast, the draftguidelines would have counted only the resources in the COTPcity. In the draft guidelines, USCG specifically stated that thetemporary storage capacity used to calculate an OSRO's EDRC would"not include fixed, shore-based storage capacity." However, inthe final guidelines, USCG revised this policy. "An OSRO thatoperates in an area where fixed storage is a realistic asset mayclaim fixed storage as meeting part of its temporary storagerequirement," according to USCG. When determining whether tocount fixed storage, "the key factor that USCG will evaluate iswhether the temporary storage that an OSRO has identified willallow the OSRO to sustain its classified EDRC throughout spillresponse operations," the agency noted.Under the draft guidelines, USCG would have evaluated an OSRO'sability to dispose of recovered oil as part of the classificationprocess, but this criterion has been omitted from the finalguidelines. In addition, in the draft guidelines, USCG did notaddress whether OSROs could receive credit for response resourcesdesignated to meet state resident-equipment requirements.However, in the final guidelines, USCG noted that "OSROs thathave designated equipment to meet state resident-equipmentrequirements must indicate this on their OSRO application."According to USCG, "for classification purposes, designatedresident equipment is not cascadable outside of the area forwhich it is designated." As under the draft guidelines, OSROsclassified under the final guidelines will be reevaluated everythree years to verify that their classifications are accurate.The final guidelines also specify that USCG will conduct "randomspot checks" between each regularly scheduled reinspection visit"to confirm resource availability and equipment operability."Reaction from NRC and MSRC: In separate interviews with OPB aboutthe final OSRO classification process, NRC and MSRC bothcommented on the importance of dedicated resources to thenation's overall spill response capability. To illustrate MSRC'sperspective, Rixon compared USCG's response planning regulationsto a high-jump competition. "Congress and USCG initially set thebar at a certain height," according to Rixon. "USCG thendiscovered that only one company--MSRC--could clear the bar,"Rixon claimed. "Rather than say to everyone else, you must trainharder to compete in this event, USCG decided to lower the bar,"according to Rixon. "We are not the only organization withdedicated resources, but we did acquire a higher percentage ofdedicated resources than any other organization, and we did thatat great cost to our clients," Rixon explained. "When NRC andother companies wanted to get into the game, they decided not tospend the kind of money that we spent," according to Rixon. "Infact, these companies realized that they could gain a competitiveedge by not acquiring as many dedicated resources," Rixon said.By failing to fully recognize the limitations of nondedicatedresources in the OSRO classification system, USCG "has placed thewhole concept of dedicated resources in grave jeopardy," Rixonclaimed. "The end of dedicated resources will not come like athunderclap," according to Rixon. "Tomorrow, we will not wake upand find that all of this country's dedicated response resourcesare gone, but they will erode slowly, and eventually no OSROswill have them," Rixon said. "Then, at some time in the future,USCG will try to execute the response plans that are in place,and they will discover that the dedicated assets that they wererelying on are not there any more," Rixon said. "We believe thatUSCG must take steps to ensure that dedicated assets remain inplace or that nondedicated resources are maintained in sufficientnumbers so that there is some degree of certainty that enoughequipment and personnel will be available when a major spilloccurs," Rixon said. In addition, "USCG must improve its effortsto test and evaluate the capability of OSROs on a true no-noticebasis, especially those OSROs that rely on nondedicatedresources," according to Rixon.According to NRC's Miller, "there is no proof that dedicatedequipment is more reliable than nondedicated equipment during aspill response." Miller pointed out that "NRC has respondedsuccessfully to 85 oil spills," whereas "MSRC does not have thatkind of track record." Therefore, MSRC "can only guess that theirdedicated resources might be better in a spill response," Millersaid. He noted that, "at a time when most of MSRC's customers aredoing away with their owned and dedicated tanker fleets andregularly chartering ships on the spot market, it seems curiousto me that MSRC does not recognize the hypocrisy of advocatingdedicated resources for spill response." According to Miller,"MSRC went out and spent a lot of money on dedicated equipment,and as a result, they have saddled their customers with atremendous expense and an ungainly organization." In contrast,"NRC looked at the marketplace, purchased equipment as needed,saw that nondedicated resources were available, and developed abetter program for our customers," Miller said. For a copy of thefinal OSRO classification guidelines, at no cost, contact: TerryHoover, Commandant (G-MEP-2), USCG Headquarters, 2100 SecondStreet, S.W., Washington, DC 20593-0001; Tel: 202-267-0448;Fax: 202-267-4085.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NOAA ADOPTS RESTORATION-BASED NRDA PROCESS IN FINAL RULEOn 5 January, the U.S. National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration (NOAA) issued its long-awaited final rulespecifying the methods that federal, state, and tribal trusteesare authorized to use when conducting natural resource damageassessments (NRDAs) under OPA 90. The NRDA process described inthe final rule is essentially the same as the "restoration-based"approach outlined in NOAA's "reproposed" NRDA rule, which theagency issued during August 1995 (OPB, 11 Aug. 1995, p.1). Underthe final rule, which will take effect on 5 February, the NRDAprocess will focus on determining the appropriate scale of therestoration projects required to "make the environment and thepublic whole" following a spill. The trustees for the naturalresources injured by an oil spill will evaluate the injuriescaused by the spill and develop a detailed plan for returning theinjured resources to their baseline condition and compensatingthe public for the lost use of those resources while they arebeing restored. The responsible parties (RPs) will then eitherfund or implement the restoration plan.The restoration-based NRDA approach contained in the final ruleand in NOAA's August 1995 proposal differs significantly from theprocess that the agency outlined in its first proposed NRDA ruleduring January 1994 (OPB, 15 Jan. 1994, p.1). Under that originalproposed rule, the NRDA process would have focused on assessingthe monetary value of the natural resources injured by an oilspill. The RPs would then have been required to pay thecalculated sum to the trustees, who would have used it to restoreor replace the injured natural resources. The January 1994proposal was sharply criticized by representatives of the marineinsurance and oil transportation industries, who argued that themethods it proposed for calculating natural resource values werearbitrary and therefore might lead to grossly inflated damageclaims under OPA 90. The critics of the January 1994 proposedrule were particularly concerned about its inclusion of thecontroversial contingent-valuation method, which involves the useof surveys to determine the "passive use" values of naturalresources. Passive use values are the values that people attachto resources that they do not use but that they neverthelessregard as important to preserve.Like NOAA's August 1995 proposal, the final NRDA rule defines amore limited role for contingent valuation and other valuationmethods than the role outlined in NOAA's January 1994 proposal.The final rule limits the use of valuation techniques to specificcircumstances and states that these techniques may be used onlyto determine the appropriate scale of natural resourcerestoration projects. The use of contingent valuation and othervaluation methods for this purpose "avoids many problemsidentified by commenters regarding the use of continent valuationto calculate a dollar value" for natural resource damages, asspecified in the January 1994 proposed rule, NOAA stated in thefinal rule. According to NOAA, under the final rule, RPs areliable for the cost of implementing restoration actions thatgenerate value equivalent to the lost value of the injurednatural resources, not for reimbursing the trustees for thecalculated lost value of the resources.NOAA's decision to limit the role of valuation methods in theAugust 1995 proposed rule alarmed environmental groups, whoclaimed that, by switching from the original valuation-basedapproach to a restoration-based approach, the proposal would failto fully compensate the public for the inherent value of naturalresources. These groups argued that, by giving RPs the option toundertake restoration projects instead of paying economic damagesfollowing a spill, the proposal would ultimately lead to lowerrecoveries for the public. Insurance companies and shippingorganizations also criticized the August 1995 proposed rule.These groups claimed that, although the proposal focused the NRDAprocess on determining the scale of restoration actions, itprovided only general guidance on NRDAs and would therefore givetrustees the option to use a wider variety of assessment methods.In the preamble to the final rule, NOAA defended the restoration-based NRDA approach. According to NOAA, by requiring trustees toassess natural resource injuries for the purpose of determiningthe required scale of restoration activities, the final NRDAprocess will "validate trustee determinations regarding thoseactions that will make the environment and public whole." Inaddition, NOAA noted that, while the final rule "provides for theuse of a range of appropriate and cost-effective assessmentprocedures," the rule also includes a set of standards that anyassessment procedure must meet. For example, the rule specifiesthat assessment procedures must be "capable of providinginformation of use in determining the type and scale ofrestoration appropriate for a particular injury" and must be"reliable and valid for the particular incident." NOAA also saidthat, because the final rule gives RPs and the publicopportunities to participate in the restoration planning process,"restoration will be achieved more quickly, transaction costswill decrease, and litigation will be avoided."NRDA rulemaking history: The publication of the final NRDA rulecame more than five years after NOAA first issued an advancenotice of proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register to solicitcomments on approaches for conducting NRDAs under OPA 90 (OPB,18 Jan. 1991, p.1). Since that time, NOAA has published elevenFederal Register notices related to the NRDA process, includingits first proposed NRDA rule during January 1994, the August 1995reproposed rule, and the final NRDA rule. In addition, NOAA hasheld numerous public workshops and regional meetings during thepast five years to solicit input on the various methods that havebeen developed to assess natural resource damages. According toNOAA, the final rule draws on the comments received and provides"a NRDA process intended to meet OPA 90's goal of expeditious,cost-effective, and feasible restoration of natural resources andservices injured by incidents involving oil."Although the final rule was published in the Federal Register on5 January, NOAA submitted the rule to the Federal Register officeon 28 December 1995, thereby meeting the deadline specified in aconsent decree that the agency reached last year with the NaturalResources Defense Council (NRDC). The consent decree resolved asuit filed during 1994 by NRDC and eight other environmentalgroups against NOAA for failing to promulgate a final NRDA ruleby 18 August 1992, as required under OPA 90 (OPB, 4 Nov. 1994,p.2). Under the consent decree, NOAA agreed to file itsreproposed NRDA rule with the Federal Register by 31 July 1995,and to file the final rule on approaches for conducting NRDAs by31 December 1995. The agency met both deadlines.Final NRDA rule: Like the August 1995 proposed rule, the finalrule divides the NRDA process following an oil spill into threephases: preassessment, restoration planning, and restorationimplementation. In the first phase--preassessment--the trusteesmust determine whether the spill warrants a complete NRDA. Basedon the information available, the trustees must determine whetherthe incident may have resulted in any injuries or any risk ofinjuries to natural resources under their trusteeship andtherefore whether the incident qualifies for a natural resourcedamage claim under OPA 90. In addition, the trustees mustevaluate whether the emergency spill response operations willeliminate the threat of ongoing injuries to natural resources."If injuries are expected to continue, and feasible restorationalternatives exist to address such injuries, the trustees mayproceed with the assessment," NOAA explained in the rule.The second phase of the NRDA process--restoration planning--hastwo components: injury assessment and restoration selection.According to NOAA, "the goal of the injury assessment is todetermine the nature and extent of the injuries to naturalresources and services, thus providing a technical basis forevaluating the need for, type of, and scale of restorationactions." Under the final rule, natural resource injuries aredefined as any "observable or measurable change in a naturalresource" or any "impairment of a natural resource service." Aspart of the injury assessment, the trustees must determine firstthat natural resources have been exposed to the spilled oil, andsecond that this exposure has caused an injury. By comparing thecondition of the injured resources to their baseline condition,the trustees must quantify the degree and spatial extent of theinjuries and estimate their temporal extent.After the injury assessment is completed, the trustees begin therestoration selection process, which involves the identification,evaluation, and selection of various restoration alternatives.Under the final rule, the trustees must identify a "reasonablerange" of restoration alternatives, including both "primaryrestoration actions," which are designed to help restore theinjured natural resources to their baseline condition, and"compensatory restoration actions," which are intended tocompensate the public for the lost use of natural resourcesduring the restoration period. The final rule specifically statesthat trustees must consider "natural recovery" as a primaryrestoration option. In addition, the trustees may consideractions intended to prevent interference with natural recovery ormore intensive actions that they believe would return injuredresources to their baseline condition more rapidly or withgreater certainty than natural recovery. When identifyingpossible compensatory restoration actions, trustees are requiredfirst to consider those actions that provide services of the sametype and quality as those lost as a result of the spill. If thetrustees cannot identify a reasonable range of this type ofcompensatory actions, they may consider other compensatoryactions, provided that these actions make available services ofcomparable type and quality to those lost.To ensure that the restoration actions identified by the trusteesappropriately address the injuries arising from the incident, thetrustees must "scale" the actions. The final rule specifies twoapproaches for determining the appropriate scale of a restorationaction: the "resource-to-resource" or "service-to-service"approach, and the "valuation" approach. In the resource-to-resource or service-to-service approach, the trustees determinethe quantity of resources or services that have been lost andidentify actions that provide at least an equal quantity ofreplacement resources or services of the same type and quality asthose lost. In the valuation approach, the trustees use valuationmethods, such as contingent valuation, to calculate the value ofthe resources or services lost as a result of the spill and todetermine the value expected to be gained from the variousrestoration actions under consideration. The trustees then scalethe restoration actions so that they provide resources orservices of equal value to those lost. The final rule states thattrustees may use the valuation approach only if they areconsidering actions that provide resources or services of adifferent type and quality from those lost, or if the resource-to-resource or service-to-service approach is inappropriate.Once the trustees have identified a reasonable range ofrestoration alternatives, they must select the "preferred"alternatives. When selecting the preferred alternatives, thetrustees are required under the rule to consider the followingfactors: 1) the cost of each alternative; 2) the extent to whicheach alternative is expected to return the injured naturalresources and services to their baseline condition or tocompensate the public for the loss of resources and servicesduring the interim period; 3) the likelihood that eachalternative will be successful; 4) the extent to which eachalternative will prevent further natural resource injuries fromthe spill and avoid collateral injuries during implementation;5) the extent to which each alternative benefits more than onenatural resource or service; and 6) the effect of eachalternative on public health and safety. Under the final rule,the trustees must select the most cost-effective of two or moreequally preferable alternatives. The trustees then develop adraft restoration plan presenting the preferred alternatives andmake the draft plan available for public review and comment.After reviewing the comments, the trustees develop a finalrestoration plan.In the third phase of the NRDA process--restorationimplementation--the trustees present the final plan to the RPs,who must either implement the plan themselves or provide thefunding for the trustees to implement it. According to NOAA, therestoration implementation phase provides an opportunity in theNRDA process for the settlement of natural resource damage claimswithout litigation, because the trustees and the RPs cannegotiate the best way to proceed with the restoration plan. Ifthe RPs refuse to fund or implement the final restoration plan,the trustees are authorized under OPA 90 to file a civil suitagainst the RPs in federal court to recover the cost ofimplementing the plan. If the response costs and natural resourcedamages arising from a spill exceed the RP's liability limitunder OPA 90, or if no RP has been identified, the trustees mayseek funding for the restoration from the Oil Spill LiabilityTrust Fund.Under OPA 90, NRDAs performed by federal, state, or tribaltrustees in accordance with the procedures contained in the finalrule "have the force and effect of a rebuttable presumption onbehalf of the trustees in any judicial or administrativeproceedings." In the final rule, NOAA interpreted thispresumption to mean that "the RP has the burden of presentingalternative evidence on damages and of persuading the fact finderthat the damages presented by the trustees are not an appropriatemeasure" of the natural resource injuries caused by a spill. If,in any portion of an assessment, the trustees use procedures thatare determined not to be in accordance with the final rule, thetrustees will not receive the rebuttable presumption for thatportion of the assessment. In addition, NRDAs performed byforeign trustees in accordance with the final rule are notentitled to the rebuttable presumption.NOAA's response to comments on earlier NRDA proposals: In thefinal rule, NOAA noted that it "has made every effort toconsider" all of the comments that it received on the NRDAproposals issued in January 1994 and August 1995, as well as thecomments submitted at the agency's public workshops and meetingson NRDA issues. Of the 71 Federal Register pages in the finalrule, 37 pages are devoted to addressing comments. "Manycommenters supported the shift in focus from monetization ofdamages to scaling of restoration actions" under the August 1995proposal, NOAA said. "These commenters stated that the reproposedrule properly placed the focus of the NRDA process on theultimate goal of OPA 90--to restore injured natural resources andservices," the agency said. However, according to NOAA, "manyother commenters raised concerns that the restoration approachwould lead to delays and increased assessment costs, sincetrustees would have to undertake studies of both lost servicesand replacement services." In addition, "several commentersargued that the August 1995 proposal was significantly weakerthan the January 1994 proposal, with no justification exceptindustry pressure for an untested restoration-based approachinstead of the well-tested and supported economic valuationprocedures," according to NOAA. Other commenters characterizedthe restoration-based NRDA approach as "an untried theory" that"might be better or worse" than the valuation-based approachoriginally proposed, NOAA said.In defense of the restoration-based NRDA process, NOAA notedthat, under OPA 90, "all damages recovered must be spent on somerestoration activity." Therefore, the NRDA process should focuson evaluating potential restoration actions, NOAA said. "It doesnot benefit the natural resources or the public if monies arecollected without a view toward how they will be spent, norwhether sufficient funds have been collected to implement anymeaningful restoration actions," according to NOAA. The agencyclaimed that, "contrary to some comments, the restorationapproach will generally speed restoration and avoid litigation,by alleviating distrust that claims for monetary damages arespeculative and punitive." According to NOAA, "practicalexperience in implementing the restoration scaling approach inpast cooperative assessments suggests that this approach iseffective in significantly expediting the restoration of injurednatural resources and services." The agency added that "thesebenefits to the environment and public do not come at the expenseof increased assessment costs." Although, under the final rule,"trustees now must assess replacement services in addition tolost services in most incidents," NOAA claimed that, "in general,a net increase in assessment costs will not result, due to boththe cooperative provisions set forth within this rule and theremoval of the requirement that trustees estimate the monetaryvalue of damages."According to NOAA, "the sole intent of the rule is to ensure therestoration of natural resources and services that have beeninjured, destroyed, or lost as a result of an incident." Suchrestoration should occur "where there is a need to do so, andwhere feasible and cost-effective means to accomplish restorationare available," the agency said. The rule's focus on restorationwill "eliminate unneeded assessment studies and preventunnecessary adversarial conflicts over misunderstood goals oftrustees," according to NOAA. The agency claimed that the rule"invites RPs to act cooperatively and responsibly to seekexpeditious and cost-effective restoration" and that itconstrains trustees' actions "to those necessary to achieve OPA'srestoration goals." As a result, according to NOAA, "costs anddamages will not be excessive or unpredictable." For furtherinformation, see pages 439 to 510 of Vol. 61, No. 4 of theFederal Register, or contact: Linda Burlington, Office of GeneralCounsel Natural Resources, NOAA, 1315 East-West Highway,Room 15132, Silver Spring, MD 20910; Tel: 301-713-1217; Fax: 301-713-1229.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996UNDERWATER PIPELINE RUPTURE CAUSES MAJOR SPILL IN RUSSIA'SSOUTHERN URAL MOUNTAINS.A large but undetermined amount of crude oil spilled from anunderwater pipeline into the Belaya River near the town of Ufa inRussia's Ural mountains on 26 December, when the line ruptured asa result of corrosion, according to Russia's EmergenciesMinistry. Uralsibnefteprovod, the regional oil transport companythat operates the pipeline, shut down the 28-inch-diameter lineafter detecting a drop in its operating pressure. The companyinitially estimated that 100 metric tons of crude oil had leakedfrom the ruptured pipeline, but recent reports from Russia'sITAR-TASS news agency indicate that the spillage may have beenmuch higher. The spilled oil from the pipeline has floweddownstream beneath the frozen surface of the Belaya River and,according to some reports, has reached as far as the Tatarstanregion, which is about 100 miles from Ufa. According to aspokesman for Russia's Emergencies Ministry, response crews haveset fire to the oil in open areas of the river to prevent it fromspreading. In addition, the crews have deployed boom to containthe oil and have used skimming equipment to recover the oilcontained within the boomed areas. As of 7 January, the crews hadrecovered 664 metric tons of an oil-water mixture from the river,including up to 100 metric tons of crude oil. Severe cold andadverse weather conditions have reportedly hampered the cleanupefforts. Although the Belaya River provides drinking water forUfa, the Emergencies Ministry spokesman noted that the spill willprobably not impact Ufa's water supplies, because the pipelinerupture occurred downstream from the town's water intakes on theriver. In a separate incident during 1989, a total of 765 peoplewere killed as a result of a massive explosion in a natural gasliquids pipeline near Ufa (OPB, 17 July 1991, p.8). The incidentoccurred when vapor leaking from the pipeline was ignited by twotrains passing through the vapor cloud.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SOLAS AMENDMENTS MANDATE ENHANCED INSPECTION PROGRAM FOR AGINGTANKERS AND BULKERS.Aging oil tankers and bulk carriers will be subjected to morerigorous surveys under major amendments to the InternationalMaritime Organization's (IMO's) 1974 International Convention forthe Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS). The amendments, which tookeffect on 1 January, were adopted during May 1994 by a specialdiplomatic conference of the parties to SOLAS (OPB, 3 June 1994,p.1). At the conference, delegates adopted the amendments as partof three new chapters to SOLAS--Chapters IX, X, and XI.Chapter XI contains the new vessel survey requirements.Chapter X, which contains a code of safety requirements for high-speed vessels, also took effect on 1 January. Chapter IX, whichmakes mandatory IMO's International Safety Management Code, willenter into force on 1 January 1998. "The enhanced program ofinspections was developed by IMO as a result of increasingconcern about the aging of the world merchant shipping fleet,"according to IMO spokesman Roger Kohn. "This is particularly trueof tankers and bulk carriers, the majority of which are nowbetween 15 and 20 years of age," Kohn said. He noted that theenhanced inspections "pay special attention to corrosion." Duringthe inspections, "coatings and tank-corrosion prevention systemsmust be thoroughly checked, and measurements must be carried outto check the thickness of plates," according to Kohn. In additionto mandating new survey requirements, Chapter XI contains threeother regulations intended to improve ship safety. One regulationrequires that all cargo vessels of 300 GT or more and mostpassenger ships obtain a valid IMO ship identification number.Another regulation requires classification societies that performvessel surveys on behalf of flag-state administrations to followguidelines adopted during 1993 by the IMO Assembly. The thirdregulation gives port-state control officers the authority toevaluate the operators of a foreign-flag ship "when there areclear grounds for believing that the master or crew are notfamiliar with essential shipboard procedures relating to thesafety of ships." The port-state officers may detain that vesselif their evaluation shows that the crew has inadequate knowledgeof the vessel's operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENVIRONMENT CANADA REPORT EXAMINES BEHAVIOR OF OIL IN COARSESEDIMENTS.Although oil penetrates to greater depths on beaches with coarsesediments than it does on beaches with fine sediments, oil isless likely to form lasting deposits in coarse sediments than itis in fine sediments, according to a draft report by EnvironmentCanada's Emergencies Science Division. The report, entitledStranded Oil in Coarse Sediment Experiments, presents thepreliminary results of research sponsored by Environment Canadato examine the relationship between sediment particle size andthe penetration and retention of oil in beach sediments.According to the report, "in all test series, oil penetrated togreater depths in coarser sediments." In addition, the reportnoted that, for most types of oil, retention "generally decreasedin coarser sediments." However, the report also said that therelationship between oil retention and sediment particle sizes"differed markedly for the various crude oils tested." In theexperiments, Alaskan North Slope crude oil exhibited "one of themost unusual sediment retention relationships, with moderateretention in finer sediments and very low retention in coarsesediments," the report said. It noted that the oil retention ofAlaskan North Slope crude oil in the experiments was consistentwith the behavior of that type of oil after it spilled from theExxon Valdez in Prince William Sound, Alaska, during 1989.According to the report, "of all the oils tested, Alaskan NorthSlope crude oil would be the most likely to freely percolatethrough coarse surface sediments and to be retained in highconcentrations in the underlying fine sediments," the reportsaid. In fact, following the Exxon Valdez spill, "most of thecleanup effort that occurred during 1990, 1991, and 1992 wasdirected towards the cleaning of subsurface oil on coarsesediment beaches with fine underlying sediments, even though thiscoastal type represented a relatively small proportion of thetotal coastline oiled," the report said. For a copy of the draftreport (EE-155), at no cost, contact: Environment Canada,Emergencies Science Division, 3439 River Road, Ottawa,Ontario K1A 0H3; Tel: 613-991-1114; Fax: 613-991-9485.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WORLD SPILL BRIEFS.An undetermined amount of crude oil spilled from a pipelineoutside the city of Araquita in northeastern Colombia on8 January, after rebel troops sabotaged the pipeline withexplosives, according to a spokesman for Ecopetrol, the state-owned company that operates the line. Although Ecopetrol shutdown the pipeline after the attack, the company has been unableto begin repairing the damaged segment due to continuingskirmishes between Colombian government soldiers and rebel forcesfrom the National Liberation Army. According to the Ecopetrolspokesman, the National Liberation Army, which has carried outnumerous acts of sabotage in recent years against the company'soil pipelines, claimed responsibility for the recent pipelineattack.A 32-inch-diameter pipeline ruptured due to corrosion and spilledan undetermined amount of crude oil on 24 December about 60 mileswest of Ukhta in the Russia's northern Komi Republic, accordingto Russia's ITAR-TASS news agency. Crews from Transneft, thestate-owned company that operates the pipeline, have reportedlyreplaced a 165-foot-long section of the damaged line. Althoughnews reports initially indicated that the spilled oil from thepipeline had contaminated the Ropcha River, Transneft officialshave since said that the oil did not enter the river. Transnefthas also estimated that it will take at least three weeks toclean up the spill. One of the largest pipeline spills in worldhistory occurred during the fall of 1994 near Usinsk in the KomiRepublic, about 200 miles northeast of the recent pipelinerupture (OPB, 4 Nov. 1994, p.1). In April 1995, a natural gaspipeline exploded in a wooded area about 8 miles outside ofUkhta, sending flames hundreds of feet into the air and burningseveral acres of forest (OPB, 5 May 1995, p.6).The 97,689-DWT Bahamian tanker Alandia Wave spilled an estimated500 to 1,000 gallons of crude oil on 21 December while loadingoil at the British Petroleum terminal on the Sullom Voe inShetland, U.K., according to a spokesman for the Shetland IslandsCouncil. The oil apparently leaked from a crack in the tanker'sNo. 1 port cargo tank, but surveyors have not yet determined whatcaused the crack. After determining the source of the spill, theAlandia Wave's crew was able to minimize the spillage bytransferring oil from the No. 1 tank to other tanks aboard thevessel. Although response crews from the Shetland Islands Counciland British Petroleum deployed boom to contain the spill, a smallamount of the spilled oil came ashore on a beach at Sella Ness.The government of Singapore recently ordered Singapore RefiningCo. to pay a fine of $150,000 Singapore ($1.00 Singapore =$0.70 U.S.) in connection with an oil spill that occurred on25 August 1995 from a pipeline at the company's refinery in PalauMerlimau, off Singapore's southwestern coast, according to newsreports (OPB, 8 Sept. 1995, p.7). About 300 metric tons of heavyfuel oil leaked from the pipeline through a valve that wasaccidentally left open during an oil transfer operation. Thespilled oil formed a 60-square-kilometer slick and came ashore atbeaches on the tourist resort island of Sentosa, about12 kilometers east of the refinery. An estimated $1.7 millionSingapore was spent to clean up the spill.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN HOTLINE.NRC and Edison Chouest Offshore Inc. of Galliano, Louisiana, havereached an agreement in principle to integrate Chouest's staffand fleet of offshore vessels into NRC's network of oil spillresponse resources. According to NRC, Chouest currently employs astaff of about 600 people and operates a fleet of 57 vessels inthe Gulf of Mexico, as well as on the U.S. Atlantic and Pacificcoasts. With the addition of the Chouest fleet, NRC's MarineResource Network now consists of more than 800 crew boats, supplyvessels, utility vessels, barges, and tugboats throughout theUnited States. "We are pleased to be working with Chouest, whichis represented by a highly professional group of employees,"commented NRC President Mark Miller. "NRC believes that the keyto rapid response to an oil spill is access to people,specialized equipment, and marine resources," Miller said. Forfurther information, contact: Mark Miller, NRC, 460 EdwardsAvenue, P.O. Box 609, Calverton, NY 11933; Tel: 516-369-8644;Fax: 516-369-4908.In the first application of its "direct final rule" process, USCGrecently issued a final rule to remove the text of theInternational Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea(COLREGS) from the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).According to USCG, the COLREGS text, which is found in 33 CFRPart 81, duplicates text also found in the United States Code andis therefore unnecessary. Under the direct final rule process,USCG may issue a final rule without first publishing it as aproposed rule, provided that the agency does not expect toreceive any adverse comments on the final rule. If USCG receivesno adverse comments on the final rule within a specified timeperiod, the rule takes effect. If adverse comments are receivedduring that period, USCG must publish a notice in the FederalRegister retracting or modifying the rule. The recent final ruleremoving the COLREGS text from the CFR will take effect on1 April, unless adverse comments are received. For furtherinformation, see pages 8 and 9 of Vol. 61, No. 1 of the FederalRegister, or contact: Diane Schneider Appleby, USCG Headquarters,2100 Second Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20593-0001; Tel: 202-267-0352.The U.S. Department of Transportation's (DOT's) Research andSpecial Programs Administration (RSPA) plans to hold a publicworkshop on 18 January in Washington, D.C., to solicit commentson the agency's recently proposed criteria for identifying"unusually sensitive" environmental areas in close proximity togas and hazardous liquid pipelines (OPB, 16 June 1995, p.8).According to RSPA, many federal, state, and local regulations,including RSPA's current rules on pipelines that carry oil andother hazardous liquids, refer to "environmentally sensitive"areas without clearly defining what constitutes such areas.Persons who are unable to attend the workshop may submit writtencomments; these comments are due by 5 February. For furtherinformation, see pages 342 to 344 of Vol. 61, No. 3 of theFederal Register, or contact: Christina Sames, RSPA, DOT,400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590-0001; Tel: 202-366-4561.On 28 December, USCG issued a supplemental notice of proposedrulemaking (SNPRM) on structural measures designed to reduce theamount of oil spilled from non-double-hull tankers until theirmandatory retirement from service in U.S. waters under USCG'sdouble-hull regulations (OPB, 29 Dec. 1995, p.5). Although OPBhad expected to provide full coverage of the SNPRM in this issue,the release of USCG's final guidelines on the OSRO classificationprocess and NOAA's final NRDA rule has delayed OPB's coverage ofthe SNPRM until next issue.For further information on any article in this issue, call theOPB Hotline at Tel: 617-491-5100.Back to Headline List